START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1312 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1312 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Legal Tender - Specie - Establishment 
 
 
This bill authorizes (1) the State or a political subdivision of the State to accept “specie” 
for the payment of taxes, fees, or other obligations and (2) an individual to use specie for 
the payment of debts between private parties if the parties mutually agree to use specie. A 
person is not required to accept specie as payment. The Commissioner of the Office of 
Financial Regulation (OFR) may adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of the bill. 
On or before October 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, OFR must submit a report to the 
Governor and General Assembly detailing the economic impact of recognizing specie as 
legal tender in the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures may increase by $50,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2027, for consulting costs, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The General Assembly finds that:  (1) the use of specie as a medium of 
exchange has a historical basis in fostering economic stability; (2) recognizing specie as 
“legal tender” promotes competition in the monetary system and protects against reliance 
on fiat currency; and (3) establishing a mechanism for the use of precious metal in 
transactions enhances economic resilience in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1312/ Page 2 
Definitions 
 
“Legal tender” means a medium of exchange recognized by the State for the payment of 
debts, taxes, fess, and other obligations. Legal tender includes “specie.” 
 
“Specie” means: 
 
 
gold or silver coin issued by the United States or a foreign government; or 
 
gold or silver in the form of bars or other physical form certified as at least 99% 
pure. 
 
Current Law:  State law does not generally regulate specie, as defined by the bill, nor is 
specie accepted as legal tender for payment of taxes, fees, or other State obligations. 
 
Federal Reserve notes are legal tender currency notes issued by the 12 Federal Reserve 
Banks pursuant to the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. A Federal Reserve note is a liability 
of the Federal Reserve Banks and an obligation of the U.S. Government. Federal Reserve 
notes are not redeemable in gold, silver, or any other commodity. 
 
State Expenditures:  To the extent there is little or no economic effect of recognizing 
specie because specie is not accepted by the Comptroller or used extensively in private 
transactions, OFR may be able to produce the required report using existing resources. 
However, to the extent that specie is accepted by the Comptroller and/or used with some 
frequency, OFR advises that, given the broad range of transactions that may use specie, the 
absence of data regarding specie transactions, and a lack of experience regarding specie, 
OFR cannot produce the report required by the bill with existing resources. Therefore, 
special fund expenditures may increase by approximately $50,000 in fiscal 2027 and 
annually thereafter. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring a consultant to research and 
produce a report on the economic impact of recognizing specie as legal tender in the State 
if it is accepted by the Comptroller as legal tender and/or used in private transactions. 
 
Additional Comments:  In June 1933, the United States abandoned the gold standard; all 
existing contracts and currency that required redemption in gold were no longer considered 
valid. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1312/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Prince George’s County; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3