START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1372 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1372 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) (By Request - Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Office of Health Care Quality Information and Maryland Health 
Centralization Commission 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes the Maryland Health Centralization Commission to 
provide ongoing advice and recommendations to the General Assembly on how best to 
increase collaboration between the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and the health 
occupations boards to achieve greater efficiency, transparency, and accountability. The 
commission must hold its first meeting by July 1, 2026. By December 1, 2026, and 
annually thereafter, the commission must report its findings and recommendations, 
including any draft legislation, to the Senate Finance Committee, the House Health 
Committee, and the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee. The bill also requires the 
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), in collaboration with the Office of Health 
Care Quality (OHCQ), to develop a process to receive specified inspection and quality 
metrics information and publish it on the Maryland Quality Reporting Website for each 
applicable health care facility. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. This analysis does not reflect any potential fiscal impact 
associated with implementation of any recommendations made by the commission. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1372/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Health Centralization Commission 
 
The commission consists of one member of the Senate; one member of the House of 
Delegates; the Secretary of Health (or their designee); the Deputy Secretary for Public 
Health Services; the executive directors of the State boards of Nursing, Physicians, 
Pharmacy, and Social Work Examiners (or their designees); three members who are the 
executive directors of health occupations boards not otherwise represented on the 
commission (or their designees); and any additional members appointed by the cochairs, 
in consultation with the health occupations boards. The members of the Senate and 
House of Delegates must cochair the commission. The Department of Legislative Services 
must staff the commission. A member of the commission may not receive compensation 
but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
Each health occupations board must designate a representative to be available to work with 
the commission. Each board must provide, as soon as practicable but not later than 
10 business days after receiving a request, any information requested by the commission. 
 
The commission must provide recommendations: 
 
 
to ensure that each health occupation board remedies audit findings and violations 
of law, regulation, or policy, and establishes policies and procedures for, as 
applicable:  (1) the timely processing of applications; (2) responding to complaints; 
(3) conducting investigations and inspections; (4) conducting criminal history 
records checks (CHRCs), including the receipt of revised criminal history 
information; (5) the collection of fees and the accounting of financial activities, 
including the assessment of penalties; (6) taking appropriate actions for license 
application fraud, including the assessment of fines; and (7) any other areas in which 
action is needed, as determined by the commission; and 
 
on (1) establishing a comprehensive licensure system that may be used by a health 
occupations board; (2) authorizing a health occupations board that uses the 
comprehensive licensure system to use license fees to support the system; 
(3) consolidating administrative functions to establish and enhance efficiency and 
control in all areas; and (4) increasing public awareness and usage of the Maryland 
Quality Reporting website of MHCC to assist individuals with selecting appropriate 
health care settings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1372/ Page 3 
Maryland Quality Reporting Website 
 
MHCC, in collaboration with OHCQ, must develop a process to receive the following 
information and publish it on the Maryland Quality Reporting website for each applicable 
facility (1) the date of OHCQ’s most recent inspection; (2) any associated ratings or other 
quality metrics calculated by OHCQ based on the most recent inspection; and (3) if 
applicable, a statement that the facility has not been inspected during the time frame 
required by statute or regulation.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Health Occupations Boards 
 
It is policy of the State that health occupations should be regulated and controlled as 
provided in the Health Occupations Article to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the 
public. The health occupations boards are created to function as independent boards, with 
the intent that a peer group is best qualified to regulate, control, and otherwise discipline 
in a fair and unbiased manner the licensees or certificate holders who practice in the State. 
 
Twenty health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating various health 
professions in Maryland. Exhibit 1 lists the health occupations boards within MDH. With 
specified exceptions, an individual must be licensed, certified, registered, or permitted by 
the respective board before the individual may practice in the State. Licensure, 
certification, registration, and permit requirements vary by profession but typically require, 
among other things, specified education and experience, passage of a national and/or State 
examination, and CHRC. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1372/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Health Occupations Boards in the Maryland Department of Health 
 
Acupuncture 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists 
Chiropractic 
Dental 
Dietetic Practice 
Environmental Health Specialists 
Long-Term Care Administrators (formerly Nursing Home Administrators) 
Massage Therapy 
Morticians and Funeral Directors 
Nursing 
Occupational Therapy 
Optometry 
Pharmacy 
Physical Therapy 
Physicians 
Podiatry 
Professional Counselors and Therapists 
Psychologists 
Residential Child Care Program Professionals 
Social Work 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Chapters 336 and 337 of 2021 required the Department of Information Technology (DoIT), 
in consultation with the health occupations boards, to (1) review the information 
technology (IT) platforms used by each board, including the administrative functions used 
by each board and the cost of operating the platforms and (2) make recommendations on 
the feasibility and cost of developing a common and standardized platform for use by each 
board, as specified. DoIT’s recommendations must include the cost and feasibility of:  
 
 
adopting a standardized website appearance and functionality for all boards; 
 
offering each board the ability to send automated notices; 
 
the ability to translate the website of each board into other languages, as specified; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1372/ Page 5 
 
offering a standardized method of presenting information to regulated health care 
providers and the public on licensing or certification, meeting scheduling and 
agendas, board membership and staff, public notices, and complaint processing; and  
 
if possible, using existing platforms employed by the boards, if consistent with the 
statewide IT master plan, in developing the common platform. 
 
On January 12, 2022, DoIT reported on the feasibility and cost of developing a common 
and standardized IT platform for use by each health occupations board that standardizes 
the websites and administrative functions of the boards and makes available accurate 
licensing information on health care. 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission 
 
MHCC is an independent commission within MDH with a mission to plan for health 
system needs, promote informed decision making, increase accountability, and improve 
access in a rapidly changing health care environment by providing timely and accurate 
information on availability, cost, and quality of services to policymakers, purchasers, 
providers, and the public. MHCC oversees the Certificate of Need program, which requires 
review and approval of certain types of proposed health care facility and service projects, 
including before a person acquires a health care facility, with specified exceptions. 
 
MHCC’s Maryland Quality Reporting website is a resource for, among other things, 
information on the quality and performance of nursing homes, hospitals, hospice, assisted 
living facilities. 
 
Office of Health Care Quality 
 
The Secretary of Health must adopt reasonable rules and regulations that set standards of 
services for related institutions, hospitals, and residential treatment centers in the following 
areas:  (1) the care of patients; (2) the medical supervision of patients; (3) the physical 
environment; (4) disease control; (5) sanitation; (6) safety; and (7) dietary matters. To 
ensure compliance with these rules and regulations, OHCQ inspects each related 
institution, hospital, and residential treatment center. In general, OHCQ inspects facilities 
for which a license is sought and periodically after a license has been issued. MDH submits 
an annual report to the General Assembly regarding the inspections conducted during the 
immediately preceding year. 
 
Additional Comments:  In April 2025, the Office of Legislative Audits released a 
fiscal compliance audit on MDH Regulatory Services (including the health occupations 
boards and OHCQ). The audit disclosed, among other findings, that (1) the Board of 
Nursing could not document that it investigated and took appropriate action for individuals 
who may have obtained a nursing license in Maryland using fraudulent credentials; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1372/ Page 6 
(2) several boards did not ensure that complaints against licensees were investigated in a 
timely manner; (3) OHCQ had not performed annual inspections for certain facilities; 
and (4) several boards did not have adequate controls over collections. The audit also 
disclosed cybersecurity‑related findings. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 26, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6