START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1306 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1306 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary and Health 
 
 
Assisted Outpatient Treatment - Surrender or Seizure of Firearms 
 
 
This bill requires a court, upon ordering a respondent to comply with an assisted outpatient 
treatment (AOT) program and if specified conditions are met, to (1) order the respondent 
to surrender to law enforcement authorities any firearm in the respondent’s possession and 
(2) prohibit the respondent from purchasing or possessing any firearm for the duration of 
the AOT order. An order under these provisions expires when the respondent is no longer 
subject to an AOT order. A court may (1) enforce such orders through its contempt powers 
and (2) impose any reasonable sanction for a violation of its order. The bill establishes 
procedures and requirements for the surrender, storage, and return of firearms relating to 
an AOT order. The bill terminates when the termination provision specified in  
Section 3 of Chapter 704 of 2024 takes effect.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $56,300 only in FY 2027 for 
computer programming. Otherwise, State finances are not anticipated to be materially 
affected, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
56,300 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($56,300) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Law enforcement expenditures may increase to comply with the bill’s 
requirements. Revenues are not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of 
local government.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1306/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A court that orders a respondent to comply with AOT must also make a 
determination as to whether the respondent is likely to endanger or cause physical injury 
to the respondent or another if the respondent has access to a firearm. If a court determines 
that the respondent is likely to endanger or cause physical injury to the respondent or 
another with access to a firearm, the court must order the respondent to surrender to law 
enforcement authorities any firearm in the respondent’s possession and not to purchase or 
possess any firearm for the duration of the order requiring the respondent to comply with 
AOT.  
 
Notwithstanding any other law, a respondent may transport a firearm if the respondent is 
carrying an order issued under the bill’s provisions and (1) the firearm is unloaded; (2) the 
respondent has notified the law enforcement unit, barracks, or station that the firearm is 
being transported in accordance with the court’s order; and (3) the respondent transports 
the firearm directly to the law enforcement unit, barracks, or station.  
 
A law enforcement officer who takes possession of a firearm in accordance with an order 
under the bill’s provisions must, at the time the firearm or ammunition is surrendered or 
seized (1) comply with specified procedures regarding a receipt of the items surrendered 
or seized; (2) provide to the respondent information on the process for retaking possession 
of the firearm; and (3) transport and store the firearm in a protective case, if one is available, 
and in a manner intended to prevent damage to the firearm during the time the order is in 
effect. A law enforcement agency may not place any mark on a seized or surrendered 
firearm for identification or other purposes.  
 
On expiration or termination of an order under the bill’s provisions, a law enforcement 
agency that holds a firearm surrendered or seized in accordance with the order must notify 
the respondent that the respondent may request the return of the firearm. After a law 
enforcement agency verifies that the respondent is not otherwise prohibited from 
possessing a firearm, the law enforcement agency must return the firearm to a respondent 
within 48 hours after the expiration of an order under the bill’s provisions.  
 
A respondent who does not wish to recover a firearm or ammunition seized or surrendered 
in accordance with an order under the bill’s provisions or who is prohibited from 
possessing firearms under Title 5 of the Public Safety Article may (1) sell or transfer title 
to the firearm to a licensed firearms dealer or another individual who is not prohibited from 
possessing the firearm under federal or State law and who does not live in the same 
residence as the respondent or (2) request the destruction of the firearm.  
 
A law enforcement agency must transfer possession of a firearm or ammunition to a 
licensed firearms dealer or another individual who is not prohibited from possessing the 
firearm under federal or State law and who does not live in the same residence as the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1306/ Page 3 
respondent only after the licensed firearms dealer or individual provides written proof that 
the respondent has agreed to transfer the firearm to the dealer or individual and the law 
enforcement agency verifies the agreement with the respondent.  
 
On request of the respondent, a law enforcement agency may destroy firearms seized or 
surrendered in accordance with an order under the bill’s provisions. However, if an 
individual other than the respondent claims ownership of a firearm seized or surrendered, 
the law enforcement agency must return the firearm to the individual on the condition that 
the individual provides proof of ownership of the firearm and the law enforcement agency 
determines that the individual is not prohibited from possessing the firearm or ammunition. 
 
If a firearm is not reclaimed within six months after expiration of the order under the bill’s 
provisions and notice provided to the respondent, no party has the right to assert ownership 
of the firearm and the law enforcement agency holding the firearm may destroy the firearm. 
 
A State’s Attorney or a law enforcement officer with probable cause to believe that a 
respondent who is subject to an order under the bill’s provisions possesses a firearm and 
failed to surrender the firearm in accordance with the order may apply for, and a court may 
issue, a search warrant for the removal of the firearm at any location identified in the 
application for the warrant, as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Assisted Outpatient Treatment 
 
Established:  Chapter 704 of 2024 requires that an Assisted Outpatient Treatment Program 
be established in each county by July 1, 2026. A county may establish its own program and 
must notify the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) by January 1, 2025, as to whether 
the county intends to do so. In any county that does not opt to establish its own program, 
MDH must establish a program in the county. An AOT program established by a county 
must be approved and overseen by the local behavioral health authority (LBHA) or core 
service agency (CSA). A county may partner with another county to establish an AOT 
program. Otherwise, an AOT program must be established by MDH. Generally, the 
provisions of Chapter 704 took effect July 1, 2025, and terminate June 30, 2030.  
 
Petitions:  “AOT” means a specific regimen of outpatient treatment for a “serious and 
persistent mental illness” to which an individual is ordered by the court to adhere. The 
director of a specified mental health program or any individual who is at least age 18 and 
has a legitimate interest in the welfare of the respondent may petition a circuit court as 
specified for AOT. A petition for AOT must be in writing, signed by the petitioner, and 
state (1) the petitioner’s name, address, and relationship to the respondent; (2) the name 
and any known address of the respondent; (3) that the petitioner has reason to believe the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1306/ Page 4 
respondent meets the criteria for AOT; and (4) the specific factual allegations for each 
criterion supporting the petitioner’s belief.  
 
The AOT petition must be (1) filed in the circuit court for the county where the respondent 
resides or the last known residence of the respondent; (2) under seal and may not be 
published on Maryland Judiciary Case Search; and (3) accompanied by an affidavit of a 
psychiatrist stating that the psychiatrist is willing and able to testify at the hearing on the 
petition and has examined the respondent within 30 days prior to the filing of the petition 
and concluded the respondent meets specified criteria.  
 
Treatment Plans 
 
After a petition is filed, but by the date of the psychiatrist’s testimony, a “care coordination 
team” (a multidisciplinary team under the oversight of an LBHA, CSA, or MDH that 
consists of, at a minimum, a psychiatrist, case manager, certified peer recovery specialist, 
other treating providers as clinically appropriate, and any other individuals required by 
MDH regulations) must develop a “treatment plan” and provide a copy to the respondent, 
the respondent’s attorney and, if applicable and known, the respondent’s guardian and 
health care agent. “Treatment plan” means a plan developed by a care coordination team 
that incorporates all outpatient treatment services that are determined to be essential and 
available for the maintenance of an individual’s health and safety and that include, at a 
minimum, (1) services of a treating psychiatrist; (2) case management; (3) services of a 
certified peer recovery specialist; and (4) if clinically appropriate, assertive community 
treatment services. 
 
In developing a treatment plan, a care coordination team must (1) give the respondent, the 
respondent’s guardian or health care agent, and any individual designated by the 
respondent, a reasonable opportunity to participate and (2) honor any directions included 
in a respondent’s mental health advance directive (if available). A treatment plan developed 
by the care coordination team must be recovery-oriented and consistent with  
evidence-based and evolving best practices in the treatment of serious and persistent mental 
illness. The care coordination team must provide a copy of the treatment plan (and the 
providers included in the treatment plan) to the respondent, the county attorney, and the 
Office of the Public Defender (OPD). The respondent must have an opportunity to 
voluntarily agree to the treatment plan. If the respondent voluntarily agrees to the treatment 
plan, the care coordination team must notify the court that the parties are dismissing the 
case, as specified, and file a stipulated agreement that includes the treatment plan.  
 
The care coordination team must assist in connecting the respondent to services that would 
help the respondent be successful in adhering to a treatment plan, including (if needed) 
transportation, housing, accessibility services, and other services that would address the 
health-related social needs of the respondent. If the treatment plan or providers change 
before the specified hearing is conducted, the care coordination team must promptly notify 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1306/ Page 5 
the respondent, the respondent’s attorney, the county attorney, and if applicable and 
known, the respondent’s guardian and health care agent. 
 
Hearings and Respondent Rights:  On receipt of a complete petition for AOT, the court 
must schedule a hearing only if the respondent has not agreed to enter voluntary treatment 
and notify (1) the respondent; (2) the mental health division in OPD; (3) as applicable, the 
LBHA, CSA, or MDH; (4) the county attorney; and (5) if applicable and known, the 
respondent’s guardian and health care agent. 
 
All rules of civil procedure and any right normally afforded to an individual in a civil or 
criminal matter must apply to cases that proceed following a petition for AOT. Further, the 
provisions may not be construed to abridge or modify any civil right of the respondent, 
including (1) any civil service ranking or appointment; (2) the right to apply for voluntary 
admission to a facility; and (3) any right relating to a license, permit, certification, 
privilege, or benefit under any law. Participation in AOT may not be used against a 
respondent in a subsequent legal matter that carries negative collateral consequences, and 
an order for AOT may not be the basis for the involuntary admission of the respondent to 
a facility or used as evidence of incompetency of the respondent. 
 
A respondent is entitled to be represented by counsel at all stages of the proceedings; if the 
respondent is unable to afford an attorney or is unable to obtain an attorney due to the 
respondent’s mental illness, representation must be provided by OPD or an OPD panel 
attorney. The respondent may not be required to give testimony at a hearing and must be 
given the opportunity to present evidence, call witnesses, and cross-examine adverse 
witnesses at the hearing. 
 
At the hearing, the petitioner must present testimonial evidence of both a psychiatrist 
whose most recent examination of the respondent is within the 30 days prior to the date of 
the petition as well as a psychiatrist to explain the treatment plan who (1) may or may not 
be the same as the examining psychiatrist; (2) has met with or made a good faith effort to 
meet with the respondent; (3) is familiar with the relevant history to the extent practicable; 
and (4) has examined the treatment plan.  
 
Criteria for Ordering Assisted Outpatient Treatment:  The court may order the respondent 
to receive AOT on a finding of clear and convincing evidence that:   
 
 
the respondent is at least age 18; 
 
the respondent has a “serious and persistent mental illness” meaning a mental illness 
that is severe in degree and persistent in duration, that causes a substantially 
diminished level of functioning in the primary aspects of daily living and an inability 
to meet the ordinary demands of life, and that may lead to an inability to maintain 
independent functioning in the community without intensive treatment and support;  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1306/ Page 6 
 
the respondent has demonstrated a lack of adherence with treatment for the serious 
and persistent mental illness that has (1) been a significant factor in necessitating 
either hospital inpatient admission to a psychiatric hospital for at least 48 hours or 
receipt of services in a correctional facility, at least twice within the immediately 
preceding 36 months or (2) resulted in an act of serious violent behavior toward self 
or others, or patterns or threats of, or attempts at, serious physical harm to self or 
others, at least once within the immediately preceding 36 months;  
 
the respondent is in need of AOT in order to prevent a relapse or deterioration that 
would create a substantial risk of serious harm to self or others;  
 
the respondent is unlikely to adequately adhere to outpatient treatment on a 
voluntary basis, as specified; and 
 
AOT is the least restrictive alternative appropriate to maintain the health and safety 
of the respondent, as specified. 
 
The court must hear all relevant evidence and (using a clear and convincing evidence 
standard) either (1) deny the petition if the court finds that the respondent does not meet 
specified criteria for AOT or (2) order the respondent to comply with AOT for up to 
one year if the court finds that the respondent meets specified criteria.  
 
Orders for Assisted Outpatient Treatment:  The court’s order for AOT must incorporate a 
treatment plan that is limited in scope to those elements included in the treatment plan 
presented to the court and to those elements the court finds by clear and convincing 
evidence to be essential to the maintenance of the respondent’s health or safety.  
 
Order Modifications:  At any time during an order for AOT, a petitioner, a care 
coordination team member, or a respondent may move that the court stay, vacate, or modify 
the order. “Material change” means an addition or a deletion of a category of services to or 
from the treatment plan. 
 
Within 30 days of receiving a motion (and any timely responses to the motion) for a 
material change, the court must issue a ruling on the motion (and any timely responses to 
the motion), unless the respondent informs the court that the respondent agrees to the 
proposed material change (in which case the court may incorporate the material change). 
Otherwise, the respondent need not comply with the material change unless explicitly 
authorized in advance by the court’s initial order or incorporated into the treatment plan 
following a finding by clear and convincing evidence that the change is essential to the 
respondent’s health or safety. However, nonmaterial changes to the treatment plan require 
the respondent’s compliance without further court action. The provisions may not be 
construed to require a psychiatrist to delay changes to the respondent’s treatment plan as 
circumstances may immediately require, but the care coordination team must notify the 
respondent, the respondent’s attorney, and if applicable and known, the respondent’s 
guardian and health care agent.  

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1306/ Page 7 
Failure to Comply with Assisted Outpatient Treatment:  If a petition for emergency 
evaluation of the respondent is filed or the respondent is the subject of other court 
involvement, the petitioner (to the extent practicable) must notify the respondent’s care 
coordination team. If the care coordination team knows that a petition for emergency 
evaluation was filed for the respondent, a team member must notify the court in writing of 
the reasons for and finding of the evaluation. In response to such a notice or at any time 
during an AOT order, the court may convene the parties on its own motion for a conference 
to review the respondent’s progress. Failure to comply with an AOT order is not grounds 
for a finding of contempt or for involuntary admission. 
 
Orders to Continue Assisted Outpatient Treatment:  At least 30 days before an AOT order 
expires, the respondent’s care coordination team must provide the respondent with a plan 
for continued treatment, if considered necessary. 
 
Prohibitions on Possession of a Regulated Firearm, Rifle, or Shotgun:  Generally, a person 
is prohibited from possessing a regulated firearm, rifle, or shotgun if the person:   
 
 
has been convicted of a disqualifying crime; 
 
has been convicted of a violation classified as a common law crime and received a 
term of imprisonment of more than two years; 
 
is a fugitive from justice; 
 
is a habitual drunkard; 
 
is addicted to a controlled dangerous substance or is a habitual user; 
 
suffers from a mental disorder and has a history of violent behavior against the 
person or another; 
 
has been found incompetent to stand trial; 
 
has been found not criminally responsible; 
 
has been voluntarily admitted for more than 30 consecutive days to a facility that 
provides treatment or other services for mental disorders; 
 
has been involuntarily committed to a facility that provides treatment or other 
services for mental disorders; 
 
is under the protection of a guardian of the person or property of a disabled person 
appointed by a court, except for cases in which the appointment of a guardian is 
solely a result of a physical disability; 
 
is a respondent against whom a current non ex parte civil protective order has been 
entered in this State or an order for protection has been issued by a court of another 
state or a Native American tribe and is in effect; or 
 
if younger than age 30 at the time of possession, has been adjudicated delinquent by 
a juvenile court for an act that would be a disqualifying crime if committed by an 
adult. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1306/ Page 8 
In addition, a person is prohibited from possessing a regulated firearm if the person (1) was 
previously convicted of a crime of violence, a violation of specified controlled dangerous 
substances laws, or an offense under the laws of another state or the United States that 
would constitute one of these crimes if committed in this State; (2) has been convicted on 
or after October 1, 2023, of a second or subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal 
Law Article (child’s access to firearms), or has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, 
of a violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article if the violation resulted in the use of 
a loaded firearm by a minor causing death or serious bodily injury to the minor or another 
person; or (3) unless the person was not convicted of but received only probation before 
judgment for an offense, is on supervised probation after being convicted of a crime 
punishable by imprisonment for one year or more, for a violation of § 21-902(b) or (c) of 
the Transportation Article (driving while impaired), or for violating a protective order 
under § 4-509 of the Family Law Article. Further, a person who has been convicted on or 
after October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article may not possess 
a regulated firearm for five years following the date of the conviction.  
 
A person who violates the prohibition against possession of a regulated firearm is guilty of 
a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a  
$10,000 maximum fine.  
 
A person who violates the prohibition against possession of a rifle or shotgun is guilty of a 
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to three years and/or a $1,000 maximum 
fine.  
 
Required Reporting by Courts or Health Facilities:  A court is required to promptly report 
to the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS), through a secure portal 
approved by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, the date of the 
court determination or finding, and the name and identifying information of a person: 
 
 
determined to be not criminally responsible; 
 
found to be incompetent to stand trial; or 
 
found to be in need of the protection of a guardian under specified provisions of the 
Estates and Trusts Article relating to the protection of minors and disabled persons, 
except for cases in which the appointment of a guardian is solely a result of a 
physical disability. 
 
A mental health care facility must similarly report to NICS the name and identifying 
information of a person admitted or committed to the facility, the date of admission or 
commitment, and the name of the facility to which the person was admitted or committed. 
 
Relief from Firearms Disqualification:  A person seeking relief from firearms 
disqualification may file an application with MDH. An application for relief from a 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1306/ Page 9 
firearms disqualification must include, along with any other information required by MDH,  
(1) a statement explaining why the applicant is prohibited from possessing a regulated 
firearm, rifle, or shotgun; (2) a statement why the applicant should be relieved from that 
prohibition; (3) a signed authorization allowing MDH to access specified health and 
criminal records; (4) three statements related to the applicant’s reputation and character; 
and (5) if the applicant is prohibited from possessing a firearm for certain mental health 
reasons, a certificate issued within 30 days of the submission of the application on a form 
signed by an individual licensed in the State as a physician who is board certified in 
psychiatry or as a psychologist stating: 
 
 
the length of time that the applicant has not had symptoms that cause the applicant 
to be a danger to self or others; 
 
the length of time that the applicant has been compliant with the treatment plan for 
the applicant’s mental illness; and 
 
an opinion as to whether the applicant, because of mental illness, would be a danger 
to the applicant or to another person if allowed to possess a firearm. 
 
Additional information is required to be included in the application for individuals who are 
prohibited on the basis of guardianship orders. 
 
MDH may not approve an application if a determination is made that (1) the applicant 
supplied incomplete or false information; (2) the application is not properly completed; or  
(3) the applicant has not shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the applicant will 
be unlikely to act in a manner dangerous to self or public safety and that granting a permit 
to possess a regulated firearm or authorizing the possession of a rifle or shotgun would be 
contrary to the public interest. 
 
Within 60 days from the receipt of a completed application, MDH must provide the 
applicant with a certificate affirming the applicant’s mental competence to possess a 
regulated firearm or a written statement that the applicant is not mentally competent to 
possess a firearm. An aggrieved applicant may request a hearing in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act, and judicial review may be sought. 
 
A physician or psychologist who acts in good faith and with reasonable grounds in 
providing the statements and opinions required by the restoration process may not be held 
civilly or criminally liable for those actions. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $56,290 only in fiscal 2027 
for the Department of State Police (DSP) and the Judiciary to update computer 
programming to accommodate the bill’s changes. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1306/ Page 10 
DSP operates a licensing portal for many transactions relating to firearms, including 
applications for the purchase or transfer of a handgun as well as applications for a handgun 
qualification license and a permit to wear, carry, or transport a regulated firearm. Altering 
the disqualifiers for possession of a regulated firearm necessitates an update to the DSP 
licensing portal at a cost of $50,000 in fiscal 2027 only. 
 
The Judiciary also needs to update its computer system to accommodate the bill’s changes 
at a cost of $6,290 in fiscal 2027 only. 
 
MDH advises that it can implement the bill with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Depending on the number of orders for the surrender of firearms 
relating to an AOT order that each jurisdiction receives, local law enforcement 
expenditures may increase for costs associated with storing additional firearms and 
executing additional search warrants. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 942 (Senator Henson) - Finance and Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, and Charles counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Town of La Plata; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10