START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1346 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1346 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Expedited Document Processing 
and Fees 
 
 
This bill establishes an expedited timeframe and corresponding fee to process specified 
documents filed with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). Such 
documents must first have been accepted for preclearance with SDAT. The bill takes 
effect January 1, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SDAT can implement the bill with existing resources. Special fund revenues 
likely increase beginning in FY 2028 from fees, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Statute requires SDAT to adopt regulations governing the 
manner of filing and processing of certain documents (e.g., articles of incorporation, 
articles of organization of a limited liability company, etc.) on an expedited basis, including 
reasonable limitations on filing documents of unusual volume or length. SDAT is 
authorized to (1) adopt regulations establishing expedited processing tiers or additional 
methods of expedited document processing and (2) charge reasonable fees for the services. 
In general, under current law, if a fee for expedited processing is paid, SDAT must 
(1) process documents filed with the department at least two hours before its close of 
business within two hours after receipt and (2) to the extent practicable, process all other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1346/ Page 2 
documents on the same day that the documents are received. Regulations set forth 
additional guidance related to expedited processing.  
 
Under current law, the fee for expedited filings is $425 for documents filed in hard copy 
(online filing is $325). The bill establishes an additional option for expedited filings that 
requires SDAT to process documents filed at least one hour before close of business within 
one hour after the documents are received, if the documents filed have been accepted for 
preclearance with SDAT under § 1‐201(d) of the Corporations and Associations Article. 
The expedited one‐hour processing fee is $1,000. 
 
Under current law, SDAT offers a preclearance service where a document, or a draft of a 
document, is reviewed for sufficiency by an authorized agent of SDAT before the 
document is filed with SDAT. The processing fee for preclearance of a document or draft 
of a document is $275 (an additional fee applies for expedited processing).     
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues likely increase beginning in fiscal 2028 due to 
filers utilizing the additional option for expedited filings under the bill’s compressed 
timeframe. SDAT advises that large law firms are most likely to request this expedited 
filing, as they often have complex, time‐sensitive corporate transactions (some of which 
are dependent on when the stock market opens). The number of expedited filings (and 
amount of associated fees) that are likely to occur cannot be reliably estimated without 
experience under the bill. For illustrative purposes only, for every 100 filings requested to 
be processed within the one‐hour timeframe under the bill, instead of the expedited 
timeframe under current practice (for hard‐copy filings), special fund revenues increase by 
$85,000. Because the expedited timeframe available under the bill requires a preclearance 
service, this example accounts for the associated fee of $275 that is charged for standard 
preclearance services.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1416 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 278 (Senators West and Waldstreicher) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1346/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3