START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1300 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1300 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Commission for Women - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the duties of the Maryland Commission for Women. The bill removes the 
requirement that the executive director of the commission be appointed by the Secretary of 
Human Services and instead specifies that the executive director is not considered a special 
appointee and is in the skilled service in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any impact on the Department of Human Services (DHS) to reclassify the 
executive director position is negligible. The commission can otherwise meet the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the Maryland Commission for Women 
in DHS works to advance solutions and to expand social, political, and economic 
opportunities for all women. The commission must: 
 
 
stimulate and encourage study and review of the status of women in the State; 
 
strengthen home life by directing attention to critical problems confronting women 
as wives, mothers, homemakers, and workers; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1300/ Page 2 
 
recommend methods of overcoming discrimination against women in public and 
private employment; 
 
encourage women to become candidates for public office; 
 
promote more effective methods for enabling women to develop their skills, 
continue their education, and be retrained; 
 
secure appropriate recognition of women’s accomplishments and contributions to 
the State; 
 
work to develop healthy attitudes within the framework of the commission’s 
responsibilities; and 
 
inform the Executive and Legislative branches on issues concerning women, 
including offering testimony on these issues. 
 
The bill removes requirements to (1) recommend methods of overcoming discrimination 
against women in public and private employment; (2) encourage women to become 
candidates for public office; (3) promote more effective methods for enabling women to 
develop their skills, continue their education, and be retrained; and (4) work to develop 
healthy attitudes within the framework of the commission’s responsibilities.  
 
The bill alters the requirement to strengthen the conditions for women in society by 
directing critical attention to critical problems confronting women in their various roles. 
  
The bill adds requirements to: 
 
 
conduct research on issues that impact women and identify existing disparities;  
 
conduct studies and assist with programs, seminars, and conferences to raise public 
awareness about issues impacting women; 
 
support policies and programs that promote the well-being of women; 
 
raise public awareness of a wide range of issues affecting women, including 
economic security, life transitions, and women’s health; 
 
promote and assist statewide women’s organizations, local commissions for 
women, and local volunteer programs focused on improving conditions for women; 
 
advocate for legislation supporting women’s economic empowerment, women’s 
health, cultural development, social inclusion, and other policies that promote the 
equality and flourishing of all people; 
 
recommend strategies to reduce discrimination and increase opportunities for 
women in employment, education, the law, State government, and elected and 
appointed positions across professions and within society; and 
 
support partner organization programs on career development, financial wellness, 
and violence prevention. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1300/ Page 3 
The bill specifies that the commission may make surveys and appoint advisory committees 
in all fields affecting the lives of women in the State. 
 
Under current law, the executive director of the commission must be a merit employee of 
DHS and is entitled to compensation provided in the State budget. Per § 1-305 of the 
State Personnel and Pensions Article, an employee who is in a position under a special 
appointment (or in the management service or executive service) serves at the pleasure of 
the employee’s appointing authority and may be terminated from employment for any 
reason that is not illegal or unconstitutional, solely in the discretion of the appointing 
authority. 
 
The bill specifies that the executive director is not considered a special appointee and is in 
the skilled service in the SPMS. 
 
Under current law, the commission must submit an annual report to the Governor and 
General Assembly. The commission’s fiscal 2025 report can be found here. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3