START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1334 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1334 
(Delegate Miller, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Education - Engagement Policies and School Compact (Maryland Public 
Education Parental Partnership Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each local board of education, by the 2027-2028 school year, to develop 
or amend a comprehensive parent and family engagement policy in consultation with 
parents, publish it online, review and revise it annually, and annually certify compliance to 
the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). The policy must establish a 
framework for school-level parent-school compacts and build capacity for meaningful 
parental engagement. Beginning in the 2028-2029 school year, each public school must 
also develop a parent-school compact. The compact must define the responsibilities of 
schools, parents, and students; be developed collaboratively; be written in plain language; 
include provisions for communication, curriculum access, and educator qualifications; and 
be reviewed annually at a parent meeting. Each school must post the compact online and 
annually certify compliance to its local board. MSDE must provide guidance and technical 
assistance and may adopt regulations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can fulfill all the requirements of the bill with existing resources, 
including providing guidance, training, and technical assistance to local boards of 
education or public schools, collecting annual certifications of compliance with the bill, 
and adopting regulations related to the bill’s requirements. No effect on revenues.  
 
Local Effect:  Expenditures increase beginning in FY 2027 to the extent that school 
systems need to hire staff to assist with the development of a comprehensive parent and 
family engagement policy and parent-school compact, conduct training for schools, and 
develop a system to track compliance with the bill. However, a reliable estimate is not 
available, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. This bill may impose a mandate on 
a unit of local government. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1334/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Parent and Family Engagement Policy 
 
The parent and family engagement policy is meant to provide parents with an opportunity 
to participate in the decisions of the local board of education and superintendent that pertain 
to the education of students within the local school system and assist parents and public 
schools in collaborating on the education of students enrolled in each public school.  
 
The parent and family engagement policy must: 
 
 
be established in consultation with the parents of students enrolled in the local 
school system; 
 
establish a framework for a parent-school compact to be used by each public school 
in the local school system in accordance with the bill, including general procedural 
rules for the creation of the compact; 
 
provide technical assistance to parents seeking to participate in the development of 
the parent-school compact, including by providing translation services and training; 
 
build capacity in each school for substantive parental engagement, including by 
providing training, materials, and support for school staff who seek to engage 
parents; 
 
coordinate and integrate the family and parent engagement strategies adopted as part 
of the policy with other relevant federal and state laws and policies; 
 
provide an opportunity, at least once a year, for parents to evaluate the policy for 
effectiveness and contribute feedback to improve the policy; and 
 
be revised at least once a year to remove barriers to parental involvement and 
address the needs of parents seeking to assist in the education of their children. 
 
The parent and family engagement policy must be documented in writing and published 
on the website of the local board. 
 
If the local board of education has an existing parent and family engagement policy, 
including a policy established in accordance with the federal Every Student Succeeds Act, 
the local board may amend that policy to meet the requirements of the bill.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1334/ Page 3 
Parent-school Compact 
 
The purpose of the parent-school compact is to clearly define the responsibilities and roles 
of school staff, parents, and students in the education of each student, including: 
 
 
the local board’s and school’s responsibility to provide high-quality curriculum and 
instruction aligned to the state standards and curricular frameworks in a supportive 
and effective learning environment; 
 
the ways parents are responsible for supporting their student’s learning and 
academic progress, including monitoring attendance, homework assistance and 
completion, and participation in extracurricular activities; 
 
a parent’s right to know the qualifications and credentials of the educators teaching 
or providing educational or other services to their student, including timely 
notification that an assigned teacher of four or more weeks holds a conditional 
teaching license or is teaching a subject matter for which the teacher does not hold 
a license; and 
 
the school’s responsibility to provide meaningful opportunities for ongoing 
communication between a student’s parents and teachers (including, to the extent 
practicable, in the language that the parent speaks) through annual parent-teacher 
conferences, frequent reports on student academic progress, and regular 
opportunities for the parent to meet with school staff.  
 
In developing a compact, the school and parents must ensure it (1) follows the 
comprehensive parent and family engagement policy developed by the local board and 
(2) is developed using a collaborative process; and is written using plain and clear language 
understandable to all parents, including to the extent practicable, the language the parents 
speak. 
 
Each school must convene an annual meetings for patents to (1) review and discuss the 
terms and content of the compact; (2) update parents on the school’s academic programs 
and curriculum used for various academic subjects, including opportunities for parents to 
review curricular materials; and (3) inform parents of the assessments used to measure 
student and school progress and the expected levels of proficiency in reported subjects. 
During the annual meeting, the school must provide parents with training materials to assist 
parents seeking to improve student achievement and offer parents meaningful opportunities 
to provide feedback on the terms of the compact, including proposing amendments to the 
compact. The annual meeting must, to the extent practicable, hold discussions in languages 
spoken by parents and be scheduled at a convenient time for parents and consider flexible 
modes of meetings in order to maximize participation. The school must seek to maximize 
participation of parents with diverse needs in the annual meeting, including the parents of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1334/ Page 4 
(1) students with disabilities; (2) English language learners; (3) homeless children; and  
(4) students with federal visas.  
 
If a school has an existing compact, the school may amend the compact to meet the 
requirements of the bill; a compact adopted in accordance with the requirements of the 
federal Every Student Succeeds Act may fulfill these requirements. 
 
Current Law:  
 
School Instruction – Generally  
 
With the advice of the State Superintendent of Schools, the State Board of Education (SBE) 
establishes basic policy and guidelines for the program of instruction for public schools. 
Subject to State law and the regulations, bylaws, policies, and guidelines established by 
SBE, each local board of education must establish the curriculum guides and courses of 
study for schools in its jurisdiction. Policies, rules, and regulations for the graduation of 
students from Maryland public schools are established by local boards of education and 
SBE.  
 
The State Standards and Frameworks defines what students should know and be able to do 
at each grade level. Using the standards and frameworks, local school systems develop 
curriculums. Teachers then develop lesson plans to teach the curriculum. 
 
Language Access Requirements 
 
Each local board of education must take reasonable steps to provide equal access to public 
services for individuals with limited English proficiency. Reasonable steps to provide equal 
access include the provision of oral language services for parents and guardians with 
limited English proficiency, which must be through face-to-face, in-house oral language 
services if in-person contact is on a weekly or more frequent basis and the translation of 
vital documents ordinarily provided to the public into any language spoken by any limited 
English proficient population that constitutes at least 3% of the overall population within 
the county as measured by the U.S. Census. 
 
Every Student Succeeds Act 
 
Under the Every Student Succeeds Act of 2015, the federal Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act was amended to require Title I, Part A recipients to develop a parent and 
family engagement policy. Local school systems that receive funds under the law must 
jointly develop with, agree on with, and distribute to parents and family members a written 
parent and family engagement policy. At the school level, each Title I recipient must also 
jointly develop with, and distribute to, parents and family members of participating 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1334/ Page 5 
children a written parent and family engagement policy, agreed on by such parents. 
Furthermore, as a component of the school-level parent and family engagement policy, 
each school must jointly develop with parents a school-parent compact that outlines how 
parents, the entire school staff, and students will share the responsibility for improved 
student academic achievement and the means by which the school and parents will build 
and develop a partnership to help children achieve the State's high standards.  
 
Local Expenditures:  While some local school systems already meet many of the bill’s 
requirements or can implement them with existing resources, others report that the bill 
would have a meaningful operational and fiscal impact. Among the local school systems 
that responded to requests for information on the bill’s potential effect, Frederick and 
Wicomico counties indicated that additional resources would be needed for 
implementation. In particular, Frederick County reports that beyond revising existing 
system policies and regulations and drafting a parent-school compact, the school system 
would need to provide extensive training to ensure that schools understand their obligations 
under both the compact and the bill, as well as develop a new system to track and monitor 
compliance with the bill’s requirements. Accordingly, some school systems may incur 
increased expenditures beginning in fiscal 2027 to hire staff to help develop a parent and 
family engagement policy and a parent-school compact, and to create systems for 
monitoring compliance with the bill’s requirements. However, none of the responding 
school systems were able to provide enough information to produce a reliable estimate of 
those costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 948 and HB 1385 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 903 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5