START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1394 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1394 
(Delegate McComas, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law – Homicide by Motor Vehicle or Vessel – Restitution to Child 
(Bentley’s Law) 
 
 
This bill generally requires a court to order an individual who has been convicted of an 
offense under Title 2, Subtitle 5 of the Criminal Law Article (homicide by motor vehicle 
or vessel while impaired or under the influence) that resulted in the death of a parent or 
guardian of a child to pay restitution to the child. The bill requires the court to consider 
certain factors in determining the amount of restitution ordered and sets forth specified 
time periods by which the restitution must be paid. However, if the surviving parent or 
guardian of a victim’s child brings an action against the individual seeking damages and 
obtains a favorable judgment (1) the court may not consider restitution, if the action was 
brought before an order of restitution is entered or (2) the court must offset the restitution 
by the amount of the favorable judgment, if the action was brought after an order of 
restitution has been entered. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. 
Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances.    
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1394/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In determining the amount of restitution ordered, the court must consider 
the child’s (1) financial needs and resources; (2) standard of living; (3) physical and 
emotional condition and needs; and (4) physical and legal custody arrangements. If the 
child of the victim has a surviving parent or guardian, the court must also consider the 
financial needs and resources of the parent or guardian, including whether the child is in 
the custody of the Department of Human Services, and reasonable work-related child care 
expenses. 
 
In general, the full amount of restitution ordered by the court must be divided into periodic 
payments to be paid to a child of the victim until the child reaches the age of 18 and has 
graduated from a secondary school or the majority of the class of which the child is a 
member when the child reaches the age of 18 has graduated from secondary school. 
However, if an individual ordered to pay restitution is incarcerated and unable to pay, 
payment must begin within one year after the individual’s release from incarceration. If the 
general period of restitution ends while the individual ordered to pay is incarcerated and 
the restitution is not paid in full, payment must continue until the restitution is paid in full. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Title 2, Subtitle 5 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Title 2, Subtitle 5 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits the crime of homicide by a motor 
vehicle or vessel while impaired or under the influence. Generally, a person may not cause 
the death of another as a result of the person’s negligently driving, operating, or controlling 
a motor vehicle or vessel while under the influence of or impaired by (1) alcohol;  
(2) alcohol per se; (3) a drug, combination of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs 
and alcohol that the person cannot drive, operate, or control a motor vehicle or vessel 
safely; or (4) a controlled dangerous substance. Penalties range from imprisonment for up 
to 3 or 10 years, and/or a fine of up to $5,000 or $10,000, depending on the charge or a 
prior conviction as further specified in statute. 
 
Restitution – Generally 
 
A court may enter a judgment of restitution ordering a defendant, child respondent, or liable 
parent to make restitution in addition to any other penalty for the commission of a crime 
or a delinquent act, as specified. A judgment of restitution is a money judgment in favor of 
the person, governmental unit, or third-party payor to whom the restitution obligor has been 
ordered to pay restitution. The judgment of restitution may be enforced by the person, 
governmental unit, or third‐party payor to whom the restitution obligor has been ordered 
to pay restitution in the same manner as a money judgment in a civil action. Generally, a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1394/ Page 3 
person or entity to whom a restitution obligor has been ordered to pay restitution has all 
the rights and obligations of a money judgment creditor under the Maryland Rules, 
including the obligation on receiving all amounts due under the judgement to file a 
statement that the judgment has been satisfied. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3