START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1380 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1380 
(Delegate Fair) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Prescriptions for Gender-Affirming Care and Hormone 
Therapy - Coverage and Dispensing Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively carriers) to provide coverage for a single dispensing of a supply 
of a “qualifying prescription” for up to a 12-month period. For a qualifying prescription 
that is a controlled substance, a carrier must provide coverage for the maximum supply that 
may be dispensed at one time under federal and State law. The bill also authorizes a 
pharmacist to dispense a qualifying prescription that does not exceed a 12-month supply 
of the prescription drug. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or 
after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any 
additional workload on MIA can likely be handled with existing budgeted resources. No 
material impact on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for local governments that purchase fully 
insured health benefit plans. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1380/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Qualifying prescription” means a prescription for a prescription drug that 
is (1) used to medically suppress, increase, or replace hormones that the body is not 
producing at intended levels or (2) related to gender-affirming treatment. “Qualifying 
prescription” does not include a prescription for (1) a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) 
or GLP-1 receptor antagonist; (2) a prescription that cannot be safely stored at 
room temperature without refrigeration; or (3) a prescription prescribed for single use, 
emergency use, or for a nonrenewable course of treatment that the prescriber does not 
intend to continue on an ongoing or maintenance basis. 
 
A carrier may (1) temporarily limit dispensing of a qualifying prescription to a 90-day 
supply if there is an acute dispensing shortage for the drug; (2) limit the dispensing during 
the last quarter of the plan year if a 12-month supply was already dispensed during the 
plan year; and (3) apply utilization management strategies to a qualifying prescription. 
However, a carrier may not require an enrollee to accept a 12-month supply if they request 
a smaller supply or the prescribing provider indicates that the enrollee should receive a 
smaller supply. 
 
Current Law:  A carrier that provides coverage for contraceptive drugs and devices must 
provide coverage for a single dispensing of up to a 12-month supply of prescription 
contraceptives. A provider is not required to prescribe, furnish, or dispense 12 months of 
contraceptives at one time. Whenever a carrier increases the copayment for a 
single dispensing of up to a 12-month supply of prescription contraceptives, the carrier 
must proportionately increase the dispensing fee paid to the pharmacist. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the bill does apply to the nongrandfathered 
individual and small employer markets. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1380/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3