START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1387 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1387 
(Delegate Coley, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund - Fund Producer Commission Rate 
 
 
This bill reduces the minimum commission rate that the Maryland Automobile Insurance 
Fund (MAIF) must pay to an insurance producer that issues insurance policies on behalf 
of the fund from 10% of the total premium to 5% of the total premium. The bill also 
prohibits MAIF from paying a commission on a policy written directly by MAIF without 
the involvement of an insurance producer.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
MAIF Effect:  MAIF nonbudgeted expenditures decrease beginning in FY 2027, 
potentially by several hundred thousand dollars annually, to the extent MAIF uses the 
authority to reduce insurance producer commission payments, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund – Generally  
 
Created by the General Assembly in 1972, MAIF is an independent nonbudgeted 
State agency. Through its Insured Division, MAIF provides automobile liability insurance 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1387/ Page 2 
to residents of the State who are unable to obtain policies in the private insurance market. 
As the insurer of last resort, MAIF is not in direct competition with the private insurance 
industry because a customer must generally have been turned down by other insurers (and 
meet other requirements) in order to obtain a policy with MAIF. 
 
Insurance Producers  
 
An insurance producer is a person licensed by the Maryland Insurance Administration to 
sell insurance in the State on behalf of an insurer. A producer can be a captive agent, only 
selling insurance for one insurer, or an independent agent, able to sell insurance for more 
than one insurer. An individual applying for the license must be of good character and 
trustworthy and meet any education requirements specified by law and set by the Maryland 
Insurance Commissioner. 
 
With limited exceptions, for private passenger automobile insurance issued by MAIF, 
MAIF is required to pay a commission to an insurance producer that issues insurance 
policies on behalf of the fund. The commission rate paid by MAIF must be between 10% 
and 15% of the total premium.  
 
MAIF Expenditures:  According to MAIF, commissions for insurance producers 
represent a significant operating expense. MAIF advises that it intends to use the authority 
granted under the bill to align producer commissions to the level of producer involvement, 
which could be below the current 10% minimum. Assuming MAIF lowers commission 
payments, MAIF nonbudgeted expenditures decrease, starting in fiscal 2027.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, MAIF advises that even a relatively minor reduction in some 
commission rates could decrease expenditures by $250,000 or more annually. However, a 
more precise impact depends on the commission rates established by MAIF and cannot be 
readily estimated without actual experience under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that a small business acts as an insurance producer 
for MAIF and its commission rate is reduced, revenues for the insurance producer decrease 
accordingly. However, without experience under the bill, the magnitude of the impact on 
small business revenues cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 637 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1387/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3