START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1345 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1345 
(Delegates Cardin and Taylor) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Maryland Trust Act - In Terrorem Clause - Void 
 
  
This bill establishes that if probable cause exists for instituting proceedings, a provision in 
a trust purporting to penalize an interested person for contesting the trust or instituting 
other proceedings relating to the estate is void. The bill must be construed to apply 
prospectively only and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or 
application to any cause of action arising before the bill’s effective date. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances.   
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Wills – In Terrorem Clause 
 
Pursuant to § 4‐413 of the Estates and Trusts Article, if probable cause exists for instituting 
proceedings, a provision in a will purporting to penalize an interested person for contesting 
the will or instituting other proceedings relating to the estate is void.  
 
Maryland Trust Act  
 
Contesting the Validity of Revocable Trust:  The Maryland Trust Act specifies that a person 
must commence a judicial proceeding to contest the validity of a trust that was revocable 
at the death of the settlor within the earliest of (1) one year after the death of the settlor or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1345/ Page 2 
(2) six months after the trustee sends the person a copy of the trust instrument and a notice 
informing the person of the existence of the trust, name and address of the trustee, and the 
time allowed for commencing a proceeding.   
 
Void Trusts:  A trust is void to the extent that the creation of the trust was induced by fraud, 
duress, or undue influence.  
 
Judicial Proceedings:  On the invocation of the court’s jurisdiction by an interested person, 
on the court’s own motion, or as otherwise provided by law, the court may intervene 
actively in the administration of a trust, fashioning and implementing remedies as the 
public interest and the interest of the beneficiaries may require. A judicial proceeding 
involving a trust may relate to a matter involving the administration of the trust, including 
a request for instructions and an action to declare rights. A court having equity jurisdiction 
has general superintending power with respect to trusts. A trust is not subject to continuing 
judicial supervision unless ordered by the court.  
 
Discretionary Powers Subject to Judicial Control:  A discretionary power conferred on the 
trustee to determine the benefits of a beneficiary is subject to judicial control to prevent 
misinterpretation or abuse of the discretion of the trustee. The benefits to which a 
beneficiary of a discretionary distribution provision is entitled, and what may constitute 
abuse of discretion by the trustee, depend on the terms of the discretion, including the 
proper construction of accompanying standards, and on the settlor’s purposes in granting 
the discretionary power and in creating the trust. The Act specifies conduct that constitutes 
a trustee’s abuse of discretion in exercising or failing to exercise a discretionary power. A 
court may review an action by a trustee under a support provision or a mandatory 
distribution provision in the trust.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2