START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1317 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1317 
(Delegate Ivey) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Government - Data-Sharing Agreements and Personal Identifying 
Information - Prohibition and Reporting (Maryland Data Privacy and Federal 
Shield Act) 
 
 
This bill prohibits, unless specifically required by State or federal law or a court order:  
(1) the State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, or any other agency, officer, 
employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government from providing personal 
identifying information to the federal government, including federal law enforcement 
agencies, and (2) the State or a unit of local government from providing information or 
assisting in the establishment or maintenance of a federal registry based on race, national 
origin, or religious affiliation, belief, or opinion. The bill also requires the 
Attorney General, by January 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, to submit a report on 
State data-sharing agreements with the federal government to the Governor and the 
General Assembly.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $122,400 only in FY 2027 for 
contractual staff to produce the required report. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
122,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($122,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1317/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Attorney General’s report must (1) identify all current data-sharing 
agreements between the State or a unit of local government and the federal government; 
(2) determine whether the data-sharing agreement is in compliance with relevant State or 
federal privacy laws; and (3) if a data-sharing agreement is not in compliance with State or 
federal privacy laws, provide recommendations to bring the agreement into compliance.  
 
“Personal identifying information” includes (1) citizenship or immigration status; 
(2) religious affiliation, belief, or opinion; and (3) biometric data, as defined under current 
law.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository – Generally 
 
The Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository (CJIS-CR) is established by 
State law within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services to collect, 
manage, and disseminate Maryland Criminal History Record Information for criminal 
justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. For national 
records’ checks, CJIS‑CR collects a fee and submits the requests for national information 
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation electronically. As submissions to CJIS are governed 
by State and federal law, they are likely not affected by the bill.  
 
Regional Automated Property Information Database 
 
Chapter 562 of 2009 established electronic reporting requirements for secondhand precious 
metal object dealers, thereby repealing the authorization that allowed dealers to mail or 
submit paper transaction records to law enforcement. The State uses the Regional 
Automated Property Information Database (RAPID) system to transmit acquisition 
information from secondhand precious metal object dealers to local, State, and federal law 
enforcement through an Internet interface. RAPID enables police departments statewide to 
immediately gain access to timely information about property that has been sold to 
pawnbrokers, precious metal dealers, or vehicle salvage yards.  
 
287(g) Agreements and Immigration Detainers 
 
Section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (codified as 8 U.S.C. § 1357(g)) 
authorizes the Attorney General of the United States to enter into agreements, commonly 
referred to as “287(g) agreements,” with state and local governments authorizing state or 
local personnel “to perform a function of an immigration officer in relation to the 
investigation, apprehension, or detention of aliens in the United States.” A 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1317/ Page 3 
287(g) agreement is not required for a local jurisdiction to cooperate with federal 
immigration authorities; however, federal law does require that each agreement provide 
that participating personnel have adequate training regarding immigration law. 
 
Chapters 1 and 2 of 2026 prohibit the State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, 
or any agency, officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government from 
entering into an “immigration enforcement agreement.” “Immigration enforcement 
agreement” means a contract, an agreement, an intergovernmental service agreement, or a 
memorandum of understanding with the federal government that authorizes the State, a 
unit of local government, a county sheriff, or any agency, officer, employee, or agent of 
the State or a unit of local government to enforce civil immigration law. “Immigration 
enforcement 
agreement” 
includes 
an 
agreement 
made 
in 
accordance 
with  
(1) 8 U.S.C. § 1103; (2) 8 U.S.C. § 1357; or (3) any other federal law.  
 
Maryland Online Data Privacy Act 
 
Chapters 454 and 455 of 2024 (the Maryland Online Data Privacy Act of 2024) establish 
new consumer protections and rights, as well as disclosure obligations, relating to online 
personal data controlled or processed by certain entities that conduct business in the State 
or provide services or products that are targeted to residents of the State. Violation of the 
Maryland Online Data Privacy Act is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under 
the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions. 
 
Under the Acts, a “controller” means a person that, alone or jointly with others, determines 
the purpose and means of processing personal data. “Personal data” means any information 
that is linked (or can be reasonably linked) to an identified or identifiable consumer. 
Among other requirements, a controller must limit the collection of personal data to what 
is reasonably necessary and proportionate to provide or maintain a specific product or 
service requested by the consumer to whom the data pertains.  
 
State Expenditures:  The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) advises that it cannot 
complete the required report with existing staff. As a result, OAG advises that  
one full‑time assistant attorney general is needed to produce the required annual reports. 
The Department of Legislative Services agrees in part and notes that the additional 
workload resulting from the bill is most burdensome in the first year, as OAG compiles the 
necessary information and produces the initial annual report, and that future submissions 
will likely require minor adjustments.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $122,433 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one temporary contractual assistant attorney general to research existing data-sharing 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1317/ Page 4 
agreements between State entities and the federal government and submit the first annual 
report required under the bill. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$113,292 
Operating Expenses 
9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$122,433 
 
This estimate reflects the termination of the contractual position on June 30, 2027, 
following the submission of the first annual report on January 1, 2027. OAG can submit 
subsequent reports with existing resources. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
State entities can submit information to OAG with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Baltimore City; 
Frederick, Harford, and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of 
the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4