START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1363 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1363 
(Delegate Nkongolo) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Domestic Violence Offenders - Registration 
 
   
This bill requires a person who is convicted of at least two domestically related crimes to 
register with the person’s supervising authority. A domestic violence offender must register 
with the appropriate supervising authority in the State within seven days after a 
second conviction for a domestically related crime. A person is no longer subject to 
registration if the underlying conviction requiring registration is reversed, vacated, or set 
aside, or the registrant is pardoned for the underlying conviction. The term of registration 
is (1) if the registrant has one prior conviction for a domestically related crime, 2 years;  
(2) if the registrant has at least two prior convictions for a domestically related crime, 
5 years; or (3) if the registrant has at least three prior convictions for a domestically related 
crime, 10 years. The bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS) to make certain registration statements available to the public. The bill 
also establishes a penalty for failure to register.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase significantly (likely by an estimated 
$1.9 million) in FY 2027 and by several hundred thousand dollars annually thereafter for 
DPSCS to create and maintain a domestic violence registry. General fund expenditures 
may further increase to the extent additional staff are required, as discussed below. 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $18,800 in FY 2027 only for 
one‑time programming costs. General fund revenues may increase, potentially as early as 
FY 2027, to the extent registration fees are established. 
 
Local Effect:  Expenditures increase, potentially significantly, for local jurisdictions to 
comply with the bill’s requirements, as discussed below. Local revenues are not affected. 
This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1363/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For purposes of registration eligibility, a person is convicted when the 
person (1) is found guilty of a crime by a jury or judicial officer; (2) enters a plea of guilty 
or nolo contendere; or (3) is granted a probation before judgment after a finding of guilt 
for a crime if the court, as a condition of probation, orders compliance with the 
requirements of the bill. 
 
With advice from the Criminal Justice Advisory Board, the Secretary of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
Publicly Available Information 
 
DPSCS must make available to the public registration statements or information about 
registration statements. Information about registration statements must include, in plain 
language that can be understood without special knowledge of the criminal laws of the 
State, a factual description of the crime of the offender that is the basis for the registration, 
excluding details that would identify the victim. Registration information provided to the 
public may not include a domestic violence offender’s Social Security number, driver’s 
license number, or arrests not resulting in conviction. A registration statement provided 
under the bill must include a copy of the completed registration form and a copy of the 
registrant’s digital image. 
 
A registration statement must include (1) the registrant’s full name, including any suffix; 
(2) a description of the crime for which the registrant was convicted; (3) the date that the 
registrant was convicted; (4) the jurisdiction and the name of the court in which the 
registrant was convicted; (5) all identifying factors, including a physical description of the 
registrant; (6) a copy of the registrant’s valid driver’s license or identification card; and  
(7) the registrant’s signature and date signed. 
 
DPSCS must post on the Internet (1) a current listing of each registrant, including each 
registrant’s name, date of birth, date of conviction, jurisdiction of the conviction, and 
digital image and (2) a plain language factual description (as referenced above).  
 
Penalties for Failure to Register 
 
A registrant may not knowingly (1) fail to register; (2) fail to provide any information to 
be included in a registration statement; or (3) provide false information of a material fact 
as required for registration. A violator is subject to the following escalating penalties: 
 
 
for a first offense, a civil fine of up to $250; 
 
for a second offense, a civil fine of up to $500; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1363/ Page 3 
 
for a third or subsequent offense, is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
The Secretary may establish a reasonable registration fee to recover the costs of managing 
the registry and electronically posting registry information. To the extent practicable, 
DPSCS must use the existing resources in the Sex Offender Registry to implement the 
provisions of the bill.  
 
Definitions 
 
“Domestic violence offender” means an individual convicted of a domestically related 
crime required to register under the bill. 
 
“Domestically related crime” means a crime committed by a defendant against a victim 
who is a person eligible for relief, as defined in § 4-501 of the Family Law Article, or who 
had a sexual relationship with the defendant within the 12 months preceding the 
commission of the crime. 
 
“Supervising authority” means an agency or person that is responsible for collecting 
information for the initial registration of a domestic violence offender including, among 
others, the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, if the registrant is in the 
custody of the department and the administrator of a local correctional facility, if the 
registrant, including a participant in a home detention program, is in the custody of the 
local correctional facility. Under certain circumstances, a supervising authority may also 
be a court or local law enforcement unit.  
 
Current Law:  There is no publicly accessible domestic violence offender registry 
established in State law. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although the bill does not specifically require the establishment of a 
centralized registry, it permits DPSCS to establish reasonable fees to recover the costs of 
managing the registry and electronically posting registry information. Further, DPSCS is 
required to use (to the extent possible) existing resources in the Sex Offender Registry, a 
Statewide centralized registry, to implement the bill. While DPSCS is required to publicly 
post registration information, the bill does not specify a means of data sharing between the 
supervising authorities enumerated by the bill. This analysis assumes that the regulations 
adopted by the Secretary (as required by the bill) specify a method by which other 
supervising authorities share information with DPSCS in order to create and maintain the 
registry.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1363/ Page 4 
Based on information provided by DPSCS, general fund expenditures are anticipated to 
increase significantly in fiscal 2027 (likely by an estimated $1.9 million) for one‑time 
programming costs associated with the creation of a domestic violence offender registry. 
General fund expenditures may further increase by several hundred thousand dollars 
annually for registry maintenance. DPSCS also anticipates significant personnel costs to 
hire 23 staff (including 1 manager, 2 supervisors, and 20 domestic violence offender 
registry specialists) to supervise domestic violence offender registrants, with general fund 
expenditures increasing by $1.5 million in fiscal 2027 and up to $2.0 million by fiscal 2031. 
DPSCS bases its estimate on existing responsibilities associated with the Sex Offender 
Registry. DPSCS also anticipates the need for additional office space to accommodate the 
increased staff, at a cost that cannot be readily determined in advance. 
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that the bill does not appear 
to subject individuals who are required to register under the bill’s provisions to additional 
supervision solely based on their status as domestic violence registrants. Further, the 
estimate received from DPSCS specifically notes that there are significantly more domestic 
violence offenders than sex offenders. However, it is not clear if the estimate specifically 
accounted for how many domestic violence offenders are likely to meet the registration 
requirements of the bill (i.e., an individual having at least two qualifying domestic violence 
convictions). In addition, because registration is required only after an individual has 
two convictions (and the bill does not have retroactive application), it will take time before 
there is a significant number of individuals subject to registration requirements. 
Accordingly, while enhanced monitoring for registrants may be contemplated under 
adopted regulations, additional staff are not specifically accounted for in this analysis.   
 
Judiciary 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $18,788 in fiscal 2027 only for programming 
changes. In addition, the Judiciary reports that the requirement to register may increase the 
number of appeals in the circuit courts for convictions that require registration. Any such 
impact is not anticipated to materially impact the workload of the courts. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures may increase, potentially significantly in local 
jurisdictions. Although general registration management and the public reporting of 
registration statements is assumed to be managed exclusively by DPSCS, individuals are 
required to register through their supervising authorities, which includes the administrator 
of a local correctional facility, the court in which the registrant was convicted, and/or the 
local law enforcement unit where the offender is a resident, transient, or habitually lives as 
specified. While the bill is silent on procedures for information and data sharing between 
supervising authorities and DPSCS for purposes of maintaining and publishing registration 
statements, as noted above, this analysis assumes that procedures are developed (through 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1363/ Page 5 
regulations) under which local entities share registration statements as necessary with 
DPSCS.  
 
For context, Worcester County advises the bill may significantly impact expenditures and 
operations of law enforcement to comply with registration requirements and monitoring 
for potential violations. Montgomery County anticipates the need for additional personnel 
to staff a domestic violence offender registry unit and generally coordinate with DPSCS, 
keep electronic records up to date, investigate failures to report, and generally register 
offenders. As discussed above, DLS advises that it is unclear to what extent domestic 
violence registrants are subject to additional monitoring.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. However, similar provisions have been considered. For example, see SB 650 
and HB 847 of 2025 and SB 1172 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5