START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1352 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1352 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Worker Residency Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires that contractors on specified public work contracts ensure that at least 
35% of apprenticeship hours are performed by State residents. The Maryland Department 
of Labor (MD Labor) is responsible for enforcing the bill’s requirements, and any costs 
incurred to administer the bill must be paid from the State Apprenticeship and Training 
Fund (SATF). Contractors found in violation of the bill’s requirements are subject to 
financial penalties (paid to SATF or to registered apprenticeship programs that operate and 
train apprentices in the State) and debarment. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase due to direct payments and penalties, but a 
reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. State agencies, including MD Labor, 
can implement the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Scope 
 
The bill applies to contractors awarded a State public work contract valued at $5.0 million 
or more or located in Baltimore City or Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Howard, Montgomery, 
or Prince George’s counties. The bill does not apply to a State contract for which the federal 
government provides money. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1352/ Page 2 
Residency Requirements 
 
As a condition of receiving a contract, a contractor must provide a statement to MD Labor 
and the procurement unit that the contractor will meet the applicable requirements for 
covered small and large projects.  
 
The Secretary of Labor may adopt regulations authorizing a contract to elect to make a 
contribution to SATF or a registered apprenticeship program operating and training 
apprentices in the State as an alternative to fulfilling the bill’s State residency requirements. 
Furthermore, a contractor that exceeds the 35% residency threshold may apply the excess 
apprenticeship hours to another contract subject to the bill that is entered into by the 
contractor within two years after the completion of the first contract.  
 
Enforcement 
 
A contractor that fails to meet the bill’s requirements is liable for an amount equal to 
twice the number of apprentice hours at the apprentice rate by which the contractor failed 
to meet the applicable requirement. A person who is found to have violated the 
requirements of the bill five times in a five-year period may be debarred from entering into 
a State contract for up to five years. 
 
The Secretary of Labor must adopt regulations to establish administrative procedures for 
the collection and distribution of penalty payments. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Work Contracts 
 
A “public work” is a structure or work, including a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, 
waterwork, or sewage disposal plant that is constructed for public use or benefit or is paid 
for wholly or partly by public money. It does not include structures or work performed by 
a public utility, as specified, or capital projects that receive State funds in the annual capital 
budget as local House of Delegates or local Senate initiatives. A “public work contract” is 
a contact for the construction of a public work. 
 
The bill specifies that a covered large project is a public work contract subject to Title 17, 
Subtitle 2 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, which establishes prevailing wage 
requirements for public work projects. In general, eligible public work projects are: 
 
 
those carried out by the State; 
 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is State 
money; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1352/ Page 3 
 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages; and 
 
construction projects by investor-owned gas and/or electric companies involving 
any underground gas or electric infrastructure. 
 
Debarring Contractors 
 
A debarred contractor may not be considered for the award of, be awarded, or perform, 
directly or indirectly, a contract with the State during the time of debarment. Debarment 
may be imposed for a number of reasons including, but not limited to, conviction for a 
variety of specified federal and State offenses, previous failure to perform procurement 
contracts, and persistent failure to meet certain Minority Business Enterprise contract goals 
in the absence of mitigating factors.  
 
While a person who is convicted of certain crimes related to bribery is debarred by 
operation of law, debarment for any other reason occurs as a result of the Attorney General 
initiating a proceeding against a contractor by filing an administrative complaint with the 
Board of Public Works (BPW). The board is required to notify a person of the proceedings 
and that the person is entitled to a hearing before the board if requested within 30 days after 
receiving the notice. If a person does not make a request within the 30 days, the person 
waives the right to a hearing and is automatically debarred. The board may place a person 
or business on suspension while the debarment proceeding is pending. Suspension means 
that a person may not be considered for the award of, be awarded, or perform, directly or 
indirectly, a contract with the State. 
 
A suspension or debarment terminates automatically if the underlying conviction is 
reversed or voided. The board also may grant a petition for removal of the debarment after 
specified time periods have elapsed. A list of presently debarred contractors and their term 
of debarment can be found on the BPW’s website. 
 
State Apprenticeship and Training Fund 
 
Chapter 644 of 2009 created SATF and required contractors on covered public work 
contracts (those valued at $500,000 or more) and subcontractors with contracts worth at 
least $100,000 to either participate in an apprenticeship training program, make payments 
to a registered apprenticeship program or to an organization that operates registered 
programs, or contribute to SATF. Chapter 782 of 2017 extended virtually identical 
requirements to contracts with a value of at least $500,000 for capital construction projects 
that receive at least $1.0 million from the State’s capital budget (which, as noted above, 
are not considered public work projects). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1352/ Page 4 
The purpose of SATF is to promote preapprenticeship programs and other workforce 
development programs in the State’s public secondary schools and community colleges 
and to cover the cost of implementing and enforcing apprenticeship laws. The programs 
should prepare students to enter apprenticeship training programs. The fund’s revenues 
consist of payments made by contractors and penalties collected due to violations. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues for SATF likely increase from direct payments 
from contractors that do not or cannot meet the bill’s apprentice residency requirements (if 
authorized by regulations), and from penalty payments from contractors found to not be in 
compliance with the bill. A reliable estimate is not feasible in the absence of experience 
under the bill, particularly since it is not known (1) whether the Secretary of Labor adopts 
regulations allowing for alternative payments to SATF; (2) how many contractors opt to 
make payments to SATF instead of meeting the apprentice residency requirements, if 
authorized by the Secretary; or (3) how many contractors found in violation of the bill opt 
to pay penalties to a registered apprenticeship program instead of to SATF. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill creates additional barriers to the participation of small 
businesses in State public work projects, as small businesses may lack resources to ensure 
compliance with the bill’s apprentice residency requirements. Alternatively, they have to 
make payments to SATF or apprenticeship programs, which affects their profitability. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 957 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties; University System of Maryland; Department of General 
Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4