START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1366 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1366 
(Delegate Nkongolo) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Family Law - Final Protective Orders - Duration 
 
 
This bill alters the duration of a final protective order such that, if a respondent is on 
probation at the time a final protective order is issued, or if the respondent is placed on 
probation during the effective period of a final protective order, the relief granted in the 
final protective order may not terminate before the probation expires or is terminated by 
court order.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $223,100 in FY 2027 only for 
one‑time programming costs. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State 
operations or finances.  
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
223,100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($223,100) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual meeting specified relationship requirements may seek relief 
from abuse by filing a petition for a protective order with the court or, if the clerk’s office 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1366/ Page 2 
is closed, with a District Court Commissioner. Statute sets forth certain procedures and 
requirements for interim and temporary protective orders.  
 
A final protective order may be granted if the judge finds by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the alleged abuse has occurred or if the respondent consents to the entry of 
the order. Among other relief, a final protective order may order the respondent to 
(1) refrain from abusing or threatening to abuse any person eligible for relief; (2) refrain 
from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing any person eligible for relief; 
(3) refrain from entering the residence of any person eligible for relief; (4) award 
emergency family maintenance as necessary to support any person eligible for relief to 
whom the respondent has a duty of support, as specified; or (5) pay filing fees and costs. 
A final protective order may also address issues relating to custody and visitation, use and 
possession of a home or vehicle, counseling, and temporary possession of a pet. A final 
protective order must require the respondent to surrender to law enforcement authorities 
any firearm in the respondent’s possession and to refrain from possession of any firearm 
for the duration of the protective order.  
 
All relief granted in a final protective order is effective for the period stated in the order, 
generally up to a maximum of 12 months. A final protective order may be issued for up to 
two years in specified circumstances set forth in statute. Statutory provisions also set forth 
circumstances under which a final protective order may be modified, rescinded, or 
extended.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase for the Judiciary by $223,116 in 
fiscal 2027 only for one-time programming changes to automatically ensure all final 
protective orders are reviewed prior to their assigned expiration and confirm the respondent 
is not on probation.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Judiciary advises that in fiscal 2025, the District Court 
granted 8,542 final protective orders; the circuit courts granted 3,825. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1366/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3