START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1305 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1305 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
State Child Welfare System - Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to annually report 
to the General Assembly and the Department of Human Services (DHS) on the number of 
foster youth who enroll in college and graduate within six years. In reporting this, and other 
information regarding children and foster youth in the State child welfare system per 
current law, MSDE must include, where appropriate, comparison data for children and 
students not in the State child welfare system. Further, by December 1, 2026, MSDE, in 
cooperation with DHS, must develop and submit a report to the General Assembly on 
improving outcomes for students in the State child welfare system.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MSDE and DHS can meet reporting requirements using existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The one-time report due to the General Assembly must: 
 
 
identify each State agency that provides services for foster youth;  
 
specifically for children and foster youth students, identify needs and gaps in 
services that could improve educational outcomes;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1305/ Page 2 
 
identify best practices from other states that have demonstrated success with college 
and career readiness for foster youth; 
 
provide recommendations for improving educational outcomes for foster youth 
students in the State;  
 
evaluate the effectiveness of the information reported regarding children and foster 
youth in the State child welfare system under § 5-1312 of the Family Law Article ; 
and  
 
provide recommendations for improving data collection and reporting requirements 
on foster youth students. 
 
The bill also makes a technical correction to relevant current law, such that the bill refers 
to individualized education programs instead of individualized education plans. 
 
Current Law:  Under § 5-1312 of the Family Law Article, DHS must report to the 
General Assembly and publish on the DHS website information on numerous specified 
items regarding children and foster youth in the State child welfare system.  
 
Under Chapters 315 and 316 of 2021, as indicated within § 5-1312, regarding children and 
foster youth in the State child welfare system, MSDE must annually report the (1) stability 
of school placements; (2) number of children with individualized education plans; 
(3) number of children with a plan under § 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act for 
students with disabilities; (4) number of children who have been retained a grade; 
(5) number of children who graduate from high school; (6) dropout rates; (7) number of 
children who are truant students; (8) rates of absenteeism; (9) rates of suspension; (10) rates 
of expulsion; and (11) number of school-based arrests.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1305/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3