START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1348 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1348 
(Delegate Embry) 
Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Human Trafficking - Reports to Regional Navigators and Prosecutions - 
Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes a mandatory reporter to notify a regional navigator of suspected  
sex trafficking or labor trafficking if, in the professional judgment of the reporter, 
notification is necessary to prevent serious harm to the child or other children. The 
mandatory reporter may notify the regional navigator without the consent of the child and 
over the express objection of the child. The bill also authorizes a State’s Attorney or the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to investigate and prosecute a violation of Title 3, 
Subtitle 11 (Human Trafficking) or a violation of any crime based on the act establishing 
a violation of the subtitle. If OAG exercises prosecutorial authority, OAG has all the 
powers and duties of a State’s Attorney to investigate and prosecute the violation.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase for OAG depending on the bill’s 
effect on OAG workloads, as described below. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations, including the workloads of State’s Attorney’ offices. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1348/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Mandatory Reporting of Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect  
 
Under § 5‐704 of the Family Law Article, health care practitioners, police officers, 
educators, and human service workers who are acting in a professional capacity, and who 
have reason to believe that a child has been subjected to abuse or neglect must notify the 
local department of social services or the appropriate law enforcement agency. An 
“educator or human service worker” includes any teacher, counselor, social worker, 
caseworker, and parole or probation officer. If the worker is acting as a staff member of a 
hospital, public health agency, child care institution, juvenile detention center, school, or 
similar institution, then the individual must notify the head of the institution or the 
designee. 
 
Under the applicable definitions of the Family Law Article, “abuse” includes “labor 
trafficking” of a child by any individual. “Labor trafficking” means knowingly (1) taking, 
placing, harboring, persuading, inducing, or enticing a child by force, fraud, or coercion to 
provide services or labor or (2) receiving a benefit or thing of value from the provision of 
services or labor by a child that was induced by force, fraud, or coercion. Via the applicable 
definitions, “abuse” also includes “sex trafficking,” which is the recruitment, harboring, 
transportation, provision, obtaining, patronizing, or soliciting of a child for the purpose of 
a commercial sex act.  
 
Safe Harbor Regional Navigators 
 
A local department that receives a report of suspected abuse or neglect involving a child 
who is a suspected victim of sex trafficking or labor trafficking must refer the child to any 
appropriate regional navigator.  
 
A regional navigator is a provider of services designated by a grantee of the Safe Harbor 
Regional Navigator Grant Program. The program, originally established by Chapter 559 of 
2019, supports services for youth victims of trafficking. Generally, the Governor’s Office 
of Crime Prevention and Policy provides grant funding for services provided by the 
program; such services must include, among other things, safety planning, trauma 
counseling, legal services, and case management.  
 
Title 3, Subtitle 11 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
Sex Trafficking:  Under § 3-1102 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not knowingly:  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1348/ Page 3 
 
take or cause another to be taken to any place for prostitution;  
 
place, cause to be placed, or harbor another in any place for prostitution;  
 
persuade, induce, entice, or encourage another to be taken to or placed in any place 
for prostitution;  
 
receive consideration to procure for or place in a house of prostitution or elsewhere 
another with the intent of causing the other to engage in prostitution or assignation;  
 
engage in a device, scheme, or continuing course of conduct intended to cause 
another to believe that if the other did not take part in a sexually explicit 
performance, the other or a third person would suffer physical restraint or serious 
harm; or  
 
destroy, conceal, remove, confiscate, or possess an actual or purported passport, 
immigration document, or government identification document of another while 
otherwise violating or attempting to commit these acts. 
 
Also, a parent, guardian, or person who has permanent or temporary care or custody or 
responsibility for supervision of another may not consent to the taking or detention of the 
other person for prostitution. 
 
In general, a person who commits the sex trafficking offenses detailed above involving an 
adult victim is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years 
and/or a maximum fine of $5,000. 
 
Under § 3-1102(b) of the Criminal Law Article, a person who commits sex trafficking 
involving a victim who is a minor (defined as an individual younger than age 18) or with 
the use of or intent to use force, threat, coercion, or fraud is guilty of a felony and subject 
to imprisonment for up to 25 years and/or a maximum fine of $15,000. The District Court 
has concurrent jurisdiction with the circuit courts over the crime of felony sex trafficking 
under § 3-1102(b). 
 
A person who knowingly aids, abets, or conspires in the violation of State sex trafficking 
laws or knowingly benefits financially or receives anything of value from a venture that 
includes an act prohibited under State sex trafficking laws is subject to the same penalties 
imposed on a person who violated the applicable statute. 
 
A defendant’s lack of knowledge of the victim’s age is not a defense in a prosecution for 
(1) sex trafficking of a minor or (2) knowingly benefitting financially from or aiding or 
abetting a sex trafficking violation. 
 
Marriage Trafficking:  Under § 3-1103 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not 
knowingly (1) take or detain another with the intent to use force, threat, coercion, or fraud 
to compel the other to marry any person; (2) receive financial benefit or thing of value in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1348/ Page 4 
relation to the crime of marriage trafficking; or (3) aid, abet, or conspire with another to 
commit the crime of marriage trafficking. A violator is guilty of the felony of forced 
marriage and on conviction subject to imprisonment for up to 25 years and/or a $15,000 
maximum fine. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase to the extent OAG 
undertakes additional investigations and prosecutions under the bill. OAG advises of the 
potential need for two attorneys and one investigator to handle an increased workload, with 
general fund expenditures increasing by $382,384 in fiscal 2027 and up to $522,542 in 
fiscal 2031. While generally acknowledging that a meaningful number of additional 
investigations and prosecutions is likely not absorbable, absent experience under the bill, 
the precise need for additional staff is unclear.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Office of the 
Attorney General; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Human Services; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4