START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1384 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1384 
(Delegate Kipke) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - State Pharmacy Benefits Manager 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), by July 1, 2028, to select 
and contract with a single third-party administrator (TPA) to serve as the State pharmacy 
benefits manager (PBM) and administer pharmacy benefits for all Medicaid recipients, 
including those enrolled in a managed care organization (MCO). MDH must engage an 
independent consultant with specified experience to advise the department in selecting and 
contracting with the TPA. The independent consultant may not be engaged by an MCO or 
by any PBM contracted with an MCO. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) increase by 
an indeterminate but significant amount beginning in FY 2027 for contracting costs, new 
personnel, and other administrative costs, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues 
increase accordingly. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The contract with a State PBM must (1) establish the State PBM’s 
fiduciary duty owed to MDH; (2) require the use of pass-through pricing; (3) require the 
State PBM to use the common formulary, reimbursement methodologies, and dispensing 
fees negotiated with input from stakeholders; (4) require transparency in drug costs, rebates 
collected and paid, dispensing fees paid, administrative fees, and all other charges, fees, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1384/ Page 2 
costs, and holdbacks; and (5) prohibit spread pricing. Each MCO contract entered into or 
renewed by MDH on or after July 1, 2028, must require the MCO to contract with and use 
the State PBM. 
 
“Spread pricing” is the model of prescription drug pricing in which the PBM charges 
Medicaid or an MCO a contracted price for a prescription drug that differs from the amount 
the PBM directly or indirectly pays the pharmacist or pharmacy for the prescription drug 
dispensed by the pharmacist or pharmacy. 
 
Current Law:  A PBM is a business that administers and manages prescription drug 
benefit plans. A PBM must register with the Maryland Insurance Administration prior to 
providing pharmacy benefits management services. A PBM that provides pharmacy 
benefits management services on behalf of a carrier may not require that a beneficiary use 
a specific pharmacy or entity to fill a prescription if the PBM (or a corporate affiliate) has 
an ownership interest in the pharmacy or entity or vice versa. A PBM may require a 
beneficiary to use a specific pharmacy or entity for a specialty drug. A PBM that provides 
pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a carrier may not reimburse a 
pharmacy or pharmacist for a pharmaceutical product or pharmacist service in an amount 
less than the PBM reimburses itself or an affiliate for providing the same product or service. 
This prohibition does not apply to reimbursement for specialty drugs, mail order drugs, or 
to a chain pharmacy with more than 15 stores or a pharmacist who is an employee of the 
chain pharmacy. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that implementing a single-state PBM would be a major 
shift for Medicaid. Currently, each of the nine Medicaid MCOs administers the pharmacy 
benefit for their enrollees. MDH contracts with a claims processor to administer the  
fee-for-service pharmacy benefit, including behavioral health and certain high-cost drugs. 
 
MDH notes that selecting and contracting with a single TPA to serve as the State PMB by 
July 1, 2028, is not feasible as procurement of an independent consultant, followed by a 
TPA to serve as the PBM, must follow the State’s procurement process. Operationally, 
integrating the nine MCOs with the new PBM will require a long ramp up period to ensure 
a smooth transition. In addition, the PBM will need to oversee both somatic drugs 
(currently managed by MCOs) and behavioral health drugs (managed by MDH).  
 
The procurement process and subsequent integration of the PBM will require additional 
staff. Thus, MDH anticipates an indeterminate but significant fiscal impact attributable to 
contracting costs, new staff, and other administrative costs beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
MDH notes that several state Medicaid programs use a single PBM, including Kentucky, 
Mississippi, and Ohio. In general, these states found savings attributable to eliminating 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1384/ Page 3 
spread pricing and use those savings to fund PBM operations. However, MDH advises that 
spread pricing is already not used in Maryland Medicaid. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business pharmacies likely benefit from reduced 
administrative burdens under a single Medicaid PBM. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3