START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1370 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1370 
(Delegate Hornberger) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Town of Rising Sun - Stop Sign Monitoring Systems - Authorization of Pilot 
Program 
 
 
This bill authorizes, for three years, the use of stop sign monitoring systems by the 
State Highway Administration (SHA) on any State highway in the Town of Rising Sun to 
record violations of State law requiring obedience to stop signs; existing statutory 
provisions that apply for other stop sign monitoring systems used in the State generally 
apply for systems placed in accordance with the bill. However, a stop sign monitoring 
system may only be used at a location approved by the Cecil County Council. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures and revenues and 
general fund revenues increase beginning as early as FY 2027 and likely only through  
FY 2030, as discussed below. General fund expenditures are not anticipated to be 
materially affected, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1370/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Automated Enforcement Systems – Generally  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, stop sign monitoring 
systems, school bus monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone 
speed control systems. Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, 
a person who receives a citation, may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Required Stops When Approaching a Stop Sign  
 
Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle 
approaching a stop sign at an intersection must:  
 
 
stop at the near side of the intersection at a clearly marked stop line;  
 
stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no clearly marked stop line, 
before entering any crosswalk; and  
 
stop at the near side of an intersection and, if there is no crosswalk, at the nearest 
point before entering the intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic 
approaching on the intersecting roadway.  
 
A violation of any of these requirements is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The 
prepayment penalty is $90 with one point assessed against the license. If the violation 
contributes to an accident, the prepayment penalty is $130 and three points must be 
assessed against the license. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
State Highway Administration 
 
TTF expenditures and revenues for SHA increase for administrative costs and prepaid 
citations beginning as early as fiscal 2027 (and likely only through fiscal 2030) to the extent 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1370/ Page 3 
that SHA chooses to implement a stop sign monitoring system program pursuant to the 
bill’s authority. (Under the bill, SHA is defined as the relevant “agency” with 
administrative responsibilities – see § 21‐707.1(b)(2)(ii).) 
 
As noted above, for most other automated enforcement systems in use in the State, the 
controlling agency must receive the revenues when a citation is prepaid and the 
District Court (i.e., the general fund) must receive the revenues when a citation is contested 
and the person is subsequently found guilty. However, §7-302 of the Courts and 
Judicial Proceedings Article, which governs the disbursement of automated enforcement 
system citation revenues, does not include specifications related to the disbursement of 
stop sign monitoring system citation revenues when a system is controlled by a 
State agency, and this section of law is unamended by the bill. Nevertheless, for purposes 
of this analysis, it is assumed that the disbursement of revenues under the bill is similar to 
that with most other automated enforcement systems controlled by State agencies (e.g., the 
TTF receives revenues from uncontested cases and the general fund receives revenues from 
contested cases). 
 
District Court  
 
To the extent that additional stop sign monitoring systems are installed under the bill’s 
authority, and under the assumptions discussed above, the number of individuals opting for 
a trial in District Court may also increase. Accordingly, general fund revenues increase, 
likely minimally, as fine revenues paid by individuals convicted in District Court are paid 
into the general fund.  
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court.  
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the  
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an information technology upgrade to 
automate the process at approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be 
incurred.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1370/ Page 4 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts);  
Maryland Department of Transportation; Cecil County; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4