START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1311 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1311 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Appropriations and Government, Labor, 
and Elections 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Higher Education – Student Financial Assistance for Incarcerated Individuals – 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to 
assist incarcerated individuals in accessing State student financial assistance, in addition to 
current law requirements for DPSCS to assist incarcerated individuals in accessing federal 
Pell Grants. In providing assistance, the bill requires DPSCS to consult with the Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC), in addition to current law requirements to consult 
with specified institutions of higher education. The bill also codifies the eligibility of 
incarcerated individuals who meet eligibility requirements for State student financial 
assistance to have such assistance available. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2027 for MHEC to 
make system and technology upgrades to allow incarcerated individuals to access State 
financial aid systems, as discussed below. DPSCS can likely assist incarcerated individuals 
in accessing State student financial assistance with existing resources, as the department 
already assists individuals in accessing federal Pell grants. The bill may increase the 
number of individuals accessing State student financial assistance, however the overall 
effect on State finances is likely minimal, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1311/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Chapters 943 and 944 of 2024, DPSCS must (1) set goals for the 
number of incarcerated individuals in postsecondary education programs; (2) establish a 
tracking system for the number of incarcerated individuals in postsecondary education 
programs; (3) establish a tracking system for the progress of incarcerated individuals in 
postsecondary education programs, as specified; (4) forward specified data to the Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC); and (5) assist incarcerated individuals in 
accessing federal Pell Grants for higher education. In order to assist incarcerated 
individuals (including those in local correctional facilities) in accessing federal Pell Grants, 
DPSCS must consult with institutions of higher education, including all University System 
of Maryland (USM) institutions, Morgan State University (MSU), Anne Arundel 
Community College, Hagerstown Community College, Wor-Wic Community College, and 
Goucher College.  
 
Pell Grants 
 
The federal Pell Grant Program, authorized by Title IV of the Higher Education Act 1965, 
as amended, is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting postsecondary 
education students. Federal Pell Grants usually are awarded only to undergraduate students 
who display exceptional financial need and have not earned a bachelor’s, graduate, or 
professional degree. Awards are based solely on financial need, which is determined by an 
institution’s cost of attendance, student aid index, and a student’s enrollment status 
(full‑time or part-time). The maximum federal Pell Grant award is $7,395 for the 
2026‑2027 award year (July 1, 2026, to June 30, 2027).  
 
To continue receiving a Pell Grant, a student must (1) maintain basic eligibility criteria for 
financial aid; (2) fill out the free application for federal student aid (FAFSA) annually; (3) 
make satisfactory academic progress for financial aid as determined by the institution; and 
(4) maintain enrollment in an eligible course of study. A student may receive a Pell Grant 
for 12 terms.  
 
Second Chance Pell Program 
 
From 1994 until June 30, 2023, incarcerated individuals were generally are not eligible to 
receive federal Pell Grants since the enactment of the Violent Crime Control and Law 
Enforcement Act of 1994. During this restriction, beginning in the 2016-2017 school year, 
the Second Chance Pell Program allowed a limited number of incarcerated individuals to 
receive Pell Grants. However, as of July 1, 2023, the FAFSA Simplification Act officially 
restored Pell Grant eligibility for confined or incarcerated individuals, provided they are 
enrolled in an approved Prison Education Program.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1311/ Page 3 
Incarcerated individuals in DPSCS facilities who have earned a GED or high school 
diploma are given an extended opportunity to access support for postsecondary education 
through the Second Chance Pell Program, overseen by DPSCS. The program allows 
incarcerated individuals to receive federal funding to enroll in postsecondary programs 
offered by local colleges and universities or distance learning providers. Maryland has 
several higher education institutions providing services to the incarcerated population and 
is working on expanding the Second Chance Pell Program throughout the State. Both 
Bowie State University and the University of Maryland Eastern Shore were selected to 
participate in the federal Second Chance Pell experiment expansions in 2020. 
Anne Arundel Community College, Wor-Wic Community College, the University of 
Baltimore, and Goucher College in Maryland were among the sites initially participating 
in the Second Chance Pell Program in 2016.  
 
Another postsecondary program, the Goucher College Prison Education Partnership, offers 
college courses to individuals at certain DPSCS facilities, and approximately 130 students 
enroll each year with Goucher College; over the years, students have pursued nearly 
200 classes.   
 
Inmate Job Training Pilot Program 
 
Chapter 677 of 2021 established the Inmate Training and Job Pilot Program to provide 
educational and vocational training opportunities for incarcerated individuals in the 
12 months preceding their release. Chapter 677 established pilot programs at certain USM 
institutions (Bowie State University, Coppin State University, and the University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore) and MSU. Additionally, MHEC is authorized to establish 
additional pilot programs at other institutions of postsecondary education through a 
memorandum of understanding. MHEC and each participating institution must administer 
the program in cooperation with DOC within DPSCS. The Inmate Training and Job Pilot 
Program terminates June 30, 2028.  
 
Each pilot program must have an individualized plan for success that specifies a staff 
member at the institution who serves as the primary contact responsible for each 
incarcerated individual’s participation and education in the program. The primary contact 
must meet with participating incarcerated individuals regularly throughout their 
participation in the pilot program and ensure the incarcerated individuals are enrolled in 
appropriate courses that work with the incarcerated individuals’ schedules. Courses must 
be credit bearing and lead to a degree or an industry-recognized certificate or license. All 
courses are subject to regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Correction at DPSCS.  
 
The primary contact must also select at least three student mentors who are (1) at least 
age 18; (2) enrolled in the institution of postsecondary education; and (3) enrolled as a 
junior or senior if the pilot program is located at a four-year institution. Student mentor 
participants must receive course credit and a small stipend from the pilot program.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1311/ Page 4 
Additional Program Requirements:  MHEC must establish a hotline to connect program 
participants to counseling and job services. If participants desire such aid, MHEC must 
facilitate contact between each program participant and a nonprofit organization in the 
community where the participant plans to reside (after release) whose mission includes aid 
with job placement, housing services, or counseling services. Also, MHEC must encourage 
former program participants to serve as contacts for future participants. 
 
MHEC, DPSCS’s Division of Correction (DOC), and the applicable institutions of 
postsecondary education must determine a suitable format for incarcerated individuals to 
take courses, whether virtual or nonvirtual. DOC must ensure that courses and instruction 
are provided in a suitable manner and create a safe and reasonable process by which to 
confer a degree to an incarcerated individual who is still incarcerated and who completes 
the requirements for a degree as part of the pilot program.  
 
DOC must coordinate with MHEC to develop a hybrid virtual and in-person learning 
environment in the division’s statewide system. 
 
Funding:  The fiscal 2025 and 2026 budgets each include $363,000 for the program. The 
fiscal 2027 budget as introduced does not include any funding for the program. Funding 
must be provided to MHEC for the costs associated with program administration, including 
a designated employee who is responsible for the administration of the pilot program, 
grants made to participating institutions (institutions must collectively aim to enroll 
40 incarcerated individuals to be divided among the institutions to qualify for an allocation 
of funds), and stipends for student mentors. Additionally, funding must be provided to 
DOC within DPSCS to cover costs associated with program administration, including a 
designated employee. 
 
Reporting:  Each program participant must agree to provide the assigned institution of 
postsecondary education and nonprofit organization with regular updates for two years 
regarding employment, future postsecondary enrollments, and any licensure or 
certification. 
 
Each president (or other governing entity) of each participating institution must submit a 
report to MHEC on the number of enrolled incarcerated individuals in the current 
academic year on or before December 15 each year from 2022 through 2026. On the basis 
of this data, MHEC must prorate funding to each participating postsecondary institution 
based on the number of participating incarcerated individuals. 
 
By July 1, 2024, and July 1, 2028, MHEC – in consultation with DOC – must submit an 
interim report and a final report, respectively, to the Governor and the General Assembly 
on the progress of the program. These reports must include program participant information 
on (1) courses enrolled in; (2) post-confinement employment; (3) post-confinement 
continuing education; and (4) post-confinement certification or licensure. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1311/ Page 5 
DPSCS Postsecondary Educational Programs 
 
According to the Correctional Education Council’s 2025 annual report, five institutions of 
higher education have collaborative partnerships with DPSCS facilities to provide 
postsecondary education “behind the fence.” The report estimates that the partnership with 
Goucher College enrolls about 130 students every year, University of Baltimore admits 
10‑25 students per year, Georgetown University admits 25 students each year, and 
Bowie State University admits 15 students each year. The report also notes a partnership 
with Wor-Wic Community College that ended programming in May 2025.  
 
State Student Financial Assistance 
 
The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) within MHEC coordinates over 
$125 million in aid annually across 29 different State scholarships and grant programs. The 
aid includes broad need-based scholarships, targeted workforce shortage programs, and 
loan repayment assistance. Generally, scholarships, grants, loans, or other financial 
assistance awarded by the OSFA may only be used at public or private nonprofit 
institutions of higher education in the State that possess a certificate of approval from 
MHEC. As a condition of receiving student financial assistance, a recipient generally must 
sign a statement pledging to remain drug-free. Each aid program has specific eligibility 
requirements, and some have service obligation or repayment requirements. There are a 
few State aid programs outside of OSFA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that the bill’s language specifying that State 
student financial assistance must be available to incarcerated individuals who meet the 
eligibility criteria for the assistance is merely clarifying in nature and thus results in no 
effect to State finances. MHEC advises that incarcerated individuals are already eligible 
for Sate student financial assistance, provided that they meet the eligibility criteria for such 
assistance.  
 
MHEC general fund expenditures increase by $50,000 for system enhancements to ensure 
incarcerated individuals have access to the State financial award system. MHEC further 
advises that the agency requires one full-time staff liaison to manage applications and 
ensure incarcerated individuals are properly able to complete the application process. 
However, DPSCS advises that the agency can assist incarcerated individuals with 
applications for State financial assistance using existing resources. Further, both the bill 
and current law place primary responsibility for assisting incarcerated individuals on 
DPSCS, not MHEC. This analysis therefore assumes that DPSCS and MHEC can combine 
existing resources to ensure incarcerated individuals have access to updated applications 
systems at MHEC. However, should DPSCS be unable to provide sufficient support to 
ensure application data of incarcerated individuals is able to seamlessly integrate into 
MHEC’s systems, additional staff at MHEC may be necessary to handle the significant 
workload associated with manual data entry.  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1311/ Page 6 
To the extent the bill encourages additional incarcerated individuals to apply for and 
receive State student financial aid, State expenditures may increase. However, many State 
student financial aid programs are competitive programs subject to funding as provided in 
the State budget. Additional applicants to State scholarship programs therefore do not 
necessarily meaningfully increase State expenditures as individuals can be added to the 
waitlist for most scholarships with no additional costs to the extent existing funding is 
insufficient. Criteria for one of the State’s largest entitlement scholarships, the Guaranteed 
Access Grant (for which additional qualifying applicants would necessarily increase State 
expenditures), include enrolling as a full-time student within six years of completing high 
school absent extenuating circumstances and being younger than age 26 at the time of 
receiving the first award. Given the likely relatively smaller demand for full-time study 
among incarcerated individuals, the overall effect on State expenditures for student 
financial assistance is likely minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; U.S. Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6