START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1376 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1376 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Health 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program, Maryland Children's Health Program, 
and Health Insurance - Transfers to Special Pediatric Hospitals - Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively carriers), as well as Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s 
Health Program (MCHP) to provide a prior authorization determination for a transfer to a 
special pediatric hospital (SPH) on request within three business days. If an SPH or the 
referring provider disagrees with a determination that a transfer is not “medically 
necessary”, the hospital or referring provider may request a retrospective review. A carrier, 
Medicaid, or MCHP must conduct a retrospective review even if the enrollee or insured 
will not benefit financially from the appeal. The hospital or referring provider must be 
reimbursed for each “administrative day” at the applicable rate from the date of the medical 
necessity determination until the conclusion of the retrospective review. The bill takes 
effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans 
issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) increase by 
$715,100 in FY 2027, and $1.43 million annually thereafter, as discussed below. Federal 
fund revenues increase accordingly. No meaningful impact on the State Employee and 
Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program.      
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$357,500 
$715,100 
$715,100 
$715,100 
$715,100 
GF/FF Exp. 
$715,100 
$1,430,200 
$1,430,200 
$1,430,200 
$1,430,200 
Net Effect 
($357,500) 
($715,100) 
($715,100) 
($715,100) 
($715,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases health insurance premiums, expenditures for 
local governments that purchase fully insured plans may increase. No effect on revenues.   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1376/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Administrative day” means a day during which a health care provider 
delivers care to a patient who no longer requires care from the provider but who the 
provider is unable to discharge or transfer to another care setting.  
 
“Medically necessary” means that care is (1) directly related to diagnostic, preventive, 
curative, palliative, rehabilitative, or ameliorative treatment of an illness, injury, or any 
health condition; (2) consistent with accepted standards of good medical practice; and 
(3) not primarily for the convenience of the patient, the patient’s family, or the provider.  
 
Current Law:  “Special pediatric hospital” means a facility in the State that provides 
nonacute medical, rehabilitation, therapy, and palliative services to individuals (1) younger 
than age 22 or (2) who are at least 2 years old and younger than age 23 and have 
co‑occurring physical and behavioral health conditions. 
 
Chapter 612 of 2025 prohibits certain carriers, as well as Medicaid and MCHP, from 
requiring prior authorization for a transfer to an SPH. Thus, Medicaid and MCHP 
eliminated the requirement for prior authorization for such transfers, effective 
January 1, 2026. Medicaid now conducts a concurrent level of care review encompassing 
the period from the requested start date through day 14. Providers are required to submit 
the initial concurrent review to MDH’s utilization control agent within 5 calendar days of 
the requested start date. Should the concurrent review conclude that the individual did not 
satisfy the SPH level of care, the SPH will not be reimbursed at the full per diem rate. 
Furthermore, administrative days will not be applicable when an individual does not 
qualify for the requisite level of care on the requested start date. Administrative days may 
be used only if an individual initially qualifies for a level of care but subsequently ceases 
to meet the criteria during the stay. SPH providers may seek concurrent review during the 
stay and qualify for an administrative day rate.  
 
Medicaid advises that, under prevailing practice for all acute inpatient stays outside of 
SPHs, retrospective review is typically finalized post-discharge, and providers are required 
to determine in advance whether coverage for services or the administrative day rate will 
be sought. In situations where a day of services is denied upon retrospective review, the 
administrative day rate is not available.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, Medicaid and MCHP must provide a prior 
authorization determination for a transfer to an SPH on request within three business days. 
If an SPH or the referring provider disagrees with a determination that a transfer is not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1376/ Page 3 
medically necessary, the SPH or referring provider may request a retrospective review. The 
SPH or referring provider must be reimbursed for each administrative day at the applicable 
rate from the date of the medical necessity determination until the conclusion of the 
retrospective review. 
 
MDH advises that its current policy can be modified to provide a prior authorization 
determination within three business days if all necessary documentation to facilitate the 
review by the utilization control is furnished by the SPH or provider. Establishment of a 
retrospective review will require a contract modification with MDH’s utilization control 
agent. The bill’s requirement to reimburse for each administrative day from the date of the 
medical necessity determination until the conclusion of the retrospective review has a 
significant fiscal impact, as discussed below.  
 
In fiscal 2025, MDH’s utilization control agent completed 194 initial reviews and 
232 continued stay reviews (CSRs). Of these, 60 were denied (38 initial and 22 CSRs). 
Most denials pertained to Mount Washington Special Pediatric Hospital. MDH estimates 
that cases would be extended by a minimum of 34 days, comprising the 14-day coverage 
period and an estimated 20 business days for a retrospective review. 
 
Administrative day rates vary both by hospital and level of care. The lowest administrative 
day rate is $357. At Mount Washington Special Pediatric Hospital, the administrative day 
rate is $826 for children not requiring ventilator support and $2,360 for those who do. 
Consequently, based on average SPH data from September 2024 through January 2026, 
the estimated cost to reimburse a hospital or referring provider for each administrative day 
from the date of the medical necessity determination until the conclusion of the 
retrospective review bill is $1.4 million annually.  
 
Thus, Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $715,077 (50% general funds, 
50% federal funds) in fiscal 2027 to reflect the bill’s January 1, 2027 effective date, and by 
$1.43 million (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) annually thereafter.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1376 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1376/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4