START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1377 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1377 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Prescription Drug Repository Program - Redirecting Safe Prescription Drugs 
Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes a Redirecting Safe Prescription Drugs Pilot Program to (1) expand 
medication access for underserved populations; (2) reduce pharmaceutical waste; and 
(3) ensure drug safety and prevent diversion while leveraging safe medications for public 
good. To administer the pilot program, the Secretary of Health must collaborate with the 
federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and four drop-off sites in the State registered 
with the DEA to participate in a National Prescription Drug Take Back Day. Each drop‑off 
site must (1) coordinate with DEA to separate and redirect eligible, noncontrolled, 
unopened prescription medications collected on Prescription Drug Take Back Day to a 
repository program; (2) ensure that collected prescription medications are packaged in a 
manner consistent with requirements of the State Prescription Drug Repository Program; 
(3) ensure that controlled substances are provided to DEA; and (4) transfer eligible 
prescription medications to a repository. The bill also establishes reporting requirements. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Pharmacy (MBOP) and the Maryland Department of 
Health can handle any oversight or reporting responsibilities with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1377/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By October 1, 2027, the Secretary of Health must report to MBOP and 
the General Assembly on (1) the total number of eligible prescription medications collected 
at each participating drop-off site during the National Prescription Drug Take Back Day; 
(2) the types of prescription medications collected; and (3) the number of drugs collected 
that were not packaged in a manner consistent with the requirements of the State 
Prescription Drug Repository Program. 
 
Current Law:  “Drop-off site” means a pharmacy, other health care facility, or other entity 
participating in a drug donation or repository program and designated by MBOP that 
(1) has voluntarily agreed to accept donated prescription drugs, over-the-counter (OTC) 
drugs, or medical supplies; (2) is located within the State or another state; and (3) does not 
have a final disciplinary order issued against it by a health occupations board. 
 
Prescription Drug Repository Program 
 
Chapter 287 of 2006 established the Prescription Drug Repository Program regulated by 
MBOP. The program accepts donated prescription drugs or medical supplies to be 
dispensed to eligible patients in the State. However, prescription drugs can only be donated 
if they are in unopened, sealed, and tamper-evident unit dose packaging and have an 
expiration date at least 90 days from the date the drug is donated. 
 
Chapter 547 of 2011 expanded the purpose of the program to include acceptance of 
prescription drugs and medical supplies returned to a pharmacy for proper disposal. Each 
pharmacy for which a pharmacy permit has been issued must dispose of prescription drugs 
or medical supplies in accordance with program policies. 
 
Chapter 705 of 2025 further expanded the program to accept OTC drugs and allow entities 
in another state to participate in the program as repositories. Chapter 705 added that, if a 
donated prescription or OTC drug is in high demand, the program may accept drugs with 
an expiration date that is less than 90 days from the date of donation. However, such drugs 
may not be dispensed if the expiration date occurs during the period for which the drug is 
prescribed. 
 
To participate, a pharmacy may not have any final disciplinary orders issued against it and 
must be approved by MBOP to accept donated drugs or medical supplies from a designated 
drop-off site, dispense the drugs or medical supplies to eligible patients, or dispose of 
prescription drugs or medical supplies not accepted for dispensing to needy individuals. A 
participating repository must: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1377/ Page 3 
 
accept only donated drugs and medical supplies forwarded by designated drop-off 
sites; 
 
inspect all donated drugs and medical supplies; 
 
accept only those donated drugs and medical supplies that meet specified 
requirements; 
 
dispose of donated prescription drugs and medical supplies not accepted for 
dispensing to eligible patients in accordance with State and federal law; 
 
maintain a separate inventory of donated drugs and medical supplies; 
 
store donated drugs and medical supplies in a secure and exclusive location; 
 
maintain separate prescription files for patients receiving donated drugs and medical 
supplies; and 
 
obliterate any patient-specific information from the labels of any donated drugs and 
medical supplies. 
 
Pharmacies participate in the program on a voluntary basis, and there is no fee to be 
approved as a repository. For matters related to donating, accepting, or dispensing drugs 
under the program, program participants that act in good faith are exempt from criminal 
prosecution or liability in tort or other civil action. 
 
Additional Comments:  The next National Prescription Drug Take Back Day is  
April 25, 2026, from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3