START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1397 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1397 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
School Construction - Gross Area Baseline Calculation - Aquatic Facilities 
 
 
This bill requires the Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC), when 
calculating a school’s gross area baseline (GAB), to allocate square footage to 
accommodate aquatic facilities for athletic education and competitive purposes. The bill 
also requires each local school system, before the 2026-2027 school year begins, to develop 
a facilities plan that identifies options for students to have access to a pool or aquatic 
facilities. IAC must collaborate on local school system plans. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect the overall level of State support for school 
construction, which is set in the annual capital budget. However, to the extent IAC must 
allocate additional State support to projects for aquatic facilities, fewer State funds are 
available for other public school construction projects. IAC can update its GAB 
calculations to allocate square footage to accommodate aquatic facilities and collaborate 
with local governments on facilities plans with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect the overall level of school construction funding 
available to local school systems, which is set through State and local capital budget 
processes. However, the total number of school construction projects supported by that 
funding is reduced to the extent higher GABs result in larger projects subject to State/local 
cost shares. Potential meaningful additional school building maintenance costs for local 
school systems to the extent additional aquatic facilities are constructed in public schools 
under the bill. In collaboration with IAC, local school systems can likely develop facilities 
plans to identify options for students to have access to a pool or aquatic facilities before 
the 2026–2027 school year with existing resources, but implementation of those plans may 
result in higher local school system expenditures, as discussed below.

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1397/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of funding factors in State support for school construction, 
including a discussion of how GABs factor into total State support for a project, please see 
the Appendix – State Funding for Public School Construction. 
 
The IAC uses the GAB calculation to determine a total outer boundary of State-supportable 
size, within which each local school system can innovate in its delivery of programs and 
services and customize its designs accordingly. GABs represent a total of the square 
footage needed for State-required educational programs and services, given typical design 
practices (although, local school systems may, using local funding, choose to build projects 
that exceed the State-calculated GAB). IAC advises that the GABs serve as an equity 
mechanism that allows for a sliding scale of square footage per student in a given facility. 
GABs are calculated by multiplying the eligible enrollment by the square footage per 
student for a given facility, plus any potential program- and population-specific add-ons. 
Maryland regulations in include GAB add-ons for English learners, career and technical 
education, concentrations of poverty, and cooperative-use spaces.  
 
IAC advises that current procedures and regulations do not allow for additional square 
footage to be added to accommodate a pool specifically. Local school systems may choose 
to build aquatic facilities using State funding within their GABs and any subsequent 
add-ons they may receive, however, due to the significant square footage required for 
aquatic facilities, many school systems are unable to use baseline and add-on allowances 
to accommodate the large square footage needed for a standard competitive swimming 
pool. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Ongoing maintenance of school-based pools is the responsibility of 
local school systems, and IAC advises that pool facilities are extremely costly to maintain. 
Given the limited funding available for ongoing maintenance of the State’s current school 
facilities portfolio, adding additional aquatic facilities to public school buildings likely 
adds meaningful additional maintenance costs in the long run. 
 
As very few schools have their own pools, a facility plan that provides every student with 
access to a pool may result in higher expenditures for local school systems to contract with 
private or neighborhood pools to provide students with access during the school year. 
Moreover, the bill does not specify how often students must have access to pools under the 
required plans; broad and frequent access likely results in even higher costs for local school 
systems. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1397/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Interagency Commission on School Construction; Maryland 
State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery 
County Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1397/ Page 4 
Appendix – State Funding for Public School Construction 
 
 
School Construction Review and Approval Process 
 
The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) manages State review and 
approval of local school construction projects. Each year, local systems develop and submit 
to IAC a facilities master plan that includes an analysis of future school facility needs based 
on the current condition of school buildings and projected enrollment. The master plan 
must be approved by the local school board. Subsequently, each local school system 
submits a capital improvement plan to IAC that includes projects for which it seeks 
planning and/or funding approval for the upcoming fiscal year, which may include projects 
that the local system has forward funded. In addition to approval from the local school 
board, the request for the upcoming fiscal year must be approved by the county’s governing 
body. Typically, the submission letter to IAC contains signatures of both the school board 
president and either the county executive and county council president or chair of the board 
of county commissioners. 
 
Based on its assessment of the relative merit of all the project proposals it receives, and 
subject to the projected level of school construction funds available, IAC determines which 
projects to fund through the Public School Construction Program (PSCP). By December 31 
of each year, IAC must approve projects comprising 75% of the preliminary school 
construction allocation projected to be available by the Governor for the upcoming  
fiscal year. Local school systems may appeal these preliminary decisions by IAC. By 
March 1 of each year, IAC must recommend to the General Assembly projects comprising 
90% of the allocation for school construction submitted in the Governor’s capital budget. 
Following the legislative session, IAC approves projects comprising the remaining school 
construction funds included in the enacted capital budget, no earlier than May 1. The final 
allocations are not subject to appeal. 
 
Built to Learn Act 
 
The Built to Learn Act (Chapter 20 of 2020) authorizes the Maryland Stadium Authority 
(MSA) to issue up to $2.2 billion in revenue bonds, backed by annual payments from the 
Education Trust Fund (ETF) beginning in fiscal 2022, for public school construction 
projects in the State, including to support a public-private partnership (P3) agreement to 
build six new schools in Prince George’s County (the P3 agreement in place is actually for 
eight schools). Proceeds from the revenue bonds are in addition to funding available from 
PSCP and are allocated among local school systems as shown in Exhibit 1 (based on 
MSA’s most recent projection of anticipated revenues of $1.7 billion given increases in 
interest rates since the program’s enactment). 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1397/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Allocation of Built to Learn Bond Sale Proceeds 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
Percent of Total 
Proceeds 
Anne Arundel 
12.5% 
$212.5 
Baltimore City 
21.0% 
357.0 
Baltimore 
21.0% 
357.0 
Frederick 
5.1% 
86.7 
Howard 
6.6% 
112.2 
Montgomery 
21.0% 
357.0 
Prince George’s 
* 
* 
All Other Counties 
11.5% 
195.5 
Unallocated/Maryland Stadium Authority 
1.3% 
22.1 
Total 
100.0% 
$1,700.0 
 
* Under Chapter 20 of 2020, as amended by Chapter 679 of 2023, Prince George’s County receives 
$27.0 million annually for up to 30 years to supplement local funds for an availability payment if it enters 
into a public-private partnership agreement, subject to other provisions in the Act. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
The Built to Learn Act also (1) extends mandated funding for the Healthy School Facility 
Fund by three years, through fiscal 2024, with Chapter 32 of 2022 subsequently extending 
funding to at least $90.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 2026; (2) raises the mandated annual 
funding level for the Enrollment Growth or Relocatable Classrooms (EGRC) program from 
$40.0 million to $80.0 million beginning in fiscal 2027; and (3) creates the Public School 
Facilities Priority Fund (PSFPF), later renamed by Chapter 32 to be the Nancy K. Kopp 
Public Schools Facilities Priority Fund) to provide State funds to address the facility needs 
of the highest priority schools identified by the statewide facilities assessment completed by 
IAC. Under Chapter 354 of 2024 and only for fiscal 2027, the purpose of PSFPF is to provide 
State funds to address the severity of issues in a school, including (among other things) air 
conditioning, heating, and plumbing. In accordance with funding amounts updated by 
Chapter 354, beginning in fiscal 2027, the Governor must appropriate at least $70.0 million 
to the fund annually. 
 
Prior to distributing funds under the Built to Learn program, MSA must enter into a 
program memorandum of understanding (MOU) with IAC (which is in place), and each 
county, local school board, and MSA must enter into a project MOU for each project 
seeking funding from the program. All projects receiving Built to Learn funds must be 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1397/ Page 6 
approved by IAC using the same process it uses for PSCP. As of January 2026, IAC has 
approved 59 projects and committed more than $1.5 billion in funding to those projects. 
 
Eligible School Construction Costs 
 
IAC establishes a range of appropriate per-student, square-foot allocations for elementary, 
middle, and high schools as well as for special education students, career and technology 
students, and specialized programs. IAC updated the space allocations in 2019 and 
renamed them gross area baselines. IAC also establishes, on an annual basis, a  
cost per square foot that is applicable to major school construction projects. For 
calendar 2026, the cost per square foot is $431 for new construction without site 
development (up from $416 in calendar 2025) and $513 for new construction with site 
development (up from $495 in calendar 2025). In general, multiplying the cost per square 
foot by the applicable gross area baseline for each proposed project (based primarily on the 
State-rated capacity of a building) yields the maximum allowable cost that is subject to the 
State/local cost-share formula. Thus, any portion of a project that exceeds the gross area 
baseline is not eligible for State funding and must be paid for by the local school system. 
 
The cost of acquiring land may not be considered an eligible construction cost and may not 
be paid by the State. Otherwise, regulations specify public school construction-related costs 
that are eligible and ineligible for State funding. Chapter 20 expanded the costs eligible for 
State funding. In general, the following costs are now included among eligible expenses: 
 
 
planning and design costs (including architectural and engineering fees); 
 
construction of a new facility, renovation of a new facility, an addition to an existing 
facility, or a replacement of an existing building or building portion (i.e., “bricks 
and mortar”); 
 
building and site development; 
 
replacement of building systems, including roofs; windows; and heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning (i.e., “systemic renovations”); 
 
modular construction that meets specified standards; 
 
State-owned relocatable facilities and temporary facilities that are required to be on 
site during construction; and 
 
furniture, fixtures, and equipment with a median useful life of at least 15 years. 
 
Among the major items explicitly not eligible for State funding under current law (besides 
site acquisition) are (1) master plans and feasibility studies; (2) projects or systemic 
renovations for buildings and systems that have been replaced, upgraded, or renovated 
within the last 15 years; and (3) items that do not have a useful life of at least 15 years. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1397/ Page 7 
State Share of Eligible Costs 
 
The State pays at least 50% of eligible costs of school construction and renovation projects, 
based on a funding formula that takes into account numerous factors, including each local 
school system’s wealth and ability to pay. State law requires that the cost-share formula be 
recalculated every two years. Exhibit 2 shows the State share of eligible school 
construction costs for all Maryland jurisdictions for fiscal 2026 through 2028, as approved 
by IAC. When updating the cost-share calculations every two years, Chapter 32 requires 
IAC to limit the percentage decrease in the State share for any county to 5%. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
State Share of Eligible School Construction Costs 
Fiscal 2026-2028 
 
County 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Allegany 
89% 
95% 
95% 
Anne Arundel 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Baltimore City 
91% 
91% 
91% 
Baltimore 
57% 
56% 
56% 
Calvert 
56% 
54% 
51% 
Caroline 
94% 
97% 
97% 
Carroll 
54% 
57% 
57% 
Cecil 
61% 
63% 
63% 
Charles 
64% 
66% 
66% 
Dorchester 
98% 
97% 
97% 
Frederick 
67% 
69% 
69% 
Garrett 
89% 
95% 
95% 
Harford 
58% 
59% 
59% 
Howard 
51% 
50% 
50% 
Kent 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Montgomery 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Prince George’s 
68% 
67% 
67% 
Queen Anne’s 
50% 
50% 
50% 
St. Mary’s 
58% 
58% 
58% 
Somerset 
100% 
98% 
95% 
Talbot 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Washington 
78% 
82% 
82% 
Wicomico 
95% 
99% 
99% 
Worcester 
50% 
50% 
50% 
Maryland School for the Blind* 
100% 
100% 
100% 
 
* Chapter 192 of 2024 establishes the State share at 100% for Maryland School for the Blind for all eligible 
school construction projects. 
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1397/ Page 8 
State Funding Levels 
 
Chapter 14 of 2018, the 21st Century School Facilities Act, established the State’s intent 
to provide at least $400.0 million annually, within current debt affordability guidelines. 
Chapter 32 increased the legislature’s intended annual funding level to $450.0 million 
beginning in fiscal 2023. Chapter 354 clarifies that the intended threshold does not include 
funding provided through the Built to Learn program. The State surpassed the intended 
thresholds in fiscal 2019 and 2021 through 2025; the State would have surpassed 
$400.0 million in fiscal 2020, but the $10.0 million allocation for the School Safety Grant 
Program (SSGP) was canceled by the Board of Public Works for cost-containment reasons. 
Chapter 679 of 2023 repeals the Aging Schools Program beginning in fiscal 2027 with the 
intent that funding be transferred to PSFPF, which takes effect that year. Although  
Chapter 679 also repealed SSGP beginning fiscal 2027, Chapter 354 subsequently retained 
the $10.0 million funding mandate for the program indefinitely. Exhibit 3 shows annual 
State public school construction funding from fiscal 2022 through 2026, by county. 
 
The fiscal 2027 operating and capital budgets as introduced provide funding that, not 
including the Prince George’s County P3 funding under Built to Learn, meets the  
$450.0 million statutory goal. State support for school construction is divided among 
general obligation (GO) bond funding and special funds as follows: 
 
 
$300.0 million in GO bonds for PSCP; 
 
$80.0 million in GO bonds for EGRC; 
 
$70.0 million in GO bonds for PSFPF 
 
$69.0 million in special funds for the P3 to construct and maintain schools in  
Prince George’s County (of which $27.0 million are State funds from ETF and the 
remainder are local funds). 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1397/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 3 
State Public School Construction Funding 
Fiscal 2022-2026 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Allegany 
$2,613 
$4,116 
$5,742 
$12,308 
$9,854 
Anne Arundel 
170,456 
76,974 
58,141 
88,551 
44,641 
Baltimore City 
83,293 
327,001 
154,841 
282,068 
79,863 
Baltimore 
258,315 
127,687 
75,823 
201,151 
63,917 
Calvert 
13,454 
8,678 
18,737 
8,250 
10,585 
Caroline 
4,791 
7,059 
4,469 
5,967 
4,546 
Carroll 
38,831 
20,955 
16,609 
16,417 
18,179 
Cecil 
5,508 
19,590 
42,912 
5,490 
7,684 
Charles 
35,892 
35,237 
21,031 
22,982 
17,058 
Dorchester 
6,616 
4,670 
6,114 
3,992 
6,853 
Frederick 
109,454 
48,808 
43,608 
21,131 
29,313 
Garrett 
12,185 
11,065 
18,479 
23,802 
9,420 
Harford 
47,453 
16,911 
33,455 
18,238 
22,517 
Howard 
70,378 
69,797 
26,993 
19,642 
28,230 
Kent 
158 
2,331 
3,242 
406 
8,885 
Montgomery 
305,449 
50,233 
198,048 
57,636 
53,730 
Prince George’s 
51,147 
124,264 
76,967 
52,782 
63,786 
Queen Anne’s 
2,368 
4,526 
6,934 
784 
16,168 
St. Mary’s 
5,773 
7,878 
15,951 
7,073 
24,698 
Somerset 
815 
266 
9,409 
6,813 
13,195 
Talbot 
1,380 
1,129 
6,202 
6,438 
3,701 
Washington 
8,804 
10,413 
14,903 
27,890 
14,909 
Wicomico 
26,169 
33,416 
22,072 
7,861 
11,584 
Worcester 
5,014 
308 
689 
8,202 
7,293 
Maryland School for the Blind 
2,021 
9,100 
13,605 
4,595 
11,328 
Statewide 
6,500 
4,279 
63 
9,033 
1,849 
Total 
$1,274,837 $1,026,691 
$895,038 
$919,501 
$583,784 
 
Notes:  Includes general obligation bonds, Built to Learn revenue bonds, pay-as-you-go funds, and 
reallocated funds that were previously authorized (as shown in IAC Capital Improvement Program 100% 
Allocation reports). Allocated funds include the Enrollment Growth or Relocatable Classroom program, 
School Safety grants, and Healthy School Facility grants. Statewide funds include unallocated discretionary 
funds, contractual costs for external reviews, and funds reserved for unforeseen contingencies. Columns 
may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9