START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1368 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1368 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Special Education - Individualized Education Program - Notification of Missed 
Services (Shifra's Act) 
 
 
This bill requires that the parents of a child with a disability who has an individualized 
education program (IEP) be notified in writing when a special education service, related 
service, or supplementary aid or support specified in the IEP (1) was not initiated by the 
date set forth in the IEP or (2) was not provided to the child during specified intervals, 
depending on the frequency of intended services and not including a child’s absence from 
school. Notification must be sent within 3 school days after the lack of initiation or 
provision of the relevant service or services. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase substantially, potentially by 
millions of dollars statewide, beginning in FY 2027. Required county government 
expenditures for public schools and local school system revenues are not affected. This 
bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Local school systems must notify parents when (1) a service, aid, or 
support that is required daily is missed, incomplete, or interrupted five times within 
10 consecutive school days; (2) a service, aid, or support required for a specific number of 
times within a specified time period is missed, incompletely provided, or interrupted over 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1368/ Page 2 
a time period at least two times longer than the specified time period; or (3) a pattern of 
missed, incomplete, or interrupted sessions substantially limits the delivery of the service, 
aid, or support. 
 
Notification to parents must include (1) an explanation of the missed, incomplete, or 
interrupted service, aid, or support and the reason the service, aid, or support was missed, 
incomplete, or interrupted; (2) steps the local school system will take to ensure the service, 
aid, or support will be provided; and (3) information for parents to request an IEP meeting 
to discuss compensatory services, dispute resolution options, and alternative methods or 
services to address the child’s needs if the local school system determines that services, 
aids, or supports are likely to continue being missed, incomplete, or interrupted. 
 
Current Law:  The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires 
that a child with disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least 
restrictive environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student 
turns 21 years old, in accordance with the Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) or an 
IEP specific to the individual needs of the child. An IFSP is for children with disabilities 
from birth up to age 3, and up to age 5, under Maryland’s Extended IFSP Option if a parent 
chooses the option. An IEP is for students with disabilities age 3 through 21. Local school 
systems are required to make a free appropriate public education available to students with 
disabilities from age 3 through 21. However, the State, under its supervisory authority 
required by IDEA, has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that this obligation is met. 
 
An IEP is a written statement for each child with a disability that, among other things, must 
indicate the present levels of academic achievement and functional performance of a child, 
measurable academic and functional goals for the child, how the child’s progress toward 
meeting these goals will be measured, and the special education and related services that 
are to be provided for the child. The parent of a child with a disability is a member of the 
IEP team that is responsible for developing and reviewing a child’s IEP and for revisions 
to the IEP. 
 
At the initial evaluation meeting, the parents of a child with a disability must be provided 
certain information, including (1) in plain language, a verbal and written explanation of the 
parents’ rights and responsibilities in the process and a program procedural safeguards 
notice; (2) written information that the parents may use to contact early intervention and 
special education family support services and staff members within the local school system 
and a brief description of the services provided by staff members; and (3) written 
information on the Special Education Ombudsman and toll-free telephone number. If a 
parent’s native language is not English, the information must be provided in the parent’s 
native language. The parents may request this information at any subsequent meeting. If a 
child who has an IEP developed in another school system moves to a different local school 
system, the new school system must provide the information in the first communication 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1368/ Page 3 
regarding the child’s IEP. Failure to provide information does not constitute grounds for a 
due process complaint. 
 
“Public agency” means MSDE, a local school system, the Juvenile Services Education 
Program, or any State agency responsible for providing education to students with 
disabilities, including the Maryland School for the Blind and the Maryland School for the 
Deaf. A parent of a child with a disability or a public agency may request mediation to 
resolve any disagreement regarding the child’s special education services or program, 
including mediation to resolve a due process complaint filed by a parent against a public 
agency. A parent of a child with disabilities may file a due process complaint with the 
Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) and the public agency. Similarly, the public 
agency may file a due process complaint with OAH and the parent. OAH appoints an 
administrative law judge to conduct a due process hearing. The decision of the 
administrative law judge must be made on substantive grounds based on whether a child 
has received a free appropriate public education. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires local school systems to track, on a daily basis and 
over specified intervals, the provision of special education services to thousands of 
students. It also allows parents to request more frequent IEP meetings to discuss and 
arrange alternative or additional services for their children. 
 
Based on estimates provided by Montgomery County Public Schools and by 
Prince George’s County Public Schools, one-time and annual local school system 
expenditures increase substantially, potentially by millions of dollars statewide, beginning 
in fiscal 2027. This includes increased costs (1) to develop or enhance, and maintain, 
tracking systems for identifying when services are missed or interrupted; (2) for 
compensatory services and meetings to determine IEP impacts, both resulting from missing 
services; (3) to generate and deliver required notices in a timely manner; and (4) for 
potential increases in costs for IEP dispute resolution. Required county government 
expenditures for public schools and local school system revenues are not affected. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not specify from whom the required notice to 
parents is provided, but it is assumed that the public agency responsible for educating a 
child must send the notice. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1368/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County 
Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4