START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1487 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1487 
(Delegate Wells) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health – Baltimore City Mobile Infant and Maternal Health Pilot 
Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Baltimore City Mobile Infant and Maternal Health Pilot Program 
(“MomMobile”) in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to bring postpartum care 
to Baltimore neighborhoods. The bill also establishes program development requirements 
for the Secretary of Health, in consultation with the Baltimore City Health Department 
(BCHD). By December 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Health must 
report to the Governor, the Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health Committee 
on the implementation of MomMobile. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $71,900 in FY 2027 for 
contractual staff to develop MomMobile; contractual staff terminate at the end of FY 2028. 
To the extent that MomMobile is implemented, MDH general fund expenditures increase 
by an additional indeterminate amount as early as FY 2028. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
71,900 
81,700 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($71,900) 
($81,700) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  BCHD expenditures increase by $39,875 in FY 2027, and $28,325 in 
FY 2028 for staff to develop MomMobile, as discussed below. To the extent MomMobile 
is implemented, BCHD expenditures increase by an additional indeterminate amount 
beginning as early as FY 2028. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1487/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “mobile health unit” means a motor vehicle equipped to deliver health 
services, including primary care, screenings, and preventative services, directly to 
underserved or vulnerable communities. 
 
The purpose of the program is to use mobile health units to bring postpartum care to 
Baltimore neighborhoods to (1) deliver postpartum checkups, mental health screenings, 
and care coordination; (2) allow health care providers, including doulas and midwives, to 
provide culturally competent care; (3) reduce transportation barriers and improve 
postpartum visit attendance; (4) improve the identification of behavioral health risks and 
support referrals to social services and community programs in Baltimore City; and 
(5) identify key metrics that can be used to assess maternal health outcomes. 
 
The Secretary of Health, in consultation with BCHD, must determine (1) the time frame 
and steps necessary to establish MomMobile; (2) the neighborhoods in which it will 
operate; (3) funding support, including establishing partnerships to use existing 
Baltimore City mobile health units; (4) the necessary resources to support MomMobile; 
(5) services that will be offered; (6) a plan to staff mobile health units with appropriate 
health care providers; and (7) a plan to evaluate the effectiveness of MomMobile, including 
feedback from patients and providers. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Maternal Health Innovation (MDMOM) Program is a 
collaboration between Johns Hopkins University, MDH, and the Maryland Patient Safety 
Center, aimed to improve maternal health across the State by coordinating innovation in 
the areas of maternal health data, hospital and home visiting, training, and resource 
availability. 
 
As part of the Postpartum Maternal Health Collaborative, Maryland established a project 
at a hospital in Prince George’s County to address pregnant and postpartum individuals 
with hypertensive conditions through collaboration with Maryland’s Perinatal Quality 
Collaborative, Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs), local health departments 
(LHDs), and community-based organizations through frequent meetings and close 
communication. As part of the collaborative, all nine of Medicaid’s MCOs provide remote 
blood pressure monitoring to the population of pregnant and postpartum individuals with 
hypertension, in addition to partnering with a home visiting service from an LHD.  
 
Baltimore City advises that BCHD leads B’More for Healthy Babies, a citywide maternal, 
infant, and child health initiative that conducts care coordination, referrals to social services 
and city programs, and home visits. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1487/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that the collaborative effort between itself and BCHD 
would require two additional staff – one full-time program administrator to collaborate 
with BCHD and develop the implementation plan, and one part-time epidemiologist to 
develop an evaluation plan and conduct data collection. Under these assumptions, MDH 
general fund expenditures would increase by $114,590 in fiscal 2027. 
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that MDH will not require 
an epidemiologist for data collection and evaluation until the program is implemented (the 
time frame for which must be determined by the Secretary as required under the bill). 
 
Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $71,869 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. Because development of the program would 
likely only take one to two years, the responsibilities incurred by this legislation may be 
performed by a contractual employee. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one contractual program manager to plan and develop MomMobile in coordination with 
BCHD. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$62,728 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$71,869 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This analysis assumes that the 
contractual position terminates at the end of fiscal 2028 upon completion of planning and 
development of the pilot program. To the extent planning takes longer, costs may continue 
in fiscal 2029. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
This estimate also does not account for any implementation costs as the bill requires the 
Secretary, in consultation with BCHD, to determine the time frame and funding supports 
needed for the program. Once the pilot program becomes operational and data collection 
and evaluation are required, MDH general fund expenditures increase by an additional 
amount for staff or contractual services and by a potentially significant amount for some 
portion of operational support for the program that cannot be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
Local Expenditures:  BCHD advises that the MomMobile program would duplicate some 
services already offered by B’More for Healthy Babies and the Maternal and Child Health 
Bureau. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1487/ Page 4 
BCHD advises that implementation of the program would require significant staff and 
equipment investment by the city. Specifically, the program would require hiring 
two program administrators, two care coordinators, four doulas, and two drivers, as well 
as one part-time (25%) medical director. For salaries and fringe benefits alone, 
BCHD expenditures would increase by $808,375 in fiscal 2027, increasing to $1.1 million 
in fiscal 2031. Additionally, the program would require the one-time purchase of 
two mobile vans (approximately $281,000 per van), as well as annual fuel costs, medical 
supplies, parking and storage costs, and contractual services to connect to Health Care 
Access Maryland (the care coordination system). Under these assumptions, BCHD 
expenditures increase by approximately $1.9 million in fiscal 2027, and by $1.8 million in 
fiscal 2031 to implement the pilot program. 
 
DLS notes that while the bill outlines the purpose of the pilot program and how it should 
be developed, it is silent on how it should be implemented, including whether MDH or 
BCHD would be responsible for implementation costs. Furthermore, the bill specifies that 
the program should establish partnerships to use existing Baltimore City mobile health 
units for MomMobile. 
 
Thus, to consult with the Secretary of Health on the development of MomMobile, BCHD 
expenditures likely increase by $39,875 in fiscal 2027, and $41,071 in fiscal 2028 to hire 
one contractual program administrator. To the extent that program development takes more 
than two years, costs continue in fiscal 2029. 
 
Upon implementation of the pilot program, BCHD expenditures increase by an additional 
indeterminate amount beginning as early as fiscal 2028. However, DLS again notes that 
the bill does not specify whether MDH or BCHD would be responsible for implementation 
costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers;  
Baltimore City; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1487/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5