START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1450 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1450 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Coordination of Benefits - Carrier Responsibilities and 
Retroactive Denials of Reimbursement 
 
 
This bill specifies that, when a claim is submitted to a carrier that is subject to the 
coordination of benefits, the carrier is responsible for (1) identifying the primary and 
secondary payors; (2) identifying the amounts payable by each payor; and (3) coordinating 
its benefits with the benefits of other payors by determining the order of payments and 
ensuring that combined payments do not exceed 100% of the total claim. Each carrier must 
submit an annual report on these activities to the Insurance Commissioner. The bill 
establishes a shorter period during which a carrier may retroactively deny reimbursement 
for services subject to coordination of benefits that applies only to coordination with 
another carrier; under the bill, a carrier may only deny reimbursement during the 9-month 
period after the date on which the carrier paid the health care provider. The permissible 
period for retroactive denial of reimbursement for services subject to coordination of 
benefits with Medicare and the Maryland Medicaid Program remains 18 months after the 
date that the carrier paid the health care provider. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any additional 
workload on MIA can be handled with existing budgeted resources. The Department of 
Budget and Management advises that the bill has the potential to increase administrative 
costs for the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program by an 
indeterminate amount. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1450/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An insurer, nonprofit health service plan, health maintenance organization, 
dental plan organization, Medicaid managed care organization (MCO), and any other 
person that provides health benefit plans subject to State regulation (collectively carriers) 
may only retroactively deny reimbursement for services within 6 months after the date that 
the carrier paid the provider. However, claims for services subject to coordination of 
benefits with another carrier, Medicaid, or Medicare may be denied for up to 18 months. 
 
A carrier that retroactively denies reimbursement to a health care provider must provide 
the health care provider with a written statement specifying the basis for the retroactive 
denial. If the retroactive denial of reimbursement results from coordination of benefits by 
a carrier that is not an MCO, the written statement must provide the name and address of 
the entity acknowledging responsibility for payment of the denied claim.  
 
A carrier that does not comply with these requirements may not retroactively deny 
reimbursement or attempt in any manner to retroactively collect reimbursement already 
paid to a health care provider.  
 
A carrier may retroactively deny reimbursement at any time if information submitted was 
fraudulent or improperly coded, if the claim was duplicative, or, for a claim submitted to 
an MCO, if the claim was for services provided during a time period for which Medicaid 
has permanently retracted the capitation payment for the recipient from the MCO. If a 
carrier retroactively denies reimbursement for services as a result of coordination of 
benefits, the health care provider must have six months from the date of denial (unless the 
carrier permits a longer time period) to submit a claim for reimbursement for the service to 
the carrier, Medicaid, or Medicare program responsible for the payment. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care providers benefit from the shorter 
timeframe placed on a carrier’s ability to retroactively deny claims and may have a reduced 
administrative burden in dealing with claims subject to coordination of benefits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1450/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3