START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1473 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1473 
(The Speaker) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Economic Development - Maryland's Future Board - Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Maryland’s Future Board, within the Department of Commerce, to 
develop a visionary plan (as defined by the bill), annually evaluate it and make revisions 
as appropriate, and annually recommend projects that ensure the economic strength of the 
State. The bill also establishes the Maryland’s Future Fund (MFF), a new special fund 
administered by Commerce to fund the projects recommended by the board. Commerce is 
authorized to adopt regulations necessary to carry out the bill. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2031.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $143,500 annually beginning 
in FY 2027 and continuing through 2031 to support the board, develop the visionary plan, 
and annually evaluate it, as discussed below. Also, as the bill does not identify a source to 
capitalize MFF, general fund expenditures are assumed to be necessary to do so to execute 
recommended projects, beginning in FY 2029 through 2031. MFF revenues and 
expenditures increase correspondingly, although funding of recommended projects may be 
phased over multiple years. The amount cannot be reliably quantified, but the possible 
scope of such projects could necessitate funding of at least several million dollars annually. 
  
Local Effect:  Although not directly affected by the bill, local governments may benefit 
from the visionary plan and funded projects.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1473/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Defined Terms 
 
“Project” includes (1) an allocation of funds in the operating budget of the State; (2) an 
allocation of funds in the capital budget of the State; and (3) the implementation of any 
policy that will advance the State’s socioeconomic wellbeing and resiliency.  
 
“Visionary plan” means a plan that envisions a State that is equitable, prosperous, livable, 
and provides opportunities for all residents to thrive, including (1) a forward-thinking 
strategy that would incorporate core values and principles as envisioned by the board; (2) a 
strategy that covers – broadly – issues that the State faces; (3) a strategy that is not 
constrained by existing technology, infrastructure, or fiscal conditions of the State; and 
(4) strategies that imagine future trends in the areas of robotics and automation, artificial 
intelligence, advanced manufacturing, data aggregations, and other industry disruptive 
technologies.  
 
Maryland’s Future Board 
 
The board comprises seven members from various sectors, including business, academia, 
and labor, appointed by the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the 
House. Membership must reflect the demographics of the State, and consideration must be 
given to geographic representation. Members serve for a term of four years, beginning  
July 1. A vacancy must be filled immediately for the remainder of the unexpired portion 
of a term. At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor has been 
appointed. The board must meet at least four times per year.  
 
By January 1, 2027, the board must develop a visionary plan for the future of the State. 
The board must carry out the requirements of the bill by (1) developing and revising a 
visionary plan; (2) recommending projects that move the State forward and contribute to 
ensuring the economic strength of the State into the future, in alignment with the visionary 
plan; and (3) consulting with entities and State agencies, as necessary. The board must 
evaluate the visionary plan at least annually and revise it accordingly. Within 30 days after 
the completion of or a revision to the plan, the board must submit the plan to the Governor 
and the General Assembly. By August 1, 2027, and each year thereafter, the board must 
submit recommendations for projects to the Governor and the General Assembly.  
 
Board members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses, as specified. The board is subject to the Public Information Act and the 
Open Meetings Act, and board members are subject to the Public Ethics Law. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1473/ Page 3 
Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
MFF is a special, nonlapsing, fund administered by Commerce. The fund consists of money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, and any other money from 
any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Expenditures from the fund may be 
made only in accordance with the State budget. Money expended from the fund is 
supplemental to funding that would otherwise be appropriated for the same purpose.  
 
Current Law:  Commerce’s mission, generally, is to strengthen the Maryland economy. 
The department develops and implements programs that aim to generate new jobs or retain 
existing jobs, attract business investment in new or expanding companies, and promote the 
State’s strategic assets. Business assistance is provided through a combination of 
investments, loans, conditional loans, grants, and tax credits.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Staffing for the Board and Development of the Plan 
 
As the bill requires that the visionary plan be developed and submitted by January 1, 2027, 
this analysis assumes that appointments to the board are made expeditiously and the board 
receives substantial support, particularly in the first two years of operation – when the plan 
must be developed initially, recommendations for projects must be made, and the 
first evaluation of the plan must be conducted. Accordingly, a contractual program 
manager is needed on July 1, 2026, concurrent with the bill’s effective date. This staffing 
cannot be funded with MFF; thus, general fund expenditures totaling at least $143,522 are 
incurred in fiscal 2027. This estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$133,687  
Operating Expenses 
      9,835 
Minimum FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$143,522 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses until the contractual position terminates 
June 30, 2031, concurrent with the termination of the bill. By year three or four, the 
contractual staffing may be able to be moderated to a part-time position. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1473/ Page 4 
This estimate also does not include additional likely expenses incurred by  
Commerce – such as a consultant who may be needed to assist with developing the plan 
and subsequently evaluating it – which the department advises could cost $1.0 million over 
the course of five years. However, expense reimbursements for the seven board members 
are assumed to be absorbable within Commerce’s existing budgeted resources. 
 
Capitalization of Maryland’s Future Fund and Funding of Projects 
 
While the bill establishes MFF as a special, nonlapsing fund, it does not specify a dedicated 
funding source for it. Accordingly, general fund expenditures are assumed to be necessary 
to capitalize MFF. However, such funding is likely not necessary until fiscal 2029 since 
the first projects to be funded are to be recommended by August 1, 2027, which means 
they can first be funded with an appropriation during the 2028 legislative session in the 
fiscal 2029 budget. (Under the bill, money expended from MFF must be made in the State 
budget and is supplemental to funding that would otherwise be appropriated for the same 
purpose.) As MFF terminates at the end of fiscal 2031, such funding is assumed to be 
needed for only three years.  
 
The amount of funding necessary each year depends on the projects that are recommended, 
which cannot be determined at this time. Nevertheless, this analysis assumes that additional 
funding is provided, through MFF, to implement the strategies under the visionary plan 
through recommended projects. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase to 
capitalize MFF and MFF revenues and expenditures increase from fiscal 2029 through 
2031. To the extent recommended projects are funded through the capital budget with 
general obligation bonds, other projects may be delayed or funded at lower levels. Also, 
funding may continue in the out-years for projects initiated due to the bill even though the 
board and MFF terminate at the end of fiscal 2031. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Although not directly affected by the bill, small businesses may 
benefit from the visionary plan and the funding of any recommended projects.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 770 (Senator Ferguson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1473/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
me/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5