START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1456 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1456 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Residential Property Advertisement - Ownership 
Verification 
 
 
This bill prohibits a commercial entity (including a social media platform) from publishing 
or advertising information on residential property available for lease or sale on behalf of 
another unless the commercial entity verifies that the person is (1) the legal owner of the 
property or (2) an agent of the legal owner. A commercial entity must maintain a 
verification for at least three years. A commercial entity that publishes or advertises 
information in violation of the bill’s requirement must promptly remove the publication or 
advertisement. Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under 
the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, 
among other acts, any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, 
visual description, or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1456/ Page 2 
effect of deceiving or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, 
rental, loan, or bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; 
the extension of consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual 
purchase of consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose 
business includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates 
MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each 
repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any 
person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2