START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1434 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1434 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Caregiver Resource Webpage - Establishment 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to develop and maintain a 
centralized caregiver resource webpage for caregivers in the State. The webpage must be 
posted in a conspicuous location on the MDH website and provide plain-language, easily 
accessible information to support all types of caregivers at different stages of caregiving. 
In developing the webpage, MDH must coordinate with the State Department of Education; 
the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA); the Developmental Disabilities 
Administration; and any other relevant State or local agencies. MDH must review and 
update the webpage as necessary, but not less than annually. The bill may not be construed 
to require MDH, any State or local agency, or any other person described, listed, or linked 
to on the webpage to provide or fund a specific service, device, resources, or program 
described, listed, or linked to on the webpage.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Caregiver” means an individual who provides care, supervision, or 
assistance to another individual due to the individual’s age, disability, chronic illness, 
cognitive impairment, or other functional limitation. “Caregiver” includes (1) a parent or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1434/ Page 2 
guardian of a child with a disability, chronic illness, cognitive impairment, or other 
functional limitation; (2) an individual caring for an adult family member or loved one with 
a disability, chronic illness, cognitive impairment, or other functional limitation; and (3) a 
minor or dependent providing care to a parent, grandparent, or other adult due to the age, 
disability, chronic illness, cognitive impairment, or other functional limitation of the 
parent, grandparent, or other adult. “Caregiver” does not include a parent or guardian 
providing care, supervision, or assistance to a child that does not have a disability, chronic 
illness, cognitive impairment, or other functional limitation.  
 
The webpage must include information and links to resources related to: 
 
 
caregiving for (1) children with disabilities and special health care needs; (2) adults 
with disabilities, chronic illness, or behavioral health needs; and (3) older adults;  
 
caregiver health, wellness, and respite resources; 
 
State and local programs that may provide financial assistance, training, or support 
to caregivers; 
 
safety planning; and 
 
privacy, data minimization, and data security considerations when technology is 
used to support caregiving or safety.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Health and Human Services Referral System  
 
The Health and Human Services Referral System is a telephone service that automatically 
connects an individual dialing the digits 2-1-1 to an established information and referral 
answering point. MDH oversees the 2-1-1 Maryland call centers and operation of the 
Health and Human Services Referral System in the State. MDH, in consultation with 2-1‑1 
Maryland, (1) maintains public information available from State agencies, programs, and 
departments that provide health and human services; (2) supports projects and activities 
that further 2-1-1 Maryland development; (3) examines and make recommendations to 
maximize the use of information technology in making 2-1-1 services available throughout 
the State; (4) evaluates the performance of each call center; (5) makes recommendations to 
2-1-1 Maryland regarding the quality of service provided or the performance of call 
centers; and (6) makes recommendations regarding corrective action to be taken by a call 
center.  
 
2-1-1 Maryland is a private, nonprofit organization that maintains an information and 
referral service network that is available to Maryland residents via telephone and Internet. 
2-1-1 Maryland offers guidance 24 hours a day and seven days a week regarding access to 
health, crisis, and social services. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1434/ Page 3 
Maryland Access Point  
 
MDOA coordinates, evaluates, and plans the delivery of services for, and advocates on 
behalf of, older adults at all levels of government. The department also administers 
programs and activities under the provisions of the federal Older Americans Act. Most of 
the direct services funded by MDOA are delivered through area agencies on aging (AAAs).  
 
Federal law defines an “Aging and Disability Resource Center” as an entity, network, or 
consortium established by a state as a part of the state system of long-term care, to provide 
a coordinated and integrated system for older individuals and individuals with disabilities 
(and their caregivers) that provides, in collaboration with AAAs, centers for independent 
living and other aging or disability entities. Maryland’s Aging and Disability Resource 
Center is Maryland Access Point (MAP). The purpose of the program is to provide a 
coordinated system of information and access for individuals seeking long-term services 
and supports, including in-home, community-based, and institutional services. MAP must, 
using its available resources, provide: 
 
 
options counseling;  
 
assistance concerning aging and disability issues and long-term services and 
supports planning;  
 
written materials regarding the availability of program services;  
 
a public database that can be accessed and searched on the Internet, of resources and 
services that could be useful to individuals who may need long-term services and 
supports and their caregivers, as well as those involved in long-term services and 
supports; and 
 
other related services necessary for the program’s success. 
 
MDOA must administer, supervise, and coordinate MAP with the cooperation of the 
Department of Disabilities, the Department of Human Services (DHS), the Governor’s 
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, and MDH. Local MAP offices must be designated 
throughout the State to ensure easy access to the program. 
 
Maryland Commission on Caregiving 
 
The Maryland Commission on Caregiving, staffed by DHS, coordinates statewide 
planning, development, and implementation of family caregiver support services. The 
commission must:  
 
 
solicit and gather concerns of caregivers by conducting surveys, holding public 
hearings, establishing a telephone hotline for public access, and other appropriate 
means; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1434/ Page 4 
 
develop and distribute to interested parties a handbook of current respite care and 
other family caregiver services available in the State; 
 
review successful respite care programs in other states; 
 
develop a model family caregiver support program that incorporates best practices 
from existing programs in this and other states; 
 
provide ongoing analysis of best practices in family caregiver support programs in 
this and other states; 
 
coordinate activities of existing and proposed family caregiver support services 
among State and local units; 
 
research available funding sources and explore possibilities for additional funds; 
 
identify unmet needs and priorities for additional funds; and 
 
monitor implementation of the commission’s recommendations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Aging; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4