START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1459 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1459 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Public Safety - Stationary Energy Storage Systems 
 
 
This bill requires an owner or operator of a stationary energy storage system to pay for 
specialized fire response training, including specialized equipment for battery energy fire 
suppression, for each local fire department that has fire suppression responsibilities in the 
area in which the stationary energy storage systems is located. The fire response training 
must comply with the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 855 Standard for the 
Installation of Stationary Energy Storage System. The State Fire Marshal must administer 
and enforce the bill and may adopt related regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $154,900 in FY 2027; future years 
reflect annualization. General fund expenditures increase further (not reflected below) to 
the extent State entities that own or operate stationary energy storage systems must submit 
payments to local governments, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
154,900 
180,700 
189,200 
197,700 
206,400 
Net Effect 
($154,900) 
($180,700) 
($189,200) 
($197,700) 
($206,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent they 
receive and spend funding from the owners or operators of stationary energy storage 
systems on specified training and equipment, as discussed below 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1459/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Fire Marshal in the Department of State Police (DSP) must 
enforce all laws of the State relating to, among other things, the prevention of fire and the 
installation and maintenance of equipment intended to control, detect, or extinguish fire. 
The State Fire Marshal must also enforce regulations adopted by the State Fire Prevention 
Commission in DSP, which must adopt comprehensive regulations as a State Fire 
Prevention Code. The commission adopted by reference, subject to some exceptions noted 
in the regulations, the NFPA 1 Fire Code (2024 Edition), the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 
(2024 Edition), and some requirements of the International Building Code as the State Fire 
Prevention Code. The State Fire Prevention Code has the force and effect of law in the 
political subdivisions of the State, and enforcement is the responsibility of the State Fire 
Marshal, a legally designated fire official of a county or municipality of the State, or other 
persons legally appointed by the State Fire Marshal (as specified under the Public Safety 
Article). 
 
Among other things, NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2024 Edition) requires that energy 
storage systems be in accordance with NFPA 855 (Standard for the Installation of 
Stationary Energy Storage Systems). NFPA 855 generally provides for the installation of 
stationary energy storage systems and related fire and explosion protection equipment. 
NFPA 855 (2026 Edition) defines “energy storage system” as one or more devices, 
assembled together, capable of storing energy to supply electrical energy at a future time, 
and defines “stationary energy storage system” as an energy storage system that is 
permanently installed as fixed equipment.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Office of the State Fire Marshal Costs 
 
Though NFPA 855 (2026 Edition) provides a general definition of “stationary energy 
storage system,” neither it nor the bill specify the size, energy storage capacity, or other 
related information to specify which stationary energy storage systems in the State could 
fall under the bill’s requirements. As a result, it is assumed for the purposes of this analysis 
that every owner of a stationary energy storage system in the State must comply, including 
owners of non-commercial systems, such as rooftop solar panels with a connected 
stationary energy storage system. The Department of Legislative Services advises that the 
bill does not provide any penalty provisions for the owners of stationary energy storage 
systems that are found to not be in compliance with the bill’s requirements, nor does it 
require registration of such systems. 
 
As the bill does not include any mechanism for the Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) 
to become aware of existing energy storage systems that are subject to the bill, but still 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1459/ Page 3 
requires OSFM to enforce the bill’s provisions, this analysis assumes that OSFM uses a 
complaint-based enforcement model. DSP advises that OSFM requires additional 
administrative support as it cannot enforce the bill’s requirements with existing resources 
and the Department of Legislative Services concurs.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $154,909 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one program manager and one program assistant to track complaints to OSFM, coordinate 
site visits to jurisdictions, develop the necessary fire response training, and implement any 
related regulations. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$136.627 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 DSP Expenditures 
$154,909 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent there are a 
significant number of violations that OSFM must investigate and the additional staff are 
not sufficient, OSFM may request additional resources through the annual budget process. 
 
Stationary Energy Storage Systems on State Property 
 
According to the Department of General Services, some State entities own or  
operate stationary energy storage systems, such as the Department of Natural Resources 
building 
in 
Annapolis 
and 
the 
Maryland 
Aviation 
Administration 
at 
the  
Baltimore-Washington International Airport. As a result, general fund expenditures 
increase to the extent State entities that own or operate stationary energy storage systems 
must submit payments to local fire departments. However, as it is unknown how many such 
systems are owned by State entities, and the amount of any payment is dependent on local 
governments making such a determination, any estimate of those expenditures is not 
feasible.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues increase to the extent they receive 
payments from the owners or operators of stationary energy storage systems in their 
jurisdictions. Local government expenditures increase for specialized fire training and 
equipment. However, as it is unknown how many stationary energy storage systems exist 
in the State and how much the owners or operators of stationary energy storage systems 
must pay to local governments, any estimate of those effects is not feasible.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1459/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business owning or operating a stationary energy 
storage system must submit payment to local governments for specialized fire response 
training and specialized equipment for battery energy fire suppression. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 636 and HB 1046 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 986 (Senator McKay) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
City of Annapolis; Department of General Services; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Energy Administration; Public Service Commission; National Fire Protection 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4