START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1420 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1420 
(Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee) 
Health and Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Criminal History Records Checks 
 
 
The bill establishes and standardizes language requiring criminal history records checks 
(CHRCs) for individuals regulated by certain health occupations boards. An applicant must 
apply to the Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository (CJIS-CR) in the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) by submitting (1) a 
complete set of legible fingerprints in a format approved by the Director of CJIS-CR and 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI); (2) the fee for Maryland criminal history 
records; and (3) the mandatory FBI fee for a national CHRC. CJIS-CR must forward an 
individual’s record to the individual and the respective board. Information obtained 
through a CHRC is confidential, may not be re-disseminated, and may only be used for 
licensing. The subject of a CHRC may contest its contents. If criminal history record 
information is reported to CJIS-CR after the date of the initial CHRC, CJIS-CR must 
provide revised information to the board and the individual. The bill also makes 
conforming changes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The affected health occupations boards can implement any administrative 
changes using existing budgeted resources. DPSCS general fund revenues and 
expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2028 as a result of 
additional CHRCs required under the bill, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1420/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The health occupations boards impacted under the bill are:  Acupuncture, 
Dental Examiners, Dietetic Practice, Environmental Health Specialists, Morticians and 
Funeral Directors, Nursing, Optometry, Pharmacy, Physical Therapy, Podiatric, 
Psychologists, and Residential Child Care Program Professionals. 
 
For boards that already require CHRCs in statute, the existing CHRC text is generally 
repealed or altered to fit the standard language under the bill. This includes Morticians and 
Funeral Directors, Nursing, Pharmacy (for wholesale distributors and registered pharmacy 
interns), Physical Therapy, Podiatric, Psychologists, and Residential Child Care Program 
Professionals. Though the CHRC process under the bill is substantially similar for each 
board, any differences are outlined below. 
 
State Acupuncture Board 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, applicants for an initial license to practice acupuncture must 
submit to a CHRC. For individuals licensed before January 1, 2028, a licensee must submit 
satisfactory evidence of a CHRC as part of the licensee’s first license renewal after 
January 1, 2028. 
 
Board of Dental Examiners 
 
Beginning October 1, 2027, the board must require a CHRC for license or certificate 
renewal applicants and each former licensee or certificate holder who files for 
reinstatement after failing to renew a license or certificate. The board may not issue, renew, 
or reinstate a license or certificate if the CHRC information has not been received. 
 
Upon receiving criminal history record information of an applicant, in determining whether 
to grant a license or certificate, the board must consider (1) the age at which the crime was 
committed; (2) the circumstance surrounding the crime; (3) the length of time that has 
passed since the crime; (4) subsequent work history; (5) employment and character 
references; and (6) other evidence that demonstrates whether the applicant poses a threat 
to the public health or safety. 
 
Failure to submit to a CHRC is also added to the list of disciplinary grounds on which the 
board may take action against a dentist or dental hygienist. 
 
Board of Dietetic Practice 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, an applicant for an initial license as a dietician-nutritionist must 
submit to a CHRC. For individuals licensed before July 1, 2027, a licensee must submit 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1420/ Page 3 
satisfactory evidence of a CHRC as part of the licensee’s first license renewal after 
January 1, 2028. 
 
Failure to submit to a CHRC is also added to the list of disciplinary grounds on which the 
board may take action against a dietician-nutritionist. 
 
Board of Environmental Health Specialists 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, an applicant for an initial environmental health specialist license 
or an applicant for the reactivation of an inactive or nonrenewed license must submit to a 
CHRC. For individuals licensed before July 1, 2027, a licensee must submit satisfactory 
evidence of a CHRC as part of the licensee’s first license renewal after July 1, 2027. The 
board may not issue, reactivate, or reinstate a license if CHRC information has not been 
received. 
 
Board of Nursing 
 
The board must require a CHRC for (1) applicants for certification as a forensic nurse 
examiner or workers’ compensation case manager; (2) selected annual renewal applicants 
for certification as a forensic nurse examiner or workers’ compensation manager, as 
required by board regulations; and (3) applicants for reinstatement as a forensic nurse 
examiner or workers’ compensation case manager if the applicant failed to renew for 
one year or more. For certification as a nursing assistant, medicine aide, dialysis technician, 
or medication technician, an applicant must submit written verification that the CHRC 
requirement has been met. 
 
Board of Examiners in Optometry 
 
Beginning August 1, 2026, the board must require a CHRC for optometrists seeking license 
renewal (as determined by board regulations) and reinstatement. The board may not issue, 
renew, or reinstate a license if the CHRC information has not been received. The board 
may only reactivate a licensee on inactive status if the licensee attests that they have 
submitted to a CHRC. 
 
Failure to submit to a CHRC is also added to the list of disciplinary grounds on which the 
board may take action against an optometrist. 
 
Board of Pharmacy 
 
An applicant for an initial license to practice pharmacy must submit to a CHRC. The board 
may not issue a license if CHRC information has not been received. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1420/ Page 4 
Beginning July 1, 2027, the board must require all licensees who were initially licensed 
without a CHRC to submit to a CHRC upon renewal, as set in board regulations. An 
applicant for reinstatement whose license has been expired for two or more years must also 
submit to a CHRC. 
 
If a wholesale distributor is located outside the State, the designated representative of the 
permit holder and the representative’s immediate supervisor must submit to a CHRC before 
renewing the permit. 
 
Upon receiving criminal history record information of an applicant, in determining whether 
to grant a license or certificate, the board must consider (1) the age at which the crime was 
committed; (2) the circumstance surrounding the crime; (3) the length of time that has 
passed since the crime; (4) subsequent work history; (5) employment and character 
references; and (6) other evidence that demonstrates whether the applicant poses a threat 
to the public health or safety. 
 
Board of Physical Therapy Examiners 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, the board must require all licensees who were initially licensed 
without a CHRC to submit to a CHRC upon renewal in accordance with board regulations. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, applications for licensure, certification, or registration from 
health occupations boards include questions regarding past disciplinary actions. Based on 
an applicant’s responses, a board may investigate an applicant. If a board determines that 
an individual made incomplete or false statements about disciplinary or criminal actions, 
the board may pursue disciplinary action for fraudulently or deceptively obtaining or 
attempting to obtain a license, certificate, or registration. 
 
There are currently five health occupations boards that do not require CHRCs in statute:  
Acupuncture, Dental Examiners, Dietetic Practice, Environmental Health Specialists, and 
Pharmacy. Exhibit 1 shows the licenses, certificates, permits, and registrations issued by 
each board under the bill and whether the credential currently requires a CHRC. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1420/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Criminal History Records Check Requirements Under Current Law 
 
Board 
Occupation 
Required 
Acupuncture 
Acupuncturist 
No 
Dental Examiners 
Dentist (all licenses) 
No 
Dental Hygienist (all licenses) 
No 
Dental Radiation Technologist 
No 
Dietetic Practice 
Dietician-Nutritionist 
No 
Environmental Health Specialists 
Environmental Health Specialist 
No 
Morticians and Funeral Directors 
Funeral Director 
Yes 
Mortician 
Yes 
Apprentice 
Yes 
Executor 
Yes 
Surviving Spouse 
Yes 
Pre-need Trustee 
Yes 
Nursing 
Forensic Nurse Examiner 
Yes* 
Workers’ Compensation Case Manager 
Yes* 
Registered Nurse 
Yes 
Practical Nurse 
Yes 
Advanced Practice Registered Nurse 
Yes 
Nursing Assistant 
Yes 
Dialysis Technician 
Yes 
Medication Technician 
No 
Electrologist 
Yes 
Direct-entry Midwife 
Yes 
Certified Midwife 
Yes 
Optometry 
Optometrist 
Yes 
Pharmacy 
Pharmacist 
No 
Pharmacy Technician 
No 
Pharmacy Intern 
Yes** 
Wholesale Distributor 
Yes 
Physical Therapy 
Physical Therapist 
Yes 
Limited Physical Therapist 
Yes 
Podiatric 
Podiatrist 
Yes 
Psychologists 
Psychologist 
Yes 
Psychology Associate 
Yes 
Residential Child Care 
Program Professionals 
Program Administrator 
Yes 
Residential Child and Youth Care Practitioner 
Yes 
 
*Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.27.21.03 and COMAR 10.27.16.03) require a forensic nurse examiner or 
workers’ compensation case manager to be licensed as a registered nurse, which requires a criminal history records 
check. 
**A pharmacy intern applicant must submit to a State criminal history record check, but not national. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1420/ Page 6 
Additionally, of the boards that currently require CHRCs, four do not require subsequent 
alerts of criminal activity:  Morticians and Funeral Directors, Physical Therapy, Podiatric 
and Psychologists. 
 
Criminal History Records Checks and the Central Repository 
 
CJIS-CR within DPSCS collects, manages, and disseminates Maryland criminal history 
record information for criminal justice and noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and 
licensing) purposes. Each individual who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a CHRC is required to 
pay $50.00 for a State and national CHRC, including a $20 fingerprinting fee, 
a $12.00 FBI fee, and an $18 fee to CJIS-CR. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The boards of Acupuncture, Dental Examiners, Dietetic Practice, 
Environmental Health Specialists, and Pharmacy can likely absorb the responsibility of 
receiving and tracking CHRCs with existing budgeted resources. 
 
As of April 2025, the Board of Pharmacy had 32,748 active licensees, the Board of Dental 
Examiners had 15,091, the Board of Dietetic Practice had 2,912, the Board of Acupuncture 
had 1,213, and the Board of Environmental Health specialists had 620. 
 
DPSCS advises that it can conduct any additional CHRCs under the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the bill 
would require a significant number of additional CHRCs beginning in fiscal 2028 – up to 
52,584 – therefore, DPSCS may require additional staff to handle the increased workload. 
To the extent that DPSCS requires additional staff, DPSCS general fund expenditures 
increase beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
State Revenues:  For each additional CHRC that CJIS-CR conducts, it charges an $18 fee. 
Thus, DPSCS general fund revenues increase from the fees from applicants for new or 
existing credentials under their respective health occupations boards. DPSCS revenues 
could increase by up to $946,512 in fiscal 2028 should all affected licensees pay the fee. 
However, CHRCs will likely be spread across several fiscal years as licensees apply for 
renewal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 806 (Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee, et al.) - 
Finance. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1420/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7