START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1430 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1430 
(Delegate Chang) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Maryland Public Charter School Program - School Facilities - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) to distribute 
funds to public charter schools for the maintenance and operation of public charter school 
facilities. Funds must be disbursed directly to public charter schools and may not be paid 
to local governing bodies or local boards of education. Beginning in fiscal 2028, the bill 
requires the Governor to include an appropriation in the annual budget bill for the 
maintenance and operation of public charter school facilities that is equal to the total 
aggregate student enrollment in the Maryland Public Charter School Program for the prior 
fiscal year multiplied by $1,600. The IAC must adopt regulations to carry out the bill. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for IAC increase by $116,800 beginning FY 2027 
for staff, and by an additional $41.4 million beginning FY 2028 in accordance with the 
bill’s mandated appropriation. Out years reflect inflation and assumed enrollment growth 
in charter schools. Federal fund revenues potentially increase a significant amount to the 
extent the program allows the State to apply for and receive competitive federal grant 
funding. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0.1 
41.5 
41.9 
42.4 
42.8 
Net Effect 
($0.1) 
($41.5) 
($41.9) 
($42.4) 
($42.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill requires funds to be paid directly to charter schools. 
However, additional funding available for the maintenance and operation of charter schools 
may encourage additional LEAs to lease facilities to charter schools. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1430/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Public charter school facilities” are premises that are owned or leased by 
a public charter school or occupied and utilized by a public charter school, as specified. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Public Charter Schools 
 
The general purpose of the Maryland Public Charter School Program is to establish an 
alternative means within the existing public school system in order to provide innovative 
learning opportunities and creative educational approaches to improve the education of 
students. A local board of education must disburse to a public charter school an amount of 
county, State, and federal money for elementary, middle, and high school students that is 
commensurate with the amount disbursed to other public schools in the local jurisdiction.  
 
The local board of education is the public chartering authority within a county. Public 
charter schools must be nonsectarian and, with exceptions, open to all students on a 
space‑available basis and admit students on a lottery basis if more students apply than can 
be accommodated. If granted a waiver, a public charter school located within a federal 
military base may designate as much as 65% of its enrollment for students whose parents 
are assigned to the base. 
 
Public charter schools cannot discriminate in their enrollment policies or charge tuition to 
students. A local school system must serve students with disabilities attending public 
charter schools in the same manner as the public agency serves students with disabilities 
in its other schools, in accordance with applicable federal and State law. A public charter 
school must require students to be physically present on school premises for a period of 
time substantially similar to that which other public school students spend on school 
premises. 
 
An application to establish a public charter school may be submitted to a local board by 
the staff of a public school, a parent of a student who attends a public school in the county, 
a nonsectarian nonprofit entity, a nonsectarian institution of higher education in the State, 
or any combination of these. A public chartering authority may not grant a charter to a 
private school, a parochial school, a home school, or a school that operates fully online. 
 
IAC advises that some charter schools are eligible for capital construction and systemic 
renovation funding from the State’s Public School Construction Program (PSCP). 
However, funding is available only for facilities that are owned by local school systems 
(and leased to the charter school) or otherwise leased by a charter for a period of at 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1430/ Page 3 
least 25 years. Funding requests must be submitted by the local school system in which the 
charter school is located. 
 
Charter School Facilities 
 
In general, public charter schools have right of first refusal for any land, school site, or 
building that is no longer needed by a local school system and county government. 
Specifically, if a local school board finds, with the approval of the State Superintendent or 
the State Superintendent’s designee, that any land, school site, or building is no longer 
needed for school purposes, it must inform the county commissioners or county council of 
that determination. Within 30 days of receiving the notice from the local school board, the 
county government must notify the local school board either (1) of the need to transfer the 
land, site, or building to the county if it is an integral part of an existing economic 
development plan that will significantly benefit the county or (2) that the county 
government has no existing plans for the land, site, or building. If the county government 
has no plans for the property or does not provide notification within 30 days, the local 
school board must make the property available to any charter school in the district, under 
terms established by the local school board. 
 
Funding for Charter School Facilities in the State Operating and Capital Budgets 
 
Public schools, including charter schools, are authorized to use Foundation Formula 
funding for maintenance and operation of the school.  
 
Until May 2023, only public charter schools in buildings owned by a local school system 
were eligible for capital construction and systemic renovation funding from the PSCP. In 
order to receive funding from the PSCP, a local school system in which the charter school 
is located must submit a funding request. The request then requires the local school system 
to assume the local share of the State and local cost-share formula for the PSCP.  
 
In 2023, IAC adopted a policy to allow the use of bond proceeds for capital improvements 
in leased public school buildings not owned by a local school system, provided that the 
lease is a minimum of 25 years in duration and, for charter schools, subject to a written 
guarantee by the local school system that granted the charter. The new IAC policy does not 
allow State bond proceeds to be used for rent payments, utility costs, or salaries. The 
fiscal 2025 capital improvement plan was the first to allow submission of projects under 
this new policy. 
 
Public charter schools are eligible and receive direct funding through the State’s capital 
program. In the fiscal 2026 capital budget as enacted (Chapter 603 of 2025), two public 
charter schools received State funding totaling $1.6 million. Funding from the capital 
program can only be used for expenses described as eligible in the authorization, and 
funding does not require any local school system or public charter school matching 
funding.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1430/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Mandated Appropriation 
 
According to the Maryland State Department of Education’s (MSDE’s) most recent annual 
report on public charter schools, there were 50 public charter schools serving 
25,351 students in the 2024-2025 school year. Assuming a 1% annual growth rate in the 
number of charter school students, an estimated 25,861 charter students in the  
2026‑2027 school year will require $41.4 million in general fund appropriations beginning 
in fiscal 2028 to meet the bill’s mandate. Out-years reflect an assumed continued 
1% growth in charter school enrollment and level funding at $1,600 per pupil.  
 
Administrative Costs 
 
The bill does not specify how the mandated funding is to be distributed to public charter 
schools. Thus, IAC must determine how the funds are to be distributed and establish 
policies and procedures, including potentially developing an application process and form. 
To accomplish this, staff is needed in fiscal 2027, before the funding becomes available in 
fiscal 2028. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures for IAC increase by $116,835 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager to establish a grantmaking process 
in fiscal 2027 to disburse mandated funding to charter schools directly beginning 
fiscal 2028, and to administer the grant program thereafter. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$107,694 
Operating Expenses 
      9,141 
Total FY 2027 IAC Expenditures 
$116,835 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Potential Competitive Federal Grant Revenues 
 
By providing State per-pupil funding for charter school facilities under the bill, the State 
may become eligible for discretionary federal grant support. MSDE advises that the 
U.S. Department of Education Charter Schools Program includes a State Charter Schools 
Facilities Incentive Grants to help states establish or administer “per-pupil facilities aid” 
for charter schools. The program is designed to encourage states to share in the costs 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1430/ Page 5 
associated with charter school facilities funding with local/non-federal matching 
requirements increasing from 10% in year one of a grant to 80% in year five. MSDE 
advises that the competitive grant has not historically been offered every year, but grants 
were awarded in both 2024 and 2025. In federal fiscal 2025, the program awarded 
$57.0 million in new and continuation grant awards under the program. 
 
Additional Comments:  IAC advises that some of the improvements made to charter 
school facilities with the mandated appropriations may outlast the charters of schools 
eligible for funding under the bill. As the bill does not contain provisions to require public 
school charters to be in place for a minimum amount of time or any restrictions on the sale 
or lease of charter school buildings that may be funded with State dollars, the bill may 
result in a loss of State funds on facilities not owned by local school districts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 960 (Senator Rosapepe) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Interagency Commission on School Construction; Maryland 
State Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5