START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1499 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1499 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Business Regulation - Home Improvement Contracts - Deposits 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person to receive a deposit of up to one-half (instead of one-third) of 
a home improvement contract price before or at the time of execution of the contract. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person may not demand or receive any payment for a home improvement 
before the home improvement contract is signed. A person may not receive a deposit of 
more than one-third of the home improvement contract price before or at the time of 
execution of the contract. 
 
Maryland Home Improvement Commission 
 
The Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC) in the Maryland Department of 
Labor licenses and regulates home improvement contractors and salespersons, subject to 
specified requirements for licensure and ongoing licensee behavior. MHIC also 
administers a guaranty fund for the purpose of reimbursing homeowners for actual losses 
due to the errors and omissions of licensed contractors and their subcontractors, 
salespersons, and employees. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1499/ Page 2 
“Home improvement” means (1) the addition to or alteration, conversion, improvement, 
modernization, remodeling, repair, or replacement of a building or part of a building that 
is used or designed to be used as a residence or dwelling place or a structure adjacent to 
that building or (2) an improvement to land adjacent to the building. 
 
“Home improvement” includes (1) construction, improvement, or replacement, on land 
adjacent to the building, of a driveway, fall-out shelter, fence, garage, landscaping, deck, 
pier, porch, or swimming pool; (2) a shore erosion control project for a residential property; 
(3) connection, installation, or replacement, in the building or structure, of a dishwasher, 
disposal, or refrigerator with an icemaker to existing exposed household plumbing lines; 
(4) installation, in the building or structure, of an awning, fire alarm, or storm window; and 
(5) work done on individual condominium units. 
 
The Secretary of Labor must calculate the direct and indirect costs attributable to MHIC 
annually, and MHIC must establish fees based on those calculations. Fees may not be 
increased annually by more than 12.5% of the existing and corresponding fees. Fee 
revenues are deposited into the Maryland Home Improvement Commission Special Fund, 
which covers MHIC’s operating costs. At the end of each fiscal year, any unspent and 
unencumbered balance in the fund in excess of $100,000 reverts to the general fund. 
 
Home Improvement Guaranty Fund 
 
MHIC must establish a Guaranty Fund that must be kept at a minimum level of $1,000,000 
to compensate homeowners for an “actual loss” that results from an act or omission by a 
licensed home improvement contractor or other violations, as discussed in further detail 
below. 
 
Licensees pay a $100 fee to the Guaranty Fund as a condition of getting a license; if the 
balance of the Guaranty Fund is projected to fall below $1,000,000, the commission must 
(1) assess each licensed contractor an additional fee of $50 and (2) submit a report to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. The report must be made within 30 days 
of any such projection and must detail actions that are being taking to restore the balance 
of the fund to a sustainable level. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Many businesses in the home improvement industry are small 
businesses and benefit from the ability to receive up to one-half of a home improvement 
contract price up front under the bill, which improves their cash flow. Additionally, a new 
small home improvement business may overcome initial funding obstacles and increase 
working capital by taking a larger up-front deposit. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1499/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3