START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1471 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1471 
(Delegate Embry) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Identity Theft Debt 
 
 
This bill establishes procedures, including required notices and investigations, to allow a 
consumer to have debt declared as “identity theft debt” and authorizes a consumer to file a 
civil action related to the debt. It is an affirmative defense to a claim against a creditor that 
the consumer agreed to incur the debt before or after it was incurred or received the benefit 
of the debt while knowing that it was incurred in the consumer’s name. There is a rebuttable 
presumption that a debt is identity theft debt if an individual is found guilty, pleads guilty, 
or receives probation before judgment for a violation of § 8‐301 of the Criminal Law 
Article (identity fraud) that gave rise to the debt. A consumer may not waive any 
protections granted under the bill, and nothing in the bill may be construed to prevent a 
consumer from pursuing any other remedy provided by law. A creditor may seek to recover 
an identity theft debt from a person that caused the debt to be incurred. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $13,000 in FY 2027 only for one‑time 
computer programming. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State 
finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1471/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Consumer” means an individual subject to a debt. 
 
“Evidence” includes a police report; a report made to a law enforcement agency; a 
Federal Trade Commission identity theft report; a report made to the Office of the 
Attorney General; a report made to the consumer protection office of a local government; 
a record of a guilty plea, conviction, or probation before judgment; and an identity theft 
passport under § 8‐305 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
“Identity theft debt” means any part of a debt that is incurred by someone other than the 
person who is authorized to incur the debt. 
 
Required Notice, Investigations, and Determinations of Identity Theft Debt 
 
A consumer may send written notice alleging that debt owed by the consumer to a creditor 
is identity theft debt. The notice must be sent by certified mail or any means sufficient for 
service under the Maryland Rules and include evidence supporting the assertion that the 
debt is identity theft debt. On receipt of this notice, a creditor must cease any debt collection 
activity relating to the debt and may not sell the debt, as specified. Cessation of debt 
collection activity (1) is not an admission of guilt, liability, or viability or nonviability of 
the subject debt and (2) does not waive any right or defense available to the consumer or 
creditor in any proceeding. 
 
A creditor must conduct and conclude a reasonable investigation of allegations contained 
in the written notice no later than 30 days after receiving the notice. The investigation must 
consider any evidence provided by the consumer and any relevant evidence in the 
possession of the creditor. 
 
If the creditor determines that the debt is not identity theft debt, the creditor must notify 
the consumer in writing of the result of the investigation and the reason for the creditor’s 
conclusion and provide the consumer with a copy of any record or evidence that formed 
the basis for the creditor’s conclusion. 
 
If the creditor determines that the debt is identity theft debt, the creditor must notify the 
consumer in writing of the result of the investigation. The creditor is also required to 
permanently cease any debt collection activities relating to the identity theft debt, including 
(1) voluntarily dismissing any pending litigation relating to the identity theft debt; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1471/ Page 3 
(2) terminating any agreement with any debt collector contracted to collect the identity 
theft debt; and (3) notifying consumer reporting agencies to delete or modify records 
relating to the debt. Any time limitation on debt collection must be tolled for any period 
during which a creditor is prohibited from collecting the debt under the bill. 
 
Civil Actions 
 
Except during the 30‐day investigation period, a consumer may file an action in the  
circuit court in the county in which the consumer lives or where the subject debt was 
incurred, alleging that all or part of the subject debt is identity theft debt or that a creditor 
violated the procedural requirements of the bill. The filing must include a copy of the 
required notice and any evidence provided to the creditor and information identifying the 
accounts associated with the debt. A consumer may demand a jury trial, and a creditor may 
not collect or attempt to collect a debt that is subject to the action during the pendency of 
the proceeding. 
 
A consumer who proves by a preponderance of the evidence that a creditor violated a 
provision of the bill is entitled to (1) a declaratory judgment that a debt is partially or wholly 
identity theft debt and (2) an injunction prohibiting a creditor from holding or attempting 
to hold the consumer liable for the identity theft debt, enforcing or attempting to enforce a 
judgment related to the identity theft debt, or assigning the identity theft debt to a 
third party. 
 
If a consumer prevails in an action, the alleged identity theft debtor is entitled to damages, 
court costs, and reasonable attorney’s fees. If a consumer proves by a preponderance of the 
evidence that a creditor knowingly failed to comply with the procedural requirements of 
the bill, the consumer is entitled to double damages, court costs, and reasonable attorney’s 
fees. 
 
Current Law:  The identity fraud statute contains several prohibitions. Among other 
things, the statute prohibits a person from knowingly, willfully, and with fraudulent intent 
possessing, obtaining, or helping another to possess or obtain any “personal identifying 
information” (e.g., name, address, Social Security number, date of birth, mother’s maiden 
name, etc.) of an individual, without the consent of the individual, in order to use, sell, or 
transfer the information to get a benefit, credit, good, service, or other thing of value or to 
access health information or health care. A person also may not knowingly and willfully 
assume the identity of another, including a fictitious person (1) to avoid identification, 
apprehension, or prosecution for a crime or (2) with fraudulent intent to get a benefit, credit, 
good, service, or other thing of value; access health information or health care; or avoid 
the payment of debt or other legal obligation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1471/ Page 4 
Violators of this prohibition are subject to the following penalties, based on the value 
involved:   
 
 
at least $100 but less than $1,500 – misdemeanor, imprisonment for up to 1 year 
and/or a $500 maximum fine; 
 
at least $1,500 but less than $25,000 – felony, imprisonment for up to 5 years and/or 
a $10,000 maximum fine; 
 
at least $25,000 but less than $100,000 – felony, imprisonment for up to 10 years 
and/or a $15,000 maximum fine; and 
 
$100,000 or more – felony, imprisonment for up to 20 years and/or a 
$25,000 maximum fine. 
 
The statute also prohibits a person from maliciously using an “interactive computer 
service” to disclose or assist another person to disclose the driver’s license number, bank 
or other financial institution account number, credit card number, payment device number, 
Social Security number, or employee identification number of an individual, without the 
consent of the individual, in order to annoy, threaten, embarrass, or harass the individual. 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to one year 
and/or a $500 maximum fine. 
 
“Interactive computer service” means an information service, system, or access software 
provider that provides or enables computer access by multiple users to a computer server, 
including a system that provides access to the Internet and cellular phones. 
 
Under § 8-305 of the Criminal Law Article, an “identity theft passport” means a card or 
certificate issued by the Attorney General that verifies the identity of the person who is a 
victim of identity fraud. Section 8-305 contains procedures for the application for and 
issuance of an identity theft passport. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $12,952 in 
FY 2027 only for one‐time computer programming to implement the bill.  
 
According to the Judiciary, during fiscal 2025, there were 1,224 charges, 170 guilty 
dispositions, and 22 probations before judgment under the identity fraud statute in the 
District Court. During fiscal 2025, there were 253 charges, 67 guilty dispositions, and 
4 probations before judgment for identity fraud in the circuit courts. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1471/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5