START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1425 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1425 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Revisions 
 
   
This bill repeals the deadline by which holders of a Class A beer and light wine license or 
a Class A beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license must pay a supplementary license fee to 
exercise certain Sunday sales privileges. The bill also alters the annual deadline from 
October 30 to March 30 for an alcoholic beverages license holder in Baltimore City to 
present to the Baltimore City Board of Liquor License Commissioners a certificate that 
shows that all personal property taxes due to the city or State have been paid. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Baltimore City finances or 
operations.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Baltimore City, the Class A beer and light wine license authorizes the 
license holder to sell beer and light wine, at retail, in a sealed package or container. The 
package or container may not be opened or its contents may not be consumed on the 
premises where the beer or light wine is sold. The annual license fee is $171.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1425/ Page 2 
The Class A BWL license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor, at 
retail, in a sealed package or container. The package or container may not be opened or its 
contents consumed on the license premises. The annual license fee is $2,060. 
 
A holder of a Class A beer and light wine license or a Class A BWL license may sell beer 
and light wine on the Sundays that fall between Thanksgiving Day and New Year’s Day, 
from 1:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. so long as the license holder has paid, by September 30 of that 
year, a supplementary license fee of $120 for each Sunday the privilege is to be exercised. 
 
The board must immediately suspend without a hearing the renewal license of an alcoholic 
beverages license holder that fails to present to the board by October 30 annually a 
certificate issued by the Director of Finance showing that all personal property taxes due 
to the city or State are paid.        
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2