START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1461 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1461 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Health Insurance - Coverage for Specialty Drugs - Rheumatologic Conditions 
 
 
This bill prohibits certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively carriers), including those that provide prescription drug 
coverage through a pharmacy benefits manager (PBM), from excluding coverage for a 
covered specialty drug for the treatment of rheumatologic conditions under specified 
circumstances. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, 
contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or 
after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any 
additional workload for MIA can be absorbed with existing budgeted resources. No impact 
on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A carrier, including one that provides prescription drug coverage through 
a PBM, may not exclude coverage for a covered specialty drug administered or dispensed 
by a provider if the carrier determines that (1) the provider is an in-network provider of 
covered rheumatology services and complies with State regulations for the administering 
and dispensing of specialty drugs and (2) the drug is auto-injected, an oral targeted immune 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1461/ Page 2 
modulator, or an oral medication that requires complex dosing based on clinical 
presentation or is used concomitantly with other infusion therapies. Exceptions carved out 
for specialty drugs under Chapters 728 and 729 of 2025 also apply to specialty drugs for 
the treatment of rheumatologic conditions. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Specialty Drugs 
 
“Specialty drug” means a prescription drug that (1) is prescribed for an individual with a 
complex, chronic, or rare medical condition; (2) costs $600 or more for up to a 
30-day supply; (3) is not typically stocked at retail pharmacies; and (4) requires either a 
difficult or unusual process of delivering the drug to the patient or enhanced patient 
education, management, or support before or after administration of the drug. 
“Specialty drug” does not include a prescription drug prescribed to treat diabetes, HIV, or 
AIDS; it does include a prescription drug prescribed to treat multiple sclerosis, hepatitis C, 
rheumatoid arthritis, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia, or multiple myeloma. 
 
Chapters 728 and 729 prohibit certain carriers, including those that provide prescription 
drug coverage through a PBM, from excluding coverage for a covered specialty drug 
administered or dispensed by a provider if the carrier determines that (1) the provider is an 
in-network provider of covered oncology services and complies with State regulations for 
the administering and dispensing of specialty drugs and (2) the drug is auto-injected, an 
oral targeted immune modulator, or an oral medication that requires complex dosing based 
on clinical presentation or is used concomitantly with other infusion or radiation therapies. 
 
Carriers 
 
A carrier may require a subscriber, member, or beneficiary to obtain a specialty drug (with 
an exception for specialty drugs under Chapters 728 and 729) through a specific pharmacy, 
including a pharmacy participating in the carrier’s provider network, if the carrier 
determines that the pharmacy meets its performance standards and accepts its network 
reimbursement fees. 
 
The reimbursement rate for a covered specialty drug must be agreed to by the carrier and 
the covered, in-network provider and billed at a nonhospital level of care or place of 
service. 
 
A carrier may refuse to authorize or approve or may deny coverage of a covered specialty 
drug administered or dispensed by a provider if administering or dispensing the drug fails 
to satisfy medical necessity criteria. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1461/ Page 3 
Pharmacy Benefits Managers 
 
A PBM is a business that administers and manages prescription drug benefit plans. A PBM 
must register with MIA prior to providing pharmacy benefits management services. 
 
A PBM that provides pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a carrier may 
not require that a beneficiary use a specific pharmacy or entity to fill a prescription if the 
PBM (or a corporate affiliate) has an ownership interest in the pharmacy or entity or 
vice versa. A PBM may require a beneficiary to use a specific pharmacy or entity for a 
specialty drug (with an exception for specialty drugs under Chapters 728 and 729). 
 
A PBM that provides pharmacy benefits management services on behalf of a carrier may 
not reimburse a pharmacy or pharmacist for a pharmaceutical product or pharmacist service 
in an amount less than the PBM reimburses itself or an affiliate for providing the same 
product or service. This prohibition does not apply to reimbursement for specialty drugs 
(with an exception for specialty drugs under Chapters 728 and 729), mail order drugs, or 
to a chain pharmacy with more than 15 stores or a pharmacist who is an employee of the 
chain pharmacy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3