START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1417 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1417 
(Delegate Arikan, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Handgun Permit Requirement - Repeal (Maryland Constitutional 
Carry Act) 
 
 
This bill repeals (1) the requirement for a person to have a permit to wear, carry, or 
transport a handgun in order for the person to wear, carry, or transport a handgun; 
(2) corresponding requirements and procedures related to the issuance of a handgun permit; 
and (3) criminal penalties for violations relating to the failure to follow requirements and 
procedures relating to a handgun permit. The bill also repeals the application of specified 
handgun-related criminal prohibitions and establishes additional prohibitions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease significantly due to the termination of 
handgun permit applications, permit renewals, and associated fees (under the illustrative 
example discussed below, general fund revenues decrease by approximately $6.8 million 
in FY 2027 and $9.0 million annually thereafter). General fund expenditures for the 
Department of State Police (DSP) may decrease for licensing-related functions, as 
discussed below. General fund revenues and expenditures decrease minimally due to the 
bill’s changes to penalty provisions.  
  
Local Effect:  Minimal decrease in local revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
changes to penalty provisions.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1417/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A person younger than age 21 is prohibited from:   
 
wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun, whether concealed or open, on or 
about the person;  
 
wearing, carrying, or knowingly transporting a handgun, whether concealed or 
open, in a vehicle traveling on a road or parking lot generally used by the public, 
highway, waterway, or airway of the State; and 
 
wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun whether concealed or open, on or about 
the person with the handgun loaded with ammunition.  
 
The bill repeals the application of specified existing criminal prohibitions and penalties 
relating to wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun against a person who is at least 
age 21. The bill prohibits a person (of any age) from wearing, carrying, or transporting a 
handgun, whether concealed or open, on or about the person (1) while on public school 
property in the State or (2) with deliberate purpose of injuring or killing another person.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Handgun Permit 
 
A person must have a handgun permit before the person carries, wears, or transports a 
handgun in the State. Existing statutory requirements and background relating to the 
issuance of handgun permits are summarized in the Appendix – Handgun Permit 
Requirements – Current Law/Background. 
 
Prohibitions 
 
With specified exceptions, including possession of a handgun permit, a person may not 
(1) wear, carry, or transport a handgun, whether concealed or open, on or about the person; 
(2) wear, carry, or knowingly transport a handgun, whether concealed or open, in a vehicle 
traveling on a road or parking lot generally used by the public, highway, waterway, or 
airway of the State; (3) violate items (1) or (2) listed above while on public school property 
in the State; (4) violate items (1) or (2) listed above with the deliberate purpose of injuring 
or killing another person; or (5) violate items (1) or (2) listed above with a handgun loaded 
with ammunition. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person who transports a handgun 
does so knowingly. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties listed 
below. The subsequent offender provisions apply to previous convictions under  
§ 4-203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun), § 4-204 (use of handgun or antique 
firearm in commission of crime), § 4-101 (dangerous weapons), and § 4-102 (deadly 
weapons on school property) of the Criminal Law Article, as shown in Exhibit 1. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1417/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Specified Handgun Violations 
 
First-time Offender – No prior convictions under 
§§ 4-203, 4-204, 4-101, or 4-102 of the Criminal 
Law Article 
In General – Imprisonment for at least 30 days and 
up to 5 years and/or fine of $250 to $2,500. 
 
Offense on Public School Property – Imprisonment 
for at least 90 days. 
 
Subsequent Offender – One prior conviction under 
§§ 4-203, 4-204, 4-101, or 4-102 of the Criminal 
Law Article 
In General – Imprisonment for at least 1 year and 
up to 10 years. 
 
Offense on Public School Property – Imprisonment 
for at least 3 years and up to 10 years. 
 
Court may not impose less than the applicable 
minimum sentence. 
 
Offense with handgun loaded with ammunition – 
With required notice, court may not suspend any 
part of or impose less than the applicable mandatory 
minimum sentence. Person is not eligible for parole 
during mandatory minimum sentence.* 
 
Subsequent Offender – More than one prior 
conviction under §§ 4-203, 4-204, 4-101, or 
4-102 of the Criminal Law Article 
In General – Imprisonment for at least 3 years and 
up to 10 years. 
 
Offense on Public School Property – Imprisonment 
for at least 5 years and up to 10 years. 
 
Offense with Deliberate Purpose of Injuring or 
Killing Another Person – Imprisonment for at least 
5 years and up to 10 years. 
 
Court may not impose less than the applicable 
minimum sentence. 
 
Offense with handgun loaded with ammunition – 
With required notice, court may not suspend any 
part of or impose less than the applicable mandatory 
minimum sentence. Person is not eligible for parole 
during mandatory minimum sentence.* 
 
*Contains exception for § 4-305 of the Correctional Services Article (parole for an inmate at the Patuxent Institution). 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1417/ Page 4 
A person who holds a handgun permit may not wear, carry, or transport a handgun while 
the person is under the influence of alcohol or drugs. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and subject to maximum penalties of imprisonment for one year and/or a fine of $1,000. 
(The bill retains this crime and the associated penalty but removes reference to a handgun 
permit.)  
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 from foregone 
handgun permit application fees, as discussed below. General fund revenues decrease 
minimally as a result of the bill’s alteration of the application of existing monetary penalties 
from cases heard in the District Court. 
 
In 2025, DSP received 37,786 initial handgun permit applications and 78,554 renewal 
applications; in 2024, 40,944 initial handgun permit applications and 28,735 renewal 
applications; and in 2023, 64,724 initial applications and 13,682 renewals. 
 
Since being directed in 2022 to immediately stop using the “good and substantial reason” 
requirement when reviewing handgun permits in the State, DSP has received a record 
number of initial handgun permit applications; however, DSP advises that it is unable to 
reliably estimate future demand for permits and renewals of permits. Permits are renewed 
two years after the initial permit and every three years thereafter.  
 
For illustrative purposes only, if DSP receives approximately 48,000 initial applications 
and 40,000 renewals each year (which reflects an average of the number of initial 
applications and renewals over the past three years, including renewals from the initial 
significant surge in 2022), general fund revenues decrease by an estimated $6.8 million in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by  
$9.0 million annually thereafter. This illustration, which is based on the current fees of 
$125 for an initial application and $75 for a renewal application, does not account for any 
possible reduction in fees (for a permit that is granted for one day only and at one place 
only) or exemptions from the fee requirements.  
 
As handgun permit applications currently remain at record numbers, it is not expected that 
the bill itself will generate an increase in handgun purchases. Thus, this analysis does not 
address any potential increase in revenues from firearm application fees or handgun 
qualification licenses.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Department of State Police 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $27.4 million in general funds for 
DSP’s licensing division. This analysis assumes that DSP retains personnel currently 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1417/ Page 5 
assigned to processing handgun permits and reassigns these employees to assist with other 
duties within the department. General fund expenditures decrease to the extent the bill 
eliminates the need for overtime and contractual personnel currently affiliated with 
permitting functions. DSP did not provide information on overtime costs and contractual 
personnel currently affiliated with the licensing division.  
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures decrease minimally as a result of the bill’s alteration of the 
application of existing incarceration penalties due to fewer people being committed to State 
correctional facilities.  
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,838 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions.  
 
Other State Agencies 
 
The Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC) reports that it does not have  
age-based defendant data for violations affected by the bill. As a result, the exact impact 
that the bill has on court caseloads is unknown. However, AOC does not anticipate a 
significant fiscal or operational impact on the trial courts under the bill.  
 
The bill likely results in a decrease in caseloads for the Office of the Public 
Defender (OPD); however, any such decrease cannot be reliably determined at this time. 
This analysis assumes that any resources dedicated to cases eliminated under the bill will 
be retained and redirected to other OPD cases.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1417/ Page 6 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy can update the Maryland 
Sentencing Guidelines Manual to reflect the new offense, as well as other changes made 
by the bill, with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues decrease minimally from monetary penalties imposed in cases 
heard in the circuit courts.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Local incarceration expenditures decrease minimally due to the 
bill’s effect on the application of existing incarceration penalties. Counties pay the full cost 
of incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. 
Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately 
$140 to $350 per incarcerated individual in recent years.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The repeal of handgun permit requirements likely leads to a 
decrease in the demand for any small businesses that provide firearms training or electronic 
fingerprint services. In addition, the repeal of the handgun permit requirements likely leads 
to a decrease in costs for small businesses that provide security guard services and special 
police officers as they no longer need to secure handgun permits.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 353 of 2025 and HB 364 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Baltimore, 
Carroll, 
Harford, 
Queen 
Anne’s, 
and  
St. Mary’s counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Natural Resources; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
me/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1417/ Page 7 
Appendix – Handgun Permit Requirements –  
Current Law/Background 
 
 
Generally, with certain exceptions, to be issued a handgun permit by the Secretary of State 
Police, an applicant (1) must be at least age 21 or a member of the uniformed services or 
the National Guard; (2) must not have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor for which 
a sentence of imprisonment for more than one year has been imposed or, if convicted, must 
have been pardoned or been granted relief under federal law; (3) must not have been 
convicted of a controlled dangerous substance violation and must not presently be an 
addict, a habitual user of a controlled dangerous substance, or an alcoholic; (4) must not be 
on supervised probation for conviction of a crime punishable by imprisonment for one year 
or more, a violation of § 21-902(b) or (c) of the Transportation Article (driving while under 
the influence or driving while impaired), or violating a protective order under § 4-509 of 
the Family Law Article (failure to comply with interim or final protective order); (5) must 
not suffer from a mental disorder and have a history of violent behavior against the person 
or another; (6) must not have been involuntarily admitted for more than 30 consecutive 
days to a facility that provides treatment or other services for mental disorders; (7) must 
not be a respondent against whom a current non ex parte civil protective order has been 
entered under § 4-506 of the Family Law Article, a current extreme risk protective order 
has been entered under § 5-601 of the Public Safety Article, or any other type of current 
court order has been entered prohibiting the person from purchasing or possessing firearms; 
(8) must not exhibit a propensity for violence or instability, which may reasonably render 
possession of a handgun a danger to the applicant or another; (9) must have successfully 
completed, prior to application and each renewal, a specified firearms training course 
approved by the Secretary; (10) if younger than 30, must not have been committed to a 
facility for juveniles for longer than one year or adjudicated delinquent for a crime of 
violence, a felony, or misdemeanor that carries a statutory penalty of more than two years; 
and (11) must not otherwise be prohibited by State or federal law from possessing a 
handgun. 
 
The Secretary may not issue a handgun permit to a person who has been convicted on or 
after October 1, 2023, of a second or subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law 
Article (child access to firearms) or has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a 
violation of that provision if the violation resulted in the use of a loaded firearm by a minor 
causing death or serious bodily injury to the minor or another person. The Secretary also 
may not issue a handgun permit to a person who has been convicted on or after  
October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article for five years 
following the date of the conviction. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1417/ Page 8 
A handgun permit applicant must successfully complete, prior to the application and each 
renewal, a firearms training course approved by the Secretary that includes (1) for an initial 
application, a minimum of 16 hours of instruction by a qualified handgun instructor, or 
8 hours of instruction for a renewal application; (2) classroom instruction on State and 
federal firearm laws, home firearm safety, handgun mechanisms and operations, conflict 
de-escalation and resolution, anger management, and suicide prevention; and (3) a firearm 
qualification component that includes live-fire shooting exercise on a firing range and 
requires the applicant to demonstrate safe handling of a handgun and shooting proficiency 
with a handgun. 
 
An applicant for a permit is not required to complete a certified firearms training course if 
the applicant:   
 
 
is a law enforcement officer or a person who is retired in good standing from service 
with a law enforcement agency of the United States, the State, or any local law 
enforcement agency in the State; 
 
is a member, retired member, or honorably discharged member of the armed forces 
or the National Guard; 
 
is a qualified handgun instructor; or 
 
has completed a firearms training course approved by the Secretary. 
 
A handgun permit application costs $125; two years after the initial permit and every 
three years thereafter, a $75 renewal fee is due. In addition, the applicant must pay for 
fingerprint-based federal and State criminal history background checks for an initial 
application. A person who applies for a renewal of a handgun permit is not required to be 
fingerprinted unless the Secretary requires a set of the person’s fingerprints to resolve a 
question of the person’s identity. 
 
Generally, a handgun permit expires on the last day of the holder’s birth month following 
two years after the date the permit is issued; however, the Secretary may establish an 
alternative expiration date for a permit to coincide with the expiration of a private detective 
license, a security guard certification, or a special police officer commission. A permit may 
be renewed for successive periods of three years each if, at the time of an application for 
renewal, the applicant possesses the qualifications for the issuance of a permit and pays the 
renewal fee. 
 
In 2025, the Department of State Police (DSP) received 37,786 new applications  
for handgun permits and 78,554 handgun permit renewal applications. DSP denied 
1,693 applications in the same year. As of January 2026, there are approximately 
198,164 active handgun permits in the State. It generally takes less than two days to receive 
the results of a national criminal history records check from the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and approximately seven days to process and issue a permit. 
 

END OF PAGE 8