START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1400 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1400 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Shellfish Aquaculture - Penalties - Suspension or Revocation of Permit or 
Registration Card 
 
 
This bill allows the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to suspend or revoke a 
shellfish aquaculture harvester permit or registration card of a person engaged or working 
in shellfish aquaculture for knowingly committing specified offenses, similar to authority 
the department has with respect to those engaged in the public oyster fishery.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General/special fund expenditures may increase, likely minimally, beginning 
in FY 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes provisions, applicable to persons engaged in shellfish 
aquaculture, that allow for the suspension or revocation of a shellfish aquaculture harvester 
permit or registration card for knowingly committing specified offenses, similar to existing 
provisions applicable to those engaged in the public oyster fishery that allow for suspension 
or revocation of an oyster authorization. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1400/ Page 2 
The specified offenses are:   
 
 
taking oysters from a closed or prohibited area more than 200 feet outside a shellfish 
aquaculture lease; 
 
delivering oysters to a dealer more than one hour after the time required by the 
Maryland Department of Health’s (MDH) Vibrio Parahaemolyticus Control Plan as 
set forth in MDH regulations (which require delivery to a dealer by specified times 
of the day on the day of harvest, during the months of June through September, 
ranging from 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. depending on the month); 
 
taking oysters from a leased area by a person other than the leaseholder or the 
leaseholder’s designee; 
 
taking oysters for commercial purposes from a natural oyster bar or a public 
shellfish fishery area without a valid oyster authorization; and 
 
unlawfully taking oysters for commercial purposes from a natural oyster bar or a 
public shellfish fishery area and planting those oysters on a shellfish aquaculture 
lease. 
 
For a first violation, a shellfish aquaculture harvester permit or registration card may be 
suspended for up to five years, and for a second or subsequent violation, a permit or 
registration card may be revoked. 
 
Before the suspension or revocation of a permit or registration card, DNR must hold a 
hearing in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). If the presiding 
officer of a hearing finds or concludes that the person knowingly committed the offense, 
DNR must suspend or revoke the person’s permit or registration card. A person aggrieved 
by DNR’s final decision may obtain judicial review in accordance with APA. A person 
whose permit or registration card has been suspended or revoked may not engage or work 
in any aquaculture activity during the suspension or revocation whether or not the work 
requires the use of another permit or registration card. 
 
The bill establishes a specified process, for a person who is the sole holder of a shellfish 
aquaculture lease and whose permit or registration card has been suspended or revoked 
under the bill, to provide to DNR a plan to remove any gear or other equipment from the 
leased area, or transfer the lease to another person, prior to a lease termination occurring 
under existing provisions. The process includes review and, in the case of a lease transfer, 
approval by the department. A person’s failure to complete the process, if subject to a lease 
termination, may result in the forfeiture of any gear and equipment on the leased area to 
the State for destruction or disposition as DNR may deem appropriate.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1400/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Department of Natural Resources Shellfish Aquaculture Regulations 
 
 
Shellfish Aquaculture Harvester Permit and Registration Card 
 
DNR regulations require a shellfish aquaculture leaseholder to obtain a shellfish 
aquaculture harvester permit from the department prior to engaging in commercial 
aquaculture activities. When a permittee is not present on the leased area and supervising, 
individuals engaged in aquaculture activities within the leased area must be named as a 
permittee or permit registrant under the shellfish aquaculture harvester permit and be in 
possession of a shellfish aquaculture harvester registration card issued by the department 
to permittees and permit registrants. 
 
 
Suspension of Permit or Card 
 
Under the DNR regulations, a permit or registration card may be suspended or revoked by 
the department if the individual:   
 
 
violates (1) regulations or statute governing shellfish aquaculture or (2) a term or 
condition of a permit, registration card, or shellfish lease agreement; 
 
receives a conviction for taking shellfish (1) from a closed or prohibited area; 
(2) with illegal gear; (3) more than two hours after sunset or any time before sunrise; 
(4) during the closed season; or (5) that are under the minimum size limit; 
 
receives more than one conviction related to illegal harvest of shellfish within a 
two‑year period; 
 
has commercial fishing privileges that are suspended or revoked for shellfish 
violations; or 
 
had all commercial fishing privileges revoked. 
 
Before a suspension or revocation, an individual must be given an opportunity for a hearing 
conducted in accordance with APA. 
 
Shellfish Aquaculture Lease Termination  
 
Statute authorizes DNR to terminate a shellfish aquaculture lease for failure to comply with 
applicable statutory requirements, including a requirement that a leaseholder actively use 
the lease and comply with any department standards for planting, harvesting, and use of 
the leased area. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1400/ Page 4 
Suspension or Revocation of Oyster Authorization (Public Oyster Fishery) 
 
Under the Natural Resources Article, DNR may, for specified offenses, suspend a tidal fish 
licensee’s authorization to catch oysters for up to five years, for a first violation, and revoke 
their oyster authorization for a second or subsequent violation. (The tidal fish license is 
DNR’s primary commercial fishing license.) The specified offenses are:   
 
 
taking oysters located more than 200 feet within a closed or prohibited area; 
 
taking oysters with gear that is prohibited in that area while more than 200 feet 
within the prohibited area; 
 
taking oysters outside of a time restriction for the harvest of oysters by more than 
one hour; 
 
taking oysters during closed seasons; and 
 
taking oysters from a leased area by a person other than the leaseholder or the 
leaseholder’s designee.  
 
Before suspending or revoking an oyster authorization, DNR must hold a hearing on the 
matter in accordance with APA. If the presiding officer of a hearing finds or concludes that 
the person knowingly committed the offense, DNR must suspend or revoke the person’s 
oyster authorization. A person aggrieved by DNR’s final decision may obtain judicial 
review in accordance with APA. A person whose authorization has been suspended or 
revoked may not engage or work in the oyster fishery while suspended or revoked, whether 
or not the work requires the use of another license. 
 
State Expenditures:  General/special fund expenditures may increase annually, likely 
minimally, beginning in fiscal 2027, to cover the cost of any hearings held in order to 
suspend or revoke any shellfish aquaculture harvester permits or registration cards under 
the bill. The number of suspensions or revocations resulting from the bill is expected to be 
minimal and limited to instances in which the department does not already have authority 
to suspend or revoke a permit or registration card under the existing shellfish aquaculture 
regulations. 
 
Under DNR’s current suspension/revocation authority under the shellfish aquaculture 
regulations, the department has suspended or revoked an average of one permit (and no 
registration cards) per year in the last four years. DNR pays $3,500 (paid for with a 
combination of general and special funds) per hearing for the Office of Administrative 
Hearings to conduct the hearings (in accordance with APA). 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1400/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 166 (Senator Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Natural Resources; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
Third Reader - March 26, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5