START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1422 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1422 
(Delegate Solomon)(By Request - Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement and Personnel - Liquidated Damages Documentation 
Requirements and State Fiscal Leadership Capacity 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Secretary of Budget and Management to set the pay scale for  
chief financial officer (CFO) and chief information officer (CIO) positions in order to assist 
with recruitment and retention for specified units of the Executive Branch of State 
government. The Secretary of Budget and Management must establish, and the Department 
of Budget and Management (DBM) must incorporate into regulations by  
November 1, 2026, minimum qualifications for CFO positions. For applicable units, 
appointing authorities must appoint a CFO that meets those qualifications, who must in 
turn provide the Comptroller’s Office with specified information. Additionally, the bill 
expands documentation and approval requirements for a unit of the Executive Branch of 
State government that decides not to pursue liquidated damages when a specified breach 
has occurred. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (general and special funds) may increase to the extent 
that CFOs and CIOs of specified units of the Executive Branch receive higher wages 
beginning in FY 2027. The FY 2027 budget as introduced includes $2.0 million in the 
Dedicated Purpose Account (DPA) that may be used for this purpose. Provisions related to 
liquidated damages are procedural in nature and have no direct effect on governmental 
finances. Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1422/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill defines a CFO as the highest-ranking executive who, for a period 
of at least six months, is responsible for directing all financial operations, including 
specified duties, or a position with equivalent duties. The Secretary of Budget and 
Management may set the pay scale for CFO positions to assist with recruitment and 
retention for a unit of the Executive Branch of State government (excluding the University 
System of Maryland(USM)) that receives at least $1.75 billion annually in State and federal 
funding and employs a CFO. 
 
For preparation of the Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (CFR), a CFO subject to 
the bill must provide the Comptroller’s Office at the close of the fiscal year: 
 
 
all necessary entries of the unit’s financial information; 
 
information necessary to prepare the schedule of expenditures of federal awards; 
and 
 
a letter attesting to the accuracy and completeness of the above information. 
 
The bill defines CIO as an individual acting as the senior executive officer responsible for 
strategic planning, management, and oversight of an agency’s information technology and 
computer systems and supporting its mission and goals or a position with equivalent duties. 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may set the pay scale for CIO positions in order 
to assist with recruitment and retention for a unit of the Executive Branch of State 
government (excluding USM) that employs a CIO. 
 
The bill requires for all procurements, instead of just procurements valued at $5.0 million 
or more under current law, that if a unit decides not to pursue liquidated damages when a 
specified breach associated with a liquidated damages provision has occurred, the unit must 
obtain the head of the unit’s approval and maintain documentation on the reasoning for not 
pursuing liquidated damages. The unit must also provide documentation to the Board of 
Public Works (BPW) and the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) on the 
rationale for not pursuing liquidated damages. 
 
Current Law:  Within the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), there are two pay 
plans:  the Standard Pay Plan and the Executive Pay Plan. The purpose of the pay plans is 
to provide employees in positions that involve comparable effort, knowledge, 
responsibilities, skills, and working conditions with comparable pay according to the 
relative value of services performed. The Standard Pay Plan includes all positions in SPMS 
and all other positions for which the Secretary of Budget and Management has authority to 
administer pay. The Executive Pay Plan includes each permanent position in the 
Executive Branch, including each permanent position in the Governor’s Office, that is not 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1422/ Page 3 
included in the Standard Pay Plan and has a pay rate equal to or exceeding the lowest 
pay rate in the Executive Pay Plan.  
 
Pay rates in the Standard Pay Plan or Executive Pay Plan may be set by a series of 
pay grades (or executive pay grades) and steps within each grade, fixed rates, or minimum 
and maximum amounts. When setting or amending a pay rate, the Secretary of Budget and 
Management must consider the prevailing pay rates for comparable services in private and 
public employment, experience, living costs, benefits, and the financial condition and 
policies of the State. A pay rate is subject to any limitations included in the State budget.  
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may increase pay rates for a specific class under 
the Standard Pay Plan with the approval of the Governor in order to recruit or retain 
competent personnel or to ensure that pay rates adequately compensate for the effort, 
knowledge, responsibility, skills, and working conditions of employees in that class. If an 
amendment to the pay plan affects a position in the Executive Branch that is listed in the 
budget bill, the amendment is contingent on the approval of BPW. An amendment to the 
Standard Pay Plan may not take effect unless sufficient money is available in the budget to 
cover the resulting pay rates. 
 
Each budget bill must contain a separate section that includes the proposed salary schedule 
for the Executive Pay Plan and a listing of the job classification and title of each position 
in the Executive Pay Plan, including the proposed salary grade for each position, and is 
subject to the General Assembly’s approval. 
 
Liquidated Damages  
 
Each State procurement contract must include a clause or clauses covering liquidated 
damages, as appropriate. A unit must obtain the approval of the head of the unit if it elects 
not to include a liquidated damages clause in a contract. DGS advises that (1) for 
construction contracts, liquidated damages are required unless the agency head determines 
otherwise and (2) determinations for other contracts are made on a contract-by-contract 
basis by a procurement officer in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General.  
 
In addition, with respect to State procurement, liquidated damages may be collected for 
specified violations of:   
 
 
the Minority Business Enterprise program;  
 
the State’s prevailing wage requirements; and  
 
the State’s Living Wage law. 
 
For procurements valued at $5.0 million or more, if a unit decides not to pursue liquidated 
damages when a specified breach associated with a liquidated damages provision has 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1422/ Page 4 
occurred, the unit must obtain the head of the unit’s approval and maintain documentation 
on the reasoning for not pursuing liquidated damages.  
 
State Expenditures:  DBM can establish minimum qualifications for CFOs and adopt 
regulations with existing resources. A unit of the Executive Branch of State government 
(excluding USM) that receives at least $1.75 billion in State and federal funding and 
employs a CFO can likely meet the bill’s reporting requirements with existing resources. 
However, State expenditures may increase to the extent that the Secretary of Budget and 
Management sets higher pay scales for CFO and CIO positions of those units of the 
Executive Branch beginning in fiscal 2027. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes 
$2.0 million in DPA that may be used for this purpose. Based on the fiscal 2027 operating 
and capital budgets as introduced, affected agencies may include, but are not necessarily 
limited to, the Maryland Department of Health, the Maryland State Department of 
Education, the Maryland Department of Transportation, the Department of Human 
Services, and the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services.  
 
BPW and JAEC can receive documentation supporting decisions not to pursue liquidated 
damages in the event of a breach for procurement contracts with existing resources. To the 
extent that the head of a unit does not approve a decision to forego liquidated damages for 
procurements valued at below $5.0 million, revenues (all funds) may increase from the 
collection of damages, but any such effect is speculative and not reflected in this analysis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Board of Public Works; Maryland State Department of 
Education; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Health; Office of the Comptroller; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1422/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5