START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1441 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1441 
(Delegate Embry) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Public Consumption and Open Container - Prepayment of 
Citation 
 
 
This bill authorizes an adult individual issued a citation to prepay a fine for violations of  
§ 6-321 (consumption of alcoholic beverages in public) or § 6-322 (possession of an open 
container) of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. Prepayment of a fine must be 
considered a guilty plea to the violation. The Chief Judge of the District Court must 
establish a schedule for the prepayment of fines. A person issued a citation may request a 
hearing within 30 days after the citation’s issuance, and the District Court may require a 
person found to have committed a violation of §§ 6-321 or 6-322 to pay a fine of up to 
$100. If a person issued a citation does not prepay the fine, does not request a hearing, and 
does not respond to the summons, the court may hold a hearing. If the evidence supports a 
guilty verdict, the court may find the person guilty of a Code violation and impose up to 
the maximum fine and court costs against the person.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by approximately 
$24,100 in FY 2027 only to revise and reprint citations. Otherwise, the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1441/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Section 6-321 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article – Consumption of 
Alcoholic Beverages in Public 
 
In general, an individual may not consume an alcoholic beverage (1) on public property; 
(2) on the mall, adjacent parking area, or other outside area of a shopping center; (3) on an 
adjacent parking area or other outside area of any other retail establishment; and (4) in a 
parked vehicle located in one of these locations. However, an individual may consume an 
alcoholic beverage in these locations if authorized, as specified. If the owner or operator of 
a motor home or chartered bus has consented to the consumption of alcoholic beverages, 
the restrictions do not apply to passengers in the living quarters of a motor home equipped 
with a toilet and central heating, or of a chartered bus in transit.  
 
A violation is a Code violation and a civil offense. Violators must be issued a citation and 
are subject to a fine of up to $100. 
 
Section 6-322 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article – Possession of an Open 
Container 
 
An individual may not possess an alcoholic beverage in an open container while (1) on the 
mall, adjacent parking area, or other outside area of a shopping center; (2) on an adjacent 
parking area or other outside area of any other retail establishment; or (3) in a parked 
vehicle located in one of these areas. An individual may possess an alcoholic beverage in 
an open container on private property if the individual is authorized by the owner of the 
establishment.  
 
A violation is a Code violation and a civil offense. Violators must be issued a citation and 
are subject to a fine of up to $100.  
 
Citations and Proceedings 
 
In general, a person must be issued a citation for a violation of § 10-113 (misrepresentation 
of age to obtain alcohol), § 10-114 (underage possession of an alcoholic beverage),  
§ 10-115 (possession of false documentation to obtain an alcoholic beverage) of the 
Criminal Law Article or § 6-321 (consumption of alcoholic beverages in public) or § 6‑322 
(possession of an open container) of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. Statute 
authorizes certain individuals to issue a citation for these violations. A person authorized 
to issue a citation must issue it if the person has probable cause to believe that the person 
charged is committing or has committed a Code violation. The citation issued to an adult 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1441/ Page 3 
must contain, among other things, specified information regarding the violation, a notice 
stating that prepayment of the fine is not allowed, and a notice that the District Court must 
promptly send the person charged a summons to appear for trial.  
 
Except for a citation subject to the jurisdiction of a circuit court, the issuing jurisdiction 
must forward a copy of the citation and a request for trial to the District Court in the district 
having venue. The District Court must promptly schedule the case for trial and summon 
the defendant to appear. Willful failure of the defendant to respond to the summons is 
contempt of court. Statute specifies certain procedures for proceedings of alleged 
violations.  
 
When a defendant has been found guilty of a Code violation and a fine has been imposed 
by the court, the court may direct that the payment of the fine be suspended or deferred 
under conditions the court may establish and, if the defendant willfully fails to pay the fine 
imposed by the court, that willful failure may be treated as a criminal contempt of court, 
for which the defendant may be punished by the court as provided by law. A defendant 
who has been found guilty of a Code violation has the right to appeal or to file a motion 
for a new trial or a motion for a revision of a judgment provided by law in the trial of a 
criminal case.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, and Garrett 
counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; 
Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3