START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1472 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1472 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Better Small Business Employee Benefit Act of 2026 
 
 
This bill exempts health benefit plans provided by a professional employer organization 
(PEO) that engages in employee leasing to small employers from the requirements of the 
Maryland Health Insurance Reform Act (small group law) and provisions governing the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE). Thus, small businesses may purchase large 
group health insurance from such entities. The bill also specifies that a welfare benefit plan 
offered to a worksite employee of a PEO must be treated as a single employer welfare 
benefit plan and requires a PEO to provide specified disclosures to a small business. The 
bill takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health 
benefit plans issued, renewed, or delivered in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill has no fiscal or operational impact on the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA). Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Application of Small Group Law 
 
Per Title 15, Subtitle 12 of the Insurance Article (which governs the small group market), 
“health benefit plan” includes a policy or certificate for hospital or medical benefits that 
covers residents of this State who are eligible employees and that is issued through a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1472/ Page 2 
multiple employer trust or association located in this State or another state or a PEO, 
co-employer, or other organization located in this State or another state that engages in 
employee leasing. Subtitle 12 applies to any health benefit plan offered by an association, 
a PEO, or any other entity, including a plan issued under the law of another state, if the 
health benefit plan covers eligible employees of one or more small employers and meets 
other specified requirements. A PEO must determine the number of employees the PEO 
leases to each of its employer clients. Any employer client that is a small employer must 
be insured in accordance with Maryland laws governing small employer groups. 
 
The bill removes a PEO located in this State or another state that engages in employee 
leasing from the definition of “health benefit plan” and a PEO or any other entity from the 
application of Subtitle 12. Thus, these entities are exempt from the requirements of small 
group law. 
 
Definition of Professional Employer Organization 
 
The bill defines “professional employer organization” to mean a business entity that enters 
into a contractual agreement with another business entity under which employer 
responsibilities are allocated between the business entities for all or at least half of the 
worksite employees of the second business entity. “PEO” does not include a business entity 
that (1) recruits or hires its own employees; (2) finds other organizations that need the 
services of its employees; (3) assigns employees to clients on a temporary basis to support 
or supplement the client’s workforce in special circumstances such as employee absences, 
temporary skill shortages, and seasonal workloads; and (4) customarily attempts to reassign 
the employees to other clients when the employees finish each assignment. 
 
Small Employer and Welfare Benefit Plans 
 
Under § 15-1204.1 of the Insurance Article, a carrier that offers health benefit plans to a 
small employer must also offer qualified health benefit plans in MHBE’s Small Business 
Health Options Program. The bill specifies that these provisions do not apply with respect 
to a health benefit plan issued through a PEO. 
 
Under Title 31 of the Insurance Article, which governs MHBE, to the extent permitted by 
federal law, an entity that leases employees from a PEO, co-employer, or other 
organization engaged in employee leasing and that otherwise meets the description of a 
small employer must be treated as a small employer. The bill repeals this language and 
specifies that a welfare benefit plan offered to a worksite employee of a PEO must be 
treated as a single employer welfare benefit plan. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1472/ Page 3 
Professional Employer Organization Disclosures to Small Businesses 
 
A PEO that enters into an agreement with a small employer to provide a health benefit plan 
must disclose to the small business, in writing (1) detailed information about the benefits 
offered to the employees of the small employer that are co-employed by the PEO; (2) any 
additional cost to the small employer related to the health benefit plan; and (3) that the 
small employer may terminate the agreement with the PEO within 60 days after written 
notice of the termination or earlier in accordance with the terms of the agreement. 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration Report on Professional Employer Organizations 
 
Chapters 796 and 797 of 2024 required MIA to study PEOs in the State. According to the 
report, issued in January 2025, there are approximately 73 PEOs operating in Maryland. 
PEOs are not licensed or regulated in Maryland but are subject to Maryland law regarding 
health and other employee benefits. PEOs enter into co-employment arrangements with 
businesses under which the PEO performs various human resources functions on behalf of 
the business, including contracting with health insurance carriers to enable their clients to 
access larger and more comprehensive health insurance plans. PEOs do not sell health 
insurance or operate as health insurers or carriers. Instead, group health insurance policies 
are issued to a PEO as a plan sponsor. PEOs extend insurance to their client co-employees 
through partnering with one or more carriers to offer coverage to worksite employees in 
the states in which their employees work or allowing clients to buy health insurance from 
carriers with the PEO benefits brokerage operating as the broker on the account. 
 
Maryland is one of only three states that do not allow PEOs to offer large group insurance 
to small business clients, who must otherwise purchase insurance according to the rules 
governing Maryland’s small group and individual markets. According to the report, MIA 
found limited data to demonstrate a direct causation between allowing small businesses to 
purchase large group health insurance through PEOs and a deleterious effect on the small 
group market. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Certain small employers will be able to obtain large group health 
insurance coverage through a PEO, which may be obtained at lower premium rates. 
However, premium rates for small employers who are unable to join PEOs and instead 
remain in the small group market may increase. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 760 and HB 1439 of 2025. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1472/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 779 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4