START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1424 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1424 
(Delegate Behler) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Anne Arundel County - Community Sewerage Systems - Homeowners 
Association Control 
 
 
This bill authorizes a homeowners association (HOA) in Anne Arundel County to manage, 
operate, and maintain a shared facility or community sewerage system (CSS) as a 
controlling authority under specified circumstances. If an HOA acting as a controlling 
authority is (1) unable to fulfill the obligations of a controlling authority and (2) fails to 
comply with a corrective order from the Secretary of the Environment regarding 
operational deficiencies, then the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) must 
direct the Maryland Environmental Service (MES) to take charge and operate the shared 
facility or CSS, as specified. Any related costs incurred by MES must be charged to the 
HOA or the individual lot owners and paid, collected, and enforced as provided in specified 
provisions of existing statute. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although there is no immediate impact on MES, to the extent that MES is 
directed to take charge and operate a shared facility or CSS, nonbudgeted expenditures 
increase to do so, and nonbudgeted revenues increase correspondingly as MES recoups its 
costs from the HOA or lot owners. Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited 
number of cases, MDE can likely review and approve requests for an HOA to act as a 
controlling authority with existing resources. However, the State is ultimately responsible 
for repaying costs incurred by MES if an HOA or the lot owners fail to pay; in such a case, 
general fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1424/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An HOA in Anne Arundel County may manage, operate, and maintain a 
shared facility or CSS as a controlling authority if (1) the shared facility or CSS was in 
operation before January 1, 2026, and was in full operational compliance for at least 
six months before the HOA became the controlling authority; (2) the HOA charges a 
mandatory user assessment for sewer service and establishes a sufficient capital reserve 
fund to cover estimated replacement costs for the shared facility or CSS; and  
(3) Anne Arundel County, MDE, and the HOA approve the transfer of responsibility to the 
HOA as a controlling authority.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Community sewerage system” means a publicly or privately owned sewerage system that 
serves at least two lots. 
 
“Shared facility” means a sewerage system that: 
 
 
serves more than one (l) lot and is owned in common by the users; (2) condominium 
unit and is owned in common by the users or by a condominium association;  
(3) user and is located on individual lots owned by the users; or (4) user on one lot 
and is owned in common by the users; 
 
is located wholly or partly on any of the common elements of a condominium; or 
 
serves a housing cooperative or other multiple ownership cooperative.  
 
“Controlling authority” means a unit of government, a body public and corporate, or an 
intercounty agency authorized by the State, a county, or a municipality to provide for the 
management, operation, and maintenance of a CSS, shared facility, or multiuse sewerage 
system. 
 
Controlling Authorities and the Management, Operation, and Maintenance of Shared 
Facilities and Community Sewerage Systems  
 
A shared facility or CSS may be approved only if the system is managed, operated, and 
maintained by a controlling authority or its third-party contractor. Additionally, the 
discharge must be handled in one of the following three ways:  (1) through discharge to 
surface waters under a discharge permit; (2) through land application under a nutrient 
management plan that assures 100% of the nitrogen and phosphorus in the applied effluent 
will be taken up by vegetation; or (3) through an on-site sewerage system.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1424/ Page 3 
These provisions may not be construed as requiring a local jurisdiction to (1) be a 
controlling authority or (2) authorize or allow the use of a shared facility or CSS within the 
local jurisdiction.  
 
Maryland Environmental Service  
 
MES is an instrumentality of the State and a self-supporting, not-for-profit public 
corporation that serves State, local, and federal agencies and the private sector through 
designing, planning, financing, constructing, operating, and monitoring projects for water 
and wastewater treatment, solid waste management, composting, recycling, dredged 
material management, hazardous materials cleanup, stormwater services, and renewable 
energy. 
 
Section 3-109 of the Natural Resources Article establishes provisions regarding projects to 
be provided by MES at the direction of the Secretary of the Environment. Specifically, 
upon failure of a municipality or person to comply with an order of the Secretary to provide 
a sewerage system or refuse disposal works, abate pollution, correct deficiencies on the 
operation of sewerage systems or refuse disposal works, or extend or alter a sewerage 
system or refuse disposal works, MES, at the direction of the Secretary, must assume 
responsibility for those efforts. Costs incurred by MES to satisfy an order of the Secretary 
are charged to the municipality or person against whom the order was originally issued, as 
specified. Statute establishes a process for MES to recoup unpaid costs, including through 
a lien against the property served. In the event MES determines, at any time, that it will be 
unable to recoup all or a portion of its costs from the municipality or persons subject to the 
order, MES must provide to the Secretary a full accounting of all costs incurred or 
anticipated to be incurred, and the State must pay to MES the full amount of costs incurred 
by MES that are not paid or reasonably expected to be paid by the municipality or persons 
originally subject to the order.  
 
County Water and Sewerage Plans  
 
Each county (including Baltimore City) must have an individual or group (with adjoining 
counties) plan that is approved by MDE that has a 10-year forecasted water and sewerage 
plan to demonstrate how safe and adequate water and sewerage facilities will be provided 
to support planned redevelopment and new growth that is outlined in their comprehensive 
land use plans. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  If the Secretary of the Environment directs MES to take charge of 
and operate a shared facility or CSS pursuant to the bill, nonbudgeted expenditures for 
MES increase. The increase in MES expenditures may be significant depending on the 
specific needs of a shared facility or CSS. Because MES is a fee-for-service entity, MES 
nonbudgeted revenues increase correspondingly as it recoups its costs.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1424/ Page 4 
Pursuant to the bill, costs incurred by MES are first charged to the HOA or the individual 
lot owners of the shared facility or CSS. However, if MES determines that it is unable to 
recoup all or a portion of its costs from the HOA or individual lot owners, the bill requires 
the State to pay MES the full amount of its costs that are not paid or reasonably expected 
to be paid by the HOA or lot owners (in accordance with § 3-109 of the Natural Resources 
Article). MDE notes that costs to replace a shared facility or CSS depend on the specific 
facility but could be millions of dollars.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 682 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Environmental Service; Anne Arundel County; Maryland Association of County Health 
Officers; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4