START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1467 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1467 
(Delegate Arikan, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Criminal Law - Fourth Degree Sexual Offense - Out-of-State Convictions 
 
 
This bill establishes that a conviction from another state or a federal, military, or 
Native American tribal court that would be considered a conviction for any of a list of 
specified sexual offenses if committed in Maryland may serve as a qualifying crime for an 
increased penalty for repeat sexual offenders under the fourth-degree sexual offense 
statute. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, a “person in a position of authority” is a person who (1) is at least age 21 
and works for remuneration or as a volunteer for a public or private preschool, elementary 
school, or secondary school or (2) is at least age 22 and works for remuneration or as a 
volunteer for a “program” and exercises supervision over or works or interacts with one or 
more minors who attend the school or participate in the program. A person in a position of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1467/ Page 2 
authority includes a principal, vice principal, teacher, coach, or school counselor at a public 
or private preschool, elementary school, or secondary school. 
 
A “program” means an individual, a business, a religious or faith-based institution, or an 
organization that provides, on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, instructional, coaching, 
recreational, spiritual, character-building, or supervisory services or activities for minors, 
including (1) sports, music, dance, art, or martial arts coaching or instruction; (2) tutoring 
or academic enrichment; (3) day care or after school care; (4) scouting; or (5) day or 
overnight camping. “Program” also means any unit of local, State, or federal government. 
 
Prohibitions 
 
The fourth-degree sexual offense statute prohibits a person from (1) engaging in sexual 
contact with another without the consent of the other or (2) except as prohibited under the 
third-degree sexual offense statute, engaging in a sexual act or vaginal intercourse with a 
victim who is age 14 or 15 and the person performing the act is at least 4 years older than 
the victim. 
 
Except as prohibited under the third-degree sexual offense statute or the prohibitions above, 
a person in a position of authority may not engage in a sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal 
intercourse with a minor who, at the time of the sexual act, sexual contact, or vaginal 
intercourse (1) is a student enrolled at a school where the person in a position of authority 
works or (2) is participating in a program for which the person in a position of authority 
works and is at least six years younger than the person in a position of authority. 
 
Penalties 
 
Under current law, fourth-degree sexual offense is a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. However, an increased 
penalty of imprisonment for up to three years and/or a $1,000 maximum fine applies to a 
person who has been convicted on a prior occasion not arising from the same incident of 
violations of specified sexual crimes under State law. The specified crimes are:  first-degree 
rape; second-degree rape; third-degree sexual offense; fourth-degree sexual offense; 
attempted rape in the first degree; attempted rape in the second degree; attempted sexual 
offense in the first-degree (as it existed before October 1, 2017); attempted sexual offense 
in the second degree (as it existed before October 1, 2017); continuing course of conduct 
with a child; and sexual abuse of a minor. 
 
The bill expands application of this increased penalty to a person who has been convicted 
on a prior occasion by a court in another state or in a federal, military, or Native American 
tribal court of a crime that would constitute any of these crimes if committed in this State. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1467/ Page 3 
Under current law, imposition of the subsequent offender penalty is subject to specified 
procedural requirements. Unless specifically charged by the State, a violation of the  
fourth-degree sexual offense statute may not be considered a lesser included crime of any 
other crime. There is a three-year statute of limitations for prosecution of a fourth-degree 
sexual offense involving a person in a position of authority or sexual contact with a minor 
without the consent of the minor. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Relevant Offense Data 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of violations (charges) and guilty 
dispositions in the District Court and the circuit courts over the last two fiscal years for 
sexual offense in the fourth degree. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Violations and Guilty Dispositions 
Sexual Offense in the Fourth Degree 
Fiscal 2024 and 2025 
 
 
Fiscal 2024 
Fiscal 2025 
 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
District Court 
 
 
 
 
Sexual Contact without Consent 
880 
8 
690 
12 
Sexual Act - Age 14 or 15 
26 
1 
34 
0 
Vaginal Intercourse – Age 14 or 15 
22 
0 
28 
1 
Sexual Act/Conduct – Person in 
Position of Authority 
19 
0 
7 
0 
Vaginal Intercourse – Person in 
Position of Authority  
2 
0 
3 
1 
Circuit Courts 
 
 
 
 
Sexual Contact without Consent 
631 
170 
516 
125 
Sexual Act – Age 14 or 15 
19 
5 
20 
2 
Vaginal Intercourse – Age 14 or 15 
28 
6 
30 
1 
Sexual Act/Conduct – Person in 
Position of Authority 
34 
10 
25 
0 
Vaginal Intercourse – Person in 
Position of Authority  
1 
0 
3 
0 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1467/ Page 4 
During fiscal 2025, the Division of Correction within the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS) conducted intake on 24 individuals for one or more of the 
offenses listed under § 3-308 of the Criminal Law Article; the average sentence for this 
group was 11.7 months. 
 
Office of the Public Defender  
 
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that, depending on the number of 
applicable cases, the bill may result in the need for one additional attorney. The Department 
of Legislative Services advises that initial caseloads are likely insufficient to justify 
immediate additional staffing. To the extent OPD’s case volume increases meaningfully as 
a direct result of the bill, OPD can request additional resources through the annual budget 
process. 
 
Other Impacts of the Bill  
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the operations or finances of the Maryland 
State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy, the Judiciary, and DPSCS. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB1350 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4