START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1433 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1433 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Community Colleges - Collective Bargaining - Definition of Supervisory 
Employee 
 
 
This bill defines “supervisory employee” for purposes of collective bargaining at 
community colleges, including Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), and specifies 
that the definition does not include department heads, comparable positions, or faculty 
members below the level of assistant dean. As a result, the bill clarifies that those 
employees may collectively bargain. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Clarifying that department heads and comparable positions may collectively 
bargain is not anticipated to materially affect BCCC revenues or expenditures because 
department heads are already permitted to collectively bargain as faculty under current law. 
  
Local Effect:  Clarifying that department heads and comparable positions may collectively 
bargain is not anticipated to materially affect local community college revenues or 
expenditures because department heads are already permitted to collectively bargain as 
faculty under current law. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Supervisory employee” is defined as an employee who has authority to:  
(1) hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline 
employees; (2) responsibly direct employees for more than 50% of the employee’s working 
hours; and (3) address and resolve employee complaints. “Supervisory employee” does not 
include a department head, an employee in a comparable position, or any faculty member 
below the level of assistant dean. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1433/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Chapters 16 and 27 of the 2021 special session established a uniform, 
statewide framework for collective bargaining at community colleges. The legislation 
phased in these collective bargaining rights, beginning with the eight large local 
community colleges on September 1, 2022, then the seven small local community colleges 
on September 1, 2023, and finally BCCC on October 1, 2024. 
 
Collective bargaining rights at community colleges are granted to “public employees.” 
“Public employee” is generally defined as an individual employed by a public employer 
and expressly includes faculty and part-time faculty at BCCC. “Faculty” are employees 
whose assignments involve academic responsibilities, including teachers and department 
heads. 
 
“Public employee” does not include certain categories of individuals and, therefore, these 
individuals do not have collective bargaining rights. Specifically excluded are (1) officers, 
including a president, vice president, dean, or other similar official appointed by a board 
of community college trustees; (2) supervisory or confidential employees; and (3) student 
assistants. “Confidential employee” is an employee whose unrestricted access to personnel, 
budgetary, or fiscal data, or whose close and continuing working relationship with 
individuals responsible for negotiating on behalf of the employer, would make union 
membership incompatible with the employee’s duties. Supervisory employee is not a 
defined term in statute. 
 
Up to four bargaining units at each community college may be established:  (1) one for 
full-time faculty; (2) one for part-time faculty; and (3) two for eligible nonexempt 
employees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 978 (Senator A. Washington) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; Public Employee Relations Board; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2