START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1463 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1463 
(Delegate Howard, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Anne Arundel County Board of Education - Constituent Services Liaison - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill requires the Anne Arundel County Board of Education to hire a constituent 
services liaison prior to the beginning of the 2026-2027 school year. The liaison must 
(1) act as the liaison between the county board and members of the community; (2) assist 
community members in accessing services of Anne Arundel County Public Schools 
(AACPS) and other State and county education-related services; (3) engage community 
partners and local organizations to advance the strategic goals of AACPS; and (4) have 
experience working in special education before being hired. The president of the board, in 
consultation with counsel for the board must negotiate the terms of the employment 
agreement for the liaison. The liaison must be subject to removal by the president of the 
board in accordance with the terms of the employment agreement. The liaison must receive 
an annual salary set by the board. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  AACPS expenditures increase by an estimated $148,100 annually beginning 
in FY 2027 to reflect the anticipated salary of the liaison plus the cost of additional 
equipment and fringe benefits. County revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1463/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Anne Arundel County Board of Education consists of 
seven nonpartisan elected members and one student member. The school board is 1 of 
20 elected boards in the State, there are also 4 hybrid boards. AACPS adopted budget 
totaled $1.78 billion in fiscal 2026. This amount includes all operating funds.  
 
Local Expenditures:  AACPS expenditures increase by an estimated $148,100 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027. This amount reflects the cost anticipated by AACPS to hire a new 
liaison with a starting annual salary of $112,632. When the salary is combined with costs 
for fringe benefits, technology, mileage reimbursement, and supplies, AACPS 
expenditures increase by a total of $148,100 in fiscal 2027. Future year expenditures may 
grow with additional annual salary increases, employee turnover, and continued ongoing 
supply, technology, and mileage reimbursement costs. Actual costs depend on the salary 
set by the local board. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1275 of 2025 and HB 1395 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2