START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1485 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1485 
(Chair, Health Committee) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Crisis Response System - Resources for Family Members and 
Trauma-Informed Care Training (Tiarra's Law) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to develop a pamphlet to 
inform the public about the Crisis Response System, the State and national 9-8-8 Suicide 
and Crisis Lifelines, and programs provided by the State 9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. 
A health care provider or representative of the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
(OCME) must provide the pamphlet to an individual on request, or when reasonably 
appropriate in connection with a death, an overdose, or a behavioral health crisis response. 
MDH must conduct a review of any trauma-informed care training that is provided to 
health care providers, including training regarding family engagement and post-incident 
support following overdose or behavioral health crises. By December 1, 2026, MDH must 
report to the General Assembly on its fundings and recommendations. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can develop the pamphlet, conduct a review of any trauma-informed 
care training, and complete the required report with existing budgeted resources. Revenues 
are not affected.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Health care provider” means a health care facility, a health care 
practitioner, and an individual licensed or certified as an emergency medical services 
provider. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1485/ Page 2 
Crisis Response System  
 
The Maryland Behavioral Health Crisis Response System must include:   
 
 
a State 9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline in each jurisdiction or region to provide 
(1) a single point of entry to the system; (2) coordination with the national 9-8-8 
Suicide and Crisis Lifeline to provide the lifeline’s full range of services, including 
supportive counseling, suicide prevention, crisis intervention, referrals to additional 
resources, and direct dispatch or warm hand-offs to mobile crisis response and 
stabilization services and other immediate services as needed; (3) coordination with 
the local core service agency or local behavioral health authorities, police, local 
mental health hotlines, emergency medical services personnel, and behavioral 
health providers; and (4) provide other programs that may include hotlines, walk-in 
crisis services, critical incident stress management teams, crisis residential beds, 
transportation coordination, and mobile crisis teams, among others;  
 
community awareness promotion and training programs; and  
 
an evaluation of outcomes of services through annual survey by the Behavioral 
Health Administration of consumers and family members and annual data 
collection, as specified.  
 
9-8-8 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline  
 
Pursuant to Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 and the federal National Suicide Hotline 
Designation Act of 2020, MDH designated 9-8-8 as the State’s behavioral health crisis 
hotline on July 16, 2022. The 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline provides free and confidential 
support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for people in distress, prevention and crisis 
resources, and best practices for professionals.  
 
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
 
OCME is the statewide agency designated by law to investigate deaths from injury, 
homicide, suicide, under unusual or suspicious circumstances, or when a person is not 
attended by a physician. The medical examiner must complete the death certificate after 
determining the cause and manner of death, which includes the name of the deceased, cause 
of death and medical certification, date and hour of death, place where death occurred, and 
place where the body was found.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1485/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3