START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1470 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1470 
(Delegate Cullison) 
Health 
 
 
Medical Assistance Programs - Drug Dispensing - Cost-of-Dispensing Survey and 
Fee-for-Service Professional Dispensing Fee 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), beginning in 2026, to 
conduct the in-State cost-of-dispensing (COD) survey at least once every three years. 
Within six months of completing the survey, MDH must adopt regulations establishing a 
fee‑for‑service (FFS) professional dispensing fee based on the results of the survey. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by $81,000 (50% general funds, 50% federal 
funds) in FY 2027 and FY 2030 to conduct a COD survey. To the extent the survey 
necessitates an increase in the professional dispensing fee, Medicaid expenditures increase 
by an additional indeterminate but significant amount (not shown below) beginning as 
early as FY 2027, as discussed below. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenue 
$40,500 
- 
- 
$40,500 
- 
GF/FF Exp. 
$81,000 
- 
- 
$81,000 
- 
Net Effect 
($40,500) 
($-) 
($-) 
($40,500) 
($-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1470/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Related Federal Rules and Requirements  
 
The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) do not require states to 
conduct COD surveys on a specific timeframe as long as pharmacy reimbursement meets 
federal requirements relating to efficiency, economy, sufficiency, and quality of care.  
 
Federal regulations (42 CFR § 447.518(d)) do require states to provide adequate data, such 
as a state or national survey of retail pharmacy providers, to support any proposed changes 
to either ingredient cost reimbursement or professional dispensing fee reimbursement. 
States must submit the proposed change in reimbursement and the supporting data through 
a State Plan Amendment formal review process to CMS. Research and data must be based 
on pharmacy costs and be sufficient to establish the adequacy of both current ingredient 
cost reimbursement and professional dispensing fee reimbursement.  
 
Maryland Medicaid Dispensing Fees  
 
The most recent COD survey for Maryland Medicaid was completed by Myers and Stauffer 
in January 2020. The survey found that, for all pharmacies, the mean and median cost of 
dispensing was $13.72 and $11.16 per prescription, respectively. The survey noted that a 
single dispensing fee of $10.67 per prescription would reimburse the weighted median cost 
of dispensing prescriptions to Maryland Medicaid members for nonspecialty pharmacies.  
 
For FFS pharmacy expenditures, Maryland Medicaid currently provides a professional 
dispensing fee of $10.67 per prescription and a nursing home dispensing fee of  
$11.49 per prescription. 
 
All nine Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) use a pharmacy benefits manager 
(PBM). 
PBM 
reimbursement 
amounts 
are 
proprietary 
and 
confidential.  
A 2018 Joint Chairmen’s Report response from MDH found that the professional 
dispensing fees paid by MCOs were much lower than those paid under FFS.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, Medicaid must conduct a COD study in 2026 and 2029 
(fiscal 2027 and 2030), along with every three years thereafter. MDH advises that a 
COD survey costs approximately $81,000. Thus, Medicaid expenditures increase by 
$81,000 (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) in fiscal 2027 and 2030. 
 
To the extent the COD study indicates a need to increase the professional dispensing fee, 
Medicaid expenditures increase by an additional significant amount beginning as early as 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1470/ Page 3 
fiscal 2027. In calendar 2025, Medicaid FFS pharmacy provided 5.3 million prescriptions. 
For illustrative purposes only, to increase the professional dispensing fee by $1.00, 
Medicaid costs increase by $5.3 million annually (50% general funds, 50% federal funds). 
 
The bill additionally requires MDH to adopt regulations establishing a FFS professional 
dispensing fee based on the results of the survey within six months of completing the 
survey. MDH advises that this timeline would place a significant burden on the department. 
The last COD survey conducted began in June 2018 (when Myers and Stauffer sent the 
survey to the participating pharmacies) and the results were published in January 2020. In 
response, Maryland adopted new professional dispensing fees in January 2021, 
approximately one year later. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent more frequent COD surveys indicate a need to 
increase professional dispensing fees, small business pharmacies benefit from increased 
revenue from prescriptions dispensed to Medicaid enrollees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 839 (Senator Ready) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3