START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1493 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1493 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Charles County - Student Bus Transportation Providers - Provider Displacement 
 
 
This bill limits the ability of the Charles County Public School System to change the 
method of providing student transportation services by requiring the county board of 
education to provide written notice to student transportation providers prior to any 
displacement as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Charles County school expenditures may increase in future years, 
potentially by a significant amount, to the extent that the bill’s prohibition on the 
displacement of individuals providing school bus transportation services results in higher 
rates and corresponding costs by private contractors. Local school revenues are not 
affected, since the bill does not alter State funding or the county appropriation to the local 
school system. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Before taking any action that results in the displacement of a company 
that has been providing student bus transportation services in the county, the 
Charles County Board of Education must (1) provide written notice via first class mail of 
the intent to displace the company at least 45 days before the hearing on the matter as 
required by the bill and (2) conduct a public hearing. The county board must provide notice 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1493/ Page 2 
of any hearing required by the bill in a newspaper of general circulation in the county 
once each week for two successive weeks before the hearing. 
 
The board must also, within one year after the public hearing, and at least two years before 
any displacement, provide written notice by registered mail of the displacement to the 
company providing the student bus transportation services. The Charles County Board of 
Education may begin providing student bus transportation services or contract with another 
company to provide the services less than two years after providing the notice via registered 
mail if (1) the board pays the displaced company an amount equal to the company’s gross 
receipts for providing the services in the county for the preceding 24-month period;  
(2) the board and the company that has been providing the services agree to a different 
notice period or compensation amount; or (3) the company stops providing the services in 
the county. 
 
Under the bill, “displacement” means the provision of student bus transportation services 
by the county board of education that precludes a company that has been providing the 
services from continuing to provide the services. Under the bill, “displacement” does not 
include circumstances in which the county board does not renew a contract for student bus 
transportation services for cause. “Displacement” also does not include circumstances in 
which the company that has been providing the services (1) has acted in a manner 
threatening to public health or safety; (2) has committed a material breach of a contract for 
student bus transportation services; or (3) refuses to continue to provide student bus 
transportation services under the terms and conditions of an existing agreement. 
 
Current Law:  Student transportation services in Maryland are generally provided by a 
combination of government-owned school vehicles and private contractors. In 
Charles County, the local school system primarily uses private contractors to transport 
students. Contractors operating the buses are not considered school system employees. 
 
Additional information on student transportation services in public schools can be  
found in the FY 2025 End-of-Year Pupil Transportation Report prepared by the  
Maryland State Department of Education. 
 
County Appropriation to the Local School System 
 
Each year, the county government is required to appropriate funds to the county board of 
education equivalent to the greater of the Maintenance of Effort (MOE) requirement or the 
local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The per-pupil MOE amount is based 
upon the enrollment count. The local share amount equals the local share of the foundation 
formula, compensatory education, English learner, special education, comparable wage 
index, full-day prekindergarten, college and career ready, transitional supplemental 
instruction (through fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant programs. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1493/ Page 3 
The Charles County government appropriation to the local school system totaled 
$232.0 million in fiscal 2025, and $245.3 million in fiscal 2026. Provisions of this bill will 
not affect the required level of county government funding to the local school system. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Student transportation services in Charles County total 
approximately $49.8 million in fiscal 2026, representing 9.4% of the general fund operating 
costs for the local school system. The projected annual increase for student transportation 
services (5.6%) exceeded the overall projected increase for the school system’s total 
general fund (4.8%). This illustrates that the cost of providing student transportation 
services in the county is exceeding the growth rate in other categories, including classroom 
instructional salary costs (2.2%). 
 
Based on a 2015 study on the school system’s student transportation services, the 
Charles County Public School System indicates that transportation costs could be lowered 
on average by 3.3% a year by bringing student bus services in-house rather than utilizing 
private contractors. Based on the school system’s fiscal 2027 budget, the potential cost 
savings to the local school system could total over $1.6 million annually. 
 
The two-year advance notice requirement within the bill may preclude the local school 
system from bringing student transportation services in-house. As a result, the local school 
system may not be able to realize potential cost savings immediately. The exact scale of 
the potential impact is unknown, but for context, the fiscal 2026 school budget indicates 
that the local school system’s current bus fleet consists of 384 total buses, including 
315 contractual buses, and 69 buses owned by the school system (33 regular,  
17 special needs, 19 spare). These costs are offset to the extent the board meets the 
conditions for providing transportation services domestically within less than two years of 
the notification required under the bill. A copy of the school system master school bus 
contract for the 2025-2026 school year is available online. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 574 (Charles County Senators) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1493/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4