START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1490 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1490 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Family Investment Program - Temporary Cash Assistance - Good Cause and 
Adequate Reason Exceptions 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Family Investment Program (FIP) from denying an application or 
reducing or terminating assistance if an individual has “good cause” for noncooperation 
with child support, as specified under criteria established by the Secretary of Human 
Services. FIP is responsible for granting good cause to an individual and must determine 
that an individual has good cause for noncooperation with child support if circumstances 
exist in which cooperation with child support may be against the best interest of the child. 
In the process of granting good cause, a FIP worker at a local department of social services 
(LDSS) may not contact the noncustodial parent from whom support would be sought. FIP 
may not deny an application or terminate assistance if the Child Support Administration 
(CSA) determines that an individual has adequate reason for noncooperation with child 
support. An individual may request and receive a determination that there is good cause or 
adequate reason for noncooperation with child support at any time during the application 
and certification period.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Human Services (DHS) can ensure an individual has 
good cause for noncooperation with child support; assist and advise individuals, as 
appropriate; and otherwise meet the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1490/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Good cause” means that circumstances exist in which cooperation with 
child support may be against the best interest of the child.  
 
The criteria established by the Secretary must provide that an individual has good cause 
for noncooperation if the individual states that:  
 
 
cooperation risks physical or emotional harm to or retaliation against the child or 
the relative with whom the child resides; 
 
the child for whom support is sought was conceived as a result of incest or rape;  
 
proceedings for the adoption of the child are pending or under consideration; or 
 
cooperation risks discouraging a noncustodial parent of the child from maintaining 
a relationship with the child or providing emotional or other support.  
 
An individual who claims good cause for noncooperation with child support is not required 
to produce written evidence; however, an individual may provide an oral or written 
statement to prove good cause. If an individual provides an oral statement to prove good 
cause, an FIP worker at an LDSS must document the oral statement. If an individual needs 
assistance, an FIP worker at an LDSS must assist the individual in preparing a written 
statement or documenting an oral statement on a standardized form created by DHS. FIP 
may not require a written statement to be notarized or be in any other format that imposes 
a cost on the individual. DHS may not require third-party verification to prove good cause. 
 
During the application and certification process for assistance, FIP must: 
 
 
 
notify all individuals on the availability of the child support pass-through and 
disregard;  
 
notify all individuals of the right of the individual to claim good cause to not 
cooperate with child support, the criteria for good cause, and the time frame and 
process for requesting good cause;  
 
notify all individuals that an FIP worker can provide the individual with assistance 
requesting good cause;  
 
at minimum, provide specified notice (1) in writing on the application for assistance; 
(2) orally during a phone or in-person interview; and (3) in all written FIP notices 
about child support compliance or noncompliance; 
 
provide an individual with assistance in requesting good cause; and  
 
provide an individual with an opportunity to claim good cause. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1490/ Page 3 
Circumstances beyond the control of an individual that are adequate reasons for 
noncooperation with child support include:  (1) delivery of mail from CSA to an incorrect 
address; (2) natural disaster or civil disorder; (3) critical illness; (4) a family crisis requiring 
an individual’s full attention; and (5) travel by an individual away from home, both in the 
period during which the department mailed notices and scheduled appointments. CSA must 
determine that there is adequate reason for an individual’s noncooperation with child 
support.  
 
DHS must inform an individual who does not provide the requested information related to 
child support that the individual may attest to the lack of information. DHS must offer 
assistance with preparing the attestation. DHS must consider an individual who attests to 
the lack of information to be in cooperation with child support.  
 
Current Law:  The Family Investment Administration within DHS is the central 
coordinating and directing agency of all public assistance programs in the State, including 
Temporary Cash Assistance (TCA) benefits as a last resort. TCA may be provided if the 
applicant or recipient (1) resides in the State; (2) has applied for child support services, if 
appropriate; (3) has engaged in job search activities as requested by DHS; (4) participates 
in work activity, as required; and (5) meets any requirements established by regulations. 
TCA provides monthly cash grants and is funded with general funds, federal Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families funds, and certain child support collections. 
 
Assistance may not be reduced or terminated for noncompliance with the work activity 
requirement if the individual has good cause under the criteria established by the Secretary, 
including:  
 
 
 
temporary illness or incapacity; 
 
court-required appearances or temporary incarceration; 
 
domestic violence; 
 
a family crisis that threatens normal family functioning, as specified;  
 
a breakdown in transportation arrangements; 
 
a breakdown in child care arrangements or lack of child care, as specified; 
 
a lack of supportive services identified and agreed on by an individual and a local 
department; or 
 
the failure of a local department to offer or provide a reasonable accommodation to 
an individual with a disability. 
 
The LDSS must impose a 30% reduction of the portion of a recipient’s grant amount 
designated for the adult member or members, minor parent or parents, or pregnant 
individual if an adult member, minor parent, or pregnant individual is found to be in 
noncompliance, without good cause, with FIP work activity requirements. The portion of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1490/ Page 4 
the grant amount designated for the child or children of the assistance unit may not be 
reduced or terminated based on noncompliance work activity requirements. 
 
The LDSS must impose a 25% reduction of the entire grant amount if an adult member or 
minor parent is found to be in noncompliance without adequate reason or good cause with 
child support requirements.  
 
If a recipient is found to be in noncompliance with FIP requirements, the LDSS must 
provide a 30-day conciliation period for each instance of noncompliance. During the 
30‑day conciliation period, the case manager must advise the recipient of the 
noncompliance, and help the recipient to comply by: 
 
 
investigating the reasons for noncompliance, including by personally contacting the 
family of the recipient; 
 
evaluating and preparing a written determination of whether the recipient qualifies 
for an exemption or good cause; 
 
sending the recipient a letter offering a conciliation conference; and 
 
assisting the recipient in identifying and resolving any barriers to compliance. 
 
The Secretary may not reduce or terminate TCA to a family until 30 days after the day on 
which the first written notice of noncompliance was sent to the recipient. The full amount 
of temporary cash assistance must resume on compliance with the FIP requirement. 
 
Child Support Collections  
 
CSA within DHS generally oversees child support services provided by the LDSSs and 
other offices, provides technical assistance, formulates policy, develops and implements 
new programs, and ensures compliance with federal and State regulations and policy.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1490/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
F 

END OF PAGE 5