START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1448 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1448 
(Delegate Tomlinson) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Municipal Elections - Information on Candidates and Voting Procedures and 
Locations 
 
 
This bill requires a municipality to submit to the State Board of Elections (SBE) (1) at least 
six months before the candidate filing deadline for a municipal election, the qualifications 
to be a candidate for each office on the municipal ballot and (2) within one week after the 
candidate filing deadline, a list of each qualified candidate for each office on the municipal 
ballot and information on how to vote and where to vote in the municipal election. SBE 
must publish the information on the SBE website immediately after the information is 
submitted by the municipality. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill can be implemented with existing resources.    
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State election law governs the administration of federal, State, county, and 
Baltimore City elections held during statewide elections every two years, and 
special elections, but generally does not govern municipal elections other than those in 
Baltimore City (which is considered a “county” for purposes of State law). Municipal 
elections are primarily governed by each municipality’s law and occur at various times 
throughout the year and in odd- and even-numbered years. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1448/ Page 2 
While State law governing elections generally does not apply to municipal elections, there 
are certain provisions of State law that address municipal elections, including those that  
(1) allow a municipality to use the information in the statewide voter registration database 
to administer voter registration for its elections; (2) allow a municipality to request that 
SBE include the offices and questions to be voted on in a municipal election on the 
statewide ballot (within the municipality) during a statewide election; (3) require 
municipalities to allow no-excuse absentee voting (mail-in voting) in municipal elections; 
and (4) require municipalities to submit their election results to SBE to publish on the SBE 
website. 
 
Publication of Municipal Election Results 
 
A municipality must, within 30 days after the results of a municipal election are certified, 
submit to SBE an electronic copy of the election results for each office or question voted 
on at the election, including: 
 
 
vote totals for each office or question, reported separately by each of the following 
voting methods, if applicable:  (1) in-person early voting; (2) mail-in voting or 
vote‑by‑mail; (3) provisional voting; and (4) in-person election day voting; and 
 
the party affiliation of each candidate if the municipality conducts partisan elections. 
 
Immediately after a municipality submits its election results, SBE must publish the election 
results on the SBE website. The election results published by SBE must be organized by 
election year and the name of the municipality. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 848 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2