START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1428 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1428 
(Delegate Anderson) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Somerset County Board of Education - Alterations 
 
 
This emergency bill makes several changes to the Somerset County Board of Education. 
Specifically, the bill (1) requires the board to consist of one nonvoting student member 
from each public high school in the county; (2) requires the Somerset County 
Commissioners (rather than the Governor) to fill any vacancies that occur; (3) increases 
the annual compensation for the board chairman from $3,000 to $6,000 and other 
nonstudent member compensation from $2,700 to $5,000; and (4) requires closed sessions 
of the board to adhere with specified provisions of the Open Meetings Act. In accordance 
with Article III of the Maryland Constitution, increases in compensation do not apply to 
board members currently serving in a term of office and will only take effect at the start of 
the term of an individual elected after the effective date of the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  Somerset County expenditures increase by $3,450 in FY 2027 and by 
$12,200 annually beginning in FY 2030. County revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A student member must meet the following requirements: 
 
 
be a 12th grade student in the Somerset County public school system elected by the 
high school students of the public school that the student attends, in accordance with 
procedures established by the school system;  
 
serve for one year beginning July 1 after the election of the member;  
 
be a nonvoting member; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1428/ Page 2 
 
advise the county board on the interests of students. 
 
Unless invited to attend by an affirmative vote of a majority of the county board, the student 
members may not attend an executive session. 
 
Annual Compensation  
 
The bill increases the chairman’s salary by $3,000 annually (from $3,000 to $6,000). For 
all other elected members, the salary is increased by $2,300 annually (from $2,700 to 
$5,000).  
 
Current Law:  The Somerset County Board of Education consists of five nonpartisan 
elected members and, although not in statute, three nonvoting student members 
(two regular student members and one alternate student member). The school board is  
1 of 20 elected boards in the State; there are also 4 hybrid boards. 
 
Annual Compensation  
 
The chairman of the board receives $3,000 annually; all other elected members receive 
$2,7000 annually. The chairman and other members are entitled to (1) reimbursement for 
expenses incurred in official duties performed outside Somerset County and (2) $500 per 
member per year for expenses incurred in official duties performed within 
Somerset County.  
 
Vacancies  
 
The Governor must appoint a qualified individual to fill any vacancy on the board for the 
remainder of the term and until a successor is elected and qualifies.  
 
Closed Meetings 
 
All final actions of the county board must be taken at a public meeting. The board must 
keep a formal record of each public meeting. This requirement does not prohibit the board 
from meeting and deliberating in executive session provided that all action is taken at a 
public meeting. 
 
Open Meetings Act - Closed Sessions (Applies to Somerset County Board of Education 
upon Enactment)  
 
A public body may not meet in closed session unless at least one member of the body has 
been designated to receive training on the requirements of the open meetings law. If a 
designated individual cannot be present at an open meeting at which the public body votes 
to hold a closed session, the body must complete a specified compliance checklist 
developed by the Office of the Attorney General and include the checklist in the meeting 
minutes. If a public body meets in closed session, the minutes for a public body’s next open 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1428/ Page 3 
session must include a summary that includes specified information about the proceedings 
of the closed meeting. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Elected members of the Somerset County Board of Education serve 
a term of four years beginning on January 1 after the member’s election. Of the five elected 
members of the board, three are elected in gubernatorial election years and two are elected 
in presidential election years. Therefore, the next term of office for which the bill’s salary 
increases will apply begins on January 1, 2027 (halfway through fiscal 2027). By 
fiscal 2030, all five elected members of the board are subject to the increased salaries 
specified in the bill for the full fiscal year as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Increased Expenditures for School Board Compensation 
 
 
FY 2027* 
FY 2028 
FY 2029* 
FY 2030 
Chairman 
$0 
$0 
$1,500 
$3,000 
Other Elected Members 
3,450 
6,900 
8,050 
9,200 
Total 
$3,450 
$6,900 
$9,550 
$12,200 
 
* Reflects half-year increase for members taking office January 1 in fiscal 2027 and 2029; fiscal 2030 
reflects full salary increases for all elected members of the board.  
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 508 (Senator Carozza) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Somerset County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3