START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1480 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1480 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Labor Law - Child Labor Penalties, Private Sector Employee Labor Relations, 
and State Employee Labor Standards 
 
   
This bill prohibits a unit in the Executive Branch from petitioning or applying to the federal 
government for a waiver of any federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) provision that is 
applicable to the unit, even if the waiver is otherwise authorized under federal law. The bill 
also prohibits employers from forming specified employee involvement organizations 
(EIOs) that are not:  subject to the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) or under the 
jurisdiction of the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). The bill expands the 
jurisdiction of the Public Employee Relations Board (PERB) to cover private employees 
under specified conditions. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may assess a civil 
penalty against a person who violates specified child labor laws. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2026 from 
the bill’s civil penalty provisions. Otherwise, the bill does not have an immediate fiscal 
impact, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the operations or finances of the circuit 
courts. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1480/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Child Labor Penalties 
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may assess a civil penalty, to be paid into the 
general fund, against a person who violates specified child labor laws, including interfering 
with enforcement of the law, giving false information, or employing an underage minor. A 
civil penalty may not exceed $16,035 for each specified child labor violation, and may not 
exceed $72,876 for violations that willfully or repeatedly employ a minor in specified 
conditions (generally hazardous conditions), before July 15, 2027, and the penalty is 
annually indexed to inflation beginning July 15, 2027, as set by the commissioner in the 
preceding January. 
 
Employee Involvement Organizations 
 
An employer in the State may not allow the formation of an organization or entity in the 
workplace that is initiated through either the employer or employees and established 
through mutual consent of the employer and any number of employees that meet the 
following conditions: 
 
 
supervisors and employee members participate to address or negotiate working 
conditions of mutual interest; 
 
may be dissolved unilaterally by the employer; and  
 
through federal action occurring after December 31, 2025, is in whole or in part 
expressly exempt from or otherwise not subject to NLRA or the jurisdiction of the 
NLRB. 
 
The bill may not be construed to preclude:  (1) labor organizations subject to NLRA and 
the jurisdiction of NLRB from forming or (2) certification of an exclusive representative 
under NLRA. 
 
Private Employees and the Public Employee Relations Board 
 
A private employee is an individual who is subject to NLRA or would have been subject 
to NLRA as it existed on January 1, 2025. The bill may not be construed to affect private 
employees’ rights under any other federal or State law. The bill must be construed liberally 
to ensure that private employees in the State can effectively exercise the fundamental right 
to full freedom of association, self-organization, and designation of representatives of their 
own choosing, free from retaliation or intimidation by their employers. The bill specifies 
collective bargaining rights for private employees, and the State, or a political subdivision 
of the State, is generally prohibited from denying, burdening, or abridging those rights. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1480/ Page 3 
A private employee may petition PERB to protect and enforce collective bargaining rights 
if the private employee:  (1) is employed in a position that loses NLRA coverage because 
NLRA is repealed or narrowed or its enforcement is enjoined in a case involving the private 
employee, and (2) is not covered under the federal Railway Labor Act. A private employee 
may also petition PERB if NLRB has expressly or impliedly ceded jurisdiction to the states, 
and the bill specifies when NLRB is deemed to have ceded jurisdiction to states. If PERB 
determines that the specified conditions no longer apply, PERB must retain jurisdiction 
over pending matters unless ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction to cede 
jurisdiction to the federal government. 
 
A private employee may petition PERB to process any representation petition previously 
filed with NLRB, promptly certify an employee organization as an exclusive 
representative, or decide an unfair labor practice case arising under NLRA. Any existing 
terms and conditions of employment negotiated between a certified exclusive 
representative and an employer must remain in full force and effect during the bargaining 
following certification. The bill details the process to pursue relief from PERB. 
 
PERB may conduct elections to determine an exclusive representative of an appropriate 
bargaining unit, certify an exclusive representative, order an employer to bargain with that 
exclusive representative, and decide unfair labor practices. In specified circumstances, 
PERB may order an employer to submit to binding arbitration. PERB may order any 
appropriate remedy, including injunctive relief and civil penalties to effectuate the bill and 
PERB may decide allegations of unfair labor practices. Additionally, the bill specifies how 
some matters can be resolved. 
 
If PERB finds that an employer committed an unfair labor practice under NLRA, PERB 
may assess a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000 for each private employee with respect to 
whom the violation occurred, which must be distributed to a special fund for PERB to carry 
out provisions of the bill. An order by PERB is subject to judicial review in the circuit 
court. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Work Permits and Special Permits 
 
Generally, a minor under the age of 14 may not be employed or allowed to be employed, 
and individuals between the ages of 14 and 18 may not work without a permit, subject to 
specified exemptions. Except under conditions specified in statute, a minor between the 
age of 14 and 18 may not work in about a dozen hazardous professions delineated in statute; 
additional occupations are restricted for minors younger than age 16. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1480/ Page 4 
A parent or guardian of a minor may apply for a work permit by completing an online 
application and, after reviewing the application, the Commissioner of Labor and Industry 
may issue the permit if permissible.  
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may issue a special permit for a minor of any 
age to be employed as an entertainer, model, or performer. If the commissioner is satisfied 
that the employment will not be detrimental to the minor’s health or welfare, the minor will 
be adequately supervised, and the minor’s education will not be neglected, the 
commissioner must issue the special permit. The special permit must be notarized with the 
signatures of the employer and the minor’s parent or guardian.  
 
Statute includes additional requirements related to the working hours of minors that 
generally limit the number of hours and time of day during which a minor may be 
employed. 
 
A person who interferes with the commissioner’s enforcement of the statute or knowingly 
gives false information to the commissioner is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. A person who 
knowingly employs or allows a minor to be employed in violation of the law is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $10,000, and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year.  
 
Public Employee Relations Board  
 
Chapter 114 of 2023, the Public Employee Relations Act (PERA), established PERB to 
oversee collective bargaining for all public employees. Prior to PERA, the collective 
bargaining rights of State employees, employees of public institutions of higher education, 
employees of community colleges, or public school employees, including teachers, were 
administered by one of three labor relations boards, depending on the nature of the 
employees’ employer:  the State Labor Relations Board (SLRB); the State Higher 
Education Labor Relations Board (SHELRB); and the Public School Labor Relations 
Board (PSLRB). PERA consolidated different collective bargaining laws that apply to 
different employees into one set of rules and procedures for public employees. The Act 
also repealed SLRB, SHELRB, and PSLRB, and instead established PERB to oversee 
collective bargaining for all the previously mentioned public employees. 
 
In addition to consolidating three labor boards into one, the Act consolidated different 
collective bargaining laws into one law, including provisions regarding employee access, 
unfair labor practices, management and employee rights, prohibited employer and 
employee actions, designation of bargaining units, elections, and certification of exclusive 
representatives. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1480/ Page 5 
There are approximately 180,000 public employees who fall under PERB’s jurisdiction. 
Specifically, PERB jurisdiction covers approximately 40,000 State employees,  
23,000 higher education employees, 17,000 community college employees, and 
100,000 public school employees. 
 
National Labor Relations Act 
 
In 1935, the U.S. Congress passed NLRA, commonly known as the “Wagner Act,” which 
set forth employees’ rights to join unions and required employers to bargain collectively 
with unions selected by a majority of workers in an appropriate bargaining unit. Under 
Section 7 of NLRA, employees have the right to self-organization, to form, join, or assist 
labor organizations, to bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, 
and to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other 
mutual aid or protection, and also have the right to refrain from any or all such activities. 
NLRA generally applies to all employers involved in interstate commerce other than 
airlines, railroads, agriculture, and government. Thus, NLRA provides most private sector 
employees with the right to organize and collectively bargain, but NLRA does not apply to 
public sector employees. 
 
NLRA also established NLRB, an independent federal agency, to enforce its provisions. 
NLRB also acts to prevent and remedy unfair labor practices committed by private sector 
employers and unions, as well as conducts secret-ballot elections regarding union 
representation. 
 
The President removed an NLRB member in January 2025, so for most of calendar 2025, 
NLRB lacked a quorum needed to make decisions or hear cases on unfair labor practices 
or union representation. Two members were appointed in January 2026, so the board 
currently has a quorum. 
 
Federal Fair Labor Standards Act 
 
The U.S. Congress passed the federal FLSA in 1938, to establish minimum wage, overtime 
pay, recordkeeping, and child labor standards for employees in both the private and public 
sectors. With specified exceptions, including special requirements for minors, employees 
are entitled to a minimum wage of no less than $7.25 per hour and an employer is generally 
required to pay an overtime rate of no less than one and one-half times the regular rate of 
pay after 40 hours of work in a single workweek. The FLSA generally sets the minimum 
age for employment (14 years for non-agricultural jobs), restricts the hours youth under the 
age of 16 may work, and prohibits youth under the age of 18 from being employed in 
hazardous occupations.  
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal FLSA, which 
specifies minimum wage and overtime requirements for employers and employees in the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1480/ Page 6 
State. State law specifies that an employee must be paid the greater of the federal minimum 
wage or $15.00 per hour. When federal and state standards are different, the rules that 
provide the most protection to workers apply. 
 
State Revenues:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) receives approximately 
20 cases of child labor violations annually. Violations of the child labor law are subject to 
criminal penalties, but not civil penalties. It is unknown how many child labor cases may 
result in civil penalties under the bill. However, given that the bill does not expand the 
violations subject to penalties and the limited number of violations, general fund revenues 
may increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
Special fund revenues are likely unaffected in the short-term, but in the event of NLRA 
being repealed or narrowed or NLRB ceding jurisdiction to states, special fund revenues 
to PERB may annually increase from civil penalties assessed by PERB. However, the 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the bill does not create a special fund to 
receive civil penalties under the bill.  
 
State Expenditures:  MD Labor can assess civil penalties on specified child labor 
violations with existing resources.  
 
Prohibiting EIOs and prohibiting a unit in the Executive Branch from petitioning or 
applying to the federal government for a waiver of any FLSA provision has no immediate 
impact as EIOs and FLSA waivers are not currently authorized by the federal government. 
In the event that the federal government authorizes EIOs and waivers for FLSA, the bill 
does not change current practice so there is no material effect. 
 
PERB is unaffected by the bill unless NLRA is repealed or narrowed or NLRB cedes 
jurisdiction to states. In the event of that happening, PERB advises that it cannot absorb 
the additional workload with existing resources and needs additional employees to oversee 
collective bargaining for private employees. Additionally, PERB notes that the bill 
significantly increases the workload of board members. The chair of the board is a salaried 
employee, as authorized by current law, but current law entitles the other four board 
members only to minimal compensation provided in the State budget. Therefore, the  
four unsalaried board members would need to either become full-time employees or 
receive additional compensation commensurate with their increased workload. In the 
absence of experience under the bill, it is not possible to reliably predict the extent to which 
private employees will exercise their collective bargaining rights under the bill and how 
many additional employees and resources PERB may need. Thus, to the extent that PERB 
must assume NLRA duties, PERB needs significant additional employees and resources, 
which it can request through the normal operating budget process. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1480/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 831 (Senator Ferguson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Public Employee 
Relations Board; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7