START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1466 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1466 
(Delegate Wims) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development - Appraisal Gap From 
Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program - Qualified Properties 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of a “qualified property” under the Appraisal Gap from 
Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program within the Department of Housing and 
Community Development (DHCD) to include residential real property that is in an area 
that meets criteria established by DHCD for the identification of neighborhoods that have 
been historically redlined or have undergone urban renewal. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program  
 
Chapters 702 and 703 of 2021 established the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining 
Financial Assistance Program and related fund within DHCD. The purpose of the program 
is to help close appraisal gaps that occur in historically redlined neighborhoods by making 
financial assistance available to:  
 
 
affordable housing developers working in low-income census tracts and sustainable 
communities; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1466/ Page 2 
 
individuals who purchase a qualified property:  (1) after a qualified project is 
completed; (2) at an affordable sales price as determined by regulations adopted by 
DHCD; and (3) as an owner-occupant.  
 
A “qualified property” under the program is a residential real property that is: 
 
 
newly constructed or a formerly vacant structure that has been substantially 
rehabilitated; 
 
located in a low-income census tract and an area designated as a “sustainable 
community”, as specified; and 
 
constructed or rehabilitated with the purpose of being sold to an owner-occupant at 
an affordable sales price. 
 
Generally, in the fiscal year in which a qualified project is proposed, an individual or 
business entity may apply to DHCD for financial assistance to cover the appraisal gap for 
the project. “Appraisal gap” means the amount by which the total cost of construction 
expenses exceeds the contract sales price of a qualified property when it is sold to an 
owner-occupant. “Qualified project” means the construction or substantial rehabilitation of 
a qualified property if the eligible construction expenses do not exceed $500,000. Subject 
to specified funding limits and regulations, DHCD must accept an application for financial 
assistance from an individual or business entity that proposes to develop a qualified project. 
The application must be in the form and must contain any information that DHCD requires 
by regulation. DHCD must approve all applications that qualify for financial assistance in 
a timely manner. 
 
Chapters 702 and 703 also required DHCD to conduct a study, aggregated by race, zip 
codes, and census tracts, of housing values, appraisals, and refinancing rates across the 
State over the past 30 years, including the impact of State and federal policies, such as 
infrastructure (road, park, and water and sewer) and other investments, on those 
communities. DHCD was required to submit the findings of the study to the Governor and 
the General Assembly by June 30, 2022; that report can be read here.  
 
Sustainable Communities 
 
A “sustainable community” is defined as a part of a priority funding area that (1) is 
designated by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the Secretary of 
Housing and Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base Realignment 
and Closure Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a transit-oriented 
development. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1466/ Page 3 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development, such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3