START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1474 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1474 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Transfers and Conversions 
 
   
This bill repeals existing provisions that prohibit the Baltimore County Board of License 
Commissioners from transferring a Class B license that was previously converted from a 
Class D license transferred from another election district. The bill also repeals existing 
provisions that prohibit the board from transferring or converting (1) a new license issued 
by the board based on population increases under the board’s population-based license 
limits or (2) a license that has been revoked and reissued by the board. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect Baltimore County finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 815 of 2025 authorized the Baltimore County Board of License 
Commissioners, from June 1, 2025, to May 31, 2028, to approve the transfer of up to 
five Class B or Class D alcoholic beverages licenses in existence in an eligible transferor 
district on June 1, 2025, from the district to other election districts within the county. 
 
An “eligible transferor district” means an election district in which the total number of 
Class B and Class D licenses, excluding exception licenses, is 10% or greater than the total 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1474/ Page 2 
number of Class B and Class D licenses allowed in an election district based on the rule of 
the board that limits the total number of licenses available in an election district by 
population. The number of licenses in existence prior to the transfer must not be greater 
than 25% more than the number of licenses that would otherwise exist in that election 
district, as specified. No more than two licenses can be transferred into any  
single election district. 
 
The board must convert a Class D license that is transferred from an eligible transferor 
district to any other election district to a Class B license; and may not thereafter transfer 
the Class B license from the licensed premises or convert the license to another class of 
license.  
 
The board may not transfer from a licensed premises or convert a license to another class 
of license:  (1) a new license issued by the board based on population increases under the 
board’s population-based license limits or (2) a license that has been revoked and reissued 
by the board. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2