START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1491 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1491 
(Delegate Odom, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Education - Interjurisdictional Safe Pathways Commission - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Interjurisdictional Safe Pathways Commission to identify, 
coordinate, and secure funding for safe pathways for students traveling to and from school. 
The bill specifies commission membership and requires the commission to collaborate with 
local governments, State agencies, and relevant stakeholders to develop infrastructure, 
programs, and grant strategies. The commission must take certain actions relating to safe 
pathways including identifying gaps, evaluating funding needs and opportunities, 
developing a strategic plan, recommending policies to maximize funding, identifying 
public-private partnership models, and fostering community engagement. The Maryland 
State Department of Education (MSDE) must provide staff for the commission. The 
commission must report to the Governor and specified committees of the 
General Assembly annually by December 1 on current safe pathways, opportunities for 
funding, policy and infrastructure recommendations including legislation or budgetary 
appropriations as necessary, and progress in implementing interjurisdictional coordination. 
The bill terminates September 30, 2033.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MSDE increase by $90,600 beginning in 
FY 2027 for a contractual commission staffer. MSDE general fund expenditures increase 
by an additional $750,000 in FY 2027 to conduct an initial comprehensive inventory of 
current safe pathways. Other State agencies can designate commission members as 
required using existing resources. Expense reimbursements for commission members are 
assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
840,600 
105,300 
109,900 
114,600 
119,500 
Net Effect 
($840,600) 
($105,300) 
($109,900) 
($114,600) 
($119,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1491/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments can likely coordinate with the Interjurisdictional Safe 
Pathways Commission as needed using existing resources. Local revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, “safe pathways” means physical infrastructure to ensure 
safe routes for students traveling to and from school, including sidewalks, crosswalks, 
traffic calming measures, bike lanes, pedestrian bridges, and school zone signage. Safe 
pathways also includes education programs and policy initiatives that promote safe routes 
for students traveling to and from school. 
 
The commission must meet at least four times a year, or as necessary to fulfill its duties. 
Each member serves for a term of three years, and the Governor must designate a chair of 
the commission. Commission members may not receive compensation for serving on the 
commission but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State Travel 
Regulations as provided in the State budget. 
 
Current Law:  The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) manages State 
review and approval of local school construction projects. Each year, local school systems 
develop and submit to IAC a facilities master plan that includes an analysis of future school 
facility needs based on the current condition of school buildings and projected enrollment. 
The master plan must be approved by the local school board. Subsequently, each local 
school system submits a capital improvement plan to IAC that includes projects for which 
it seeks planning and/or funding approval for the upcoming fiscal year, which may include 
projects that the local school system has forward funded. In addition to approval from the 
local school board, the request for the upcoming fiscal year must be approved by the 
county’s governing body. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures for MSDE increase by $840,600 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. Future year 
expenditures increase by $105,300 in fiscal 2028 and $119,500 by fiscal 2031. 
 
MSDE has determined that one regular full-time position and two contractual positions are 
needed to implement this bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
advises that the added responsibilities incurred by this legislation are not permanent and, 
thus, may be performed entirely by contractual employees. DLS also advises that, given 
the large membership of the commission and the additional expenditures to support 
technical work described below, the commission can likely be staffed with only one new 
contractual employee. Although MSDE advises that its Office of School Facilities and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1491/ Page 3 
Transportation is fully extended by existing regulatory and oversight duties, this analysis 
also assumes MSDE can shift resources within the department to cover administrative 
requirements for the commission that lie beyond the capabilities of one additional full‑time 
contractual employee and the commission members. This estimate therefore reflects the 
cost of hiring one contractual commission coordinator to staff the commission and lead 
coordination among members, local governments, and other State agencies. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. This 
estimate also includes $750,000 in general fund expenditures in fiscal 2027 to contract for 
the development of a safe pathways inventory assessment due to the complexity of 
conducting such an assessment.  
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$81,480 
Contractual Services/Programming Costs 
750,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
      9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$840,621 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Future year expenditures also 
assume completion of the inventory assessment and termination of related costs in 
fiscal 2027. This analysis also assumes an initial inventory assessment is sufficient to 
inform the work of the commission through fiscal 2034. To the extent that updates or 
additional inventory assessments are required in subsequent fiscal years, MSDE may 
experience additional contractual expenditures in the out-years. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.  
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) also advises that the agency requires  
one regular part-time health policy analyst to serve on the commission throughout its 
duration. However, given MSDE’s primary responsibility for staffing the commission, 
DLS advises that MDH can likely appoint an individual to serve on the commission using 
existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 71 (Senator Ellis) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1491/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Disabilities; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
sj/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4