START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1483 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1483 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health 
Finance 
 
Clinical Professional Counseling and Social Work - Out-of-State Providers - Use 
of Telehealth for Continuity of Care 
 
 
This bill exempts specified individuals from licensing requirements under the State Board 
of Professional Counselors and Therapists and the State Board of Social Work Examiners 
under certain circumstances. Such individuals may provide counseling or social work 
services through telehealth to a client in Maryland for the purpose of providing continuity 
of care for a limited period, as specified. The bill also repeals the State Board of 
Professional Counselors and Therapists’ authorization to issue a temporary telehealth 
license. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the boards are not materially 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists  
 
An individual who is (1) licensed and in good standing in another state and (2) established 
a client-counselor relationship with a client outside the state may provide counseling 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1483/ Page 2 
through telehealth. Counseling must be for the purpose of providing continuity of care for 
up to six months after the client (1) relocated to Maryland or (2) returned to Maryland after 
a continuous and nonincidental period of relocation outside the State. An individual must 
be unable to provide in-person counseling to the client because the client is located in 
Maryland. 
 
State Board of Social Work Examiners 
 
A social worker who is (1) licensed and in good standing in another state and (2) established 
a client-social worker relationship with a client outside the state may provide social work 
services through telehealth. Social work services must be for the purpose of providing 
continuity of care for up to six months after the client (1) relocated to Maryland or 
(2) returned to Maryland after a continuous and nonincidental period of relocation outside 
the State. An individual must be unable to provide in-person social work services to the 
client because the client is located in Maryland. 
 
These provisions also apply to a student, while pursuing a supervised course of study in a 
graduate level social work program in another state that is accredited or a candidate for 
accreditation by the Council on Social Work Education. 
 
Current Law:  “Telehealth” means a mode of delivering health care services through the 
use of telecommunications technologies by a health care practitioner to a patient at a 
different physical location than the health care practitioner. It includes synchronous and 
asynchronous interactions, but does not include the provision of health care services solely 
through audio-only calls, e-mail messages, or facsimile transmissions. 
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed by the State Board of Professional Counselors 
and Therapists to practice professional counseling in Maryland. An applicant for a 
professional counseling license must have (1) a master’s or doctoral degree from an 
accredited educational program approved by the board; (2) completed instruction in 
specified study areas; (3) completed a specified amount of supervised clinical experience; 
(4) passed the National Counselors Examination of the National Board for Certified 
Counselors and the Maryland Law Assessment; and (5) submit to a criminal history records 
check (CHRC).  
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed by the State Board of Social Work Examiners to 
practice social work in Maryland. An applicant must (1) depending on the license sought, 
have a baccalaureate or master’s degree in social work from an accredited program; (2) be 
at least 18 years old and of good moral character; (3) depending on the license sought, pass 
any required examinations; (4) pay any required fees; and (5) complete a CHRC. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1483/ Page 3 
Temporary Telehealth License 
 
Chapter 649 of 2025 created a temporary telehealth license. The license is issued by the 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists  to qualified applicants authorized 
to provide clinical professional counseling or counseling services in another state. The 
license authorizes the holder to provide clinical professional counseling services through 
telehealth in Maryland only to an out-of-state resident enrolled at and residing at or near 
an institution of higher education in the State. The student and the counselor must have a 
previously established therapeutic relationship that has existed for at least six months. The 
license has a term of six months and may not be renewed. 
 
The board may issue a temporary telehealth license to an individual who (1) is not 
authorized to practice clinical professional counseling in Maryland; (2) is authorized to 
provide clinical professional counseling or counseling services in another state; (3) is in 
good standing with the regulatory authority in the other state; (4) meets any other 
qualifications set by the board in regulations; and (5) submits a temporary telehealth 
application. 
 
Interstate Licensed Professional Counselors Compact 
 
Chapters 134 and 135 of 2021 entered Maryland into the Interstate Licensed Professional 
Counselors Compact. The purpose of the compact is to increase public access to 
professional counseling services and provide opportunities for interstate practice by 
licensed professional counselors who meet uniform licensure requirements. A member 
state must grant the privilege to practice to a licensee holding a valid unencumbered license 
in another member state in accordance with the terms of the compact and rules. A member 
state must recognize the right of a licensed professional counselor with a privilege to 
practice professional counseling in any member state through telehealth. As of 
February 2026, 39 states (including Maryland) and Washington, D.C. have passed the 
compact language, though only three states (Arizona, Ohio, and Minnesota) are actively 
issuing compact privileges. 
 
Interstate Social Work Licensure Compact 
 
Chapters 9 and 10 of 2025 entered Maryland into the Interstate Social Work Licensure 
Compact. The purpose of the compact is to facilitate interstate practice of regulated social 
workers by improving public access to competent social work services and to preserve the 
regulatory authority of states to protect public health and safety through the current system 
of state licensure. A member state must grant the privilege to practice to a licensee holding 
or eligible for an active, unencumbered license in a member state in accordance with the 
terms of the compact and rules. As of March 2026, 30 states (including Maryland) have 
passed compact language. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1483/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; American Counseling 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4