START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1429 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1429 
(Delegate Hornberger, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Right to Repair - Motor Vehicles and Farm Equipment 
 
 
This bill generally requires a manufacturer of motor vehicles to make available diagnostic 
and repair information and diagnostic repair tools to vehicle owners and “independent 
repair facilities”. The bill also requires a manufacturer that sells motor vehicles with 
“telematics systems” to install an open data platform in certain vehicles. The bill 
establishes numerous rules, procedures, and enforcement provisions related to its 
requirements. The bill further requires an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) to make 
available, on fair and reasonable terms, certain documentation, parts, and tools (inclusive 
of any updates) to an independent repair provider (or owner) of farm equipment to allow 
for the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of the farm equipment. The bill only applies 
prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to abrogate, interfere with, contradict, 
or alter the terms of any contract formed before the bill’s effective date. Violation of the 
bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer 
Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG), 
Consumer Protection Division (CPD), can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1429/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Independent repair facility” means a person that is not affiliated with a manufacturer or a 
manufacturer’s authorized dealer that diagnoses, services, maintains, or repairs motor 
vehicles or motor vehicle engines. It includes a dealer when the dealer diagnoses, services, 
maintains, or repairs motor vehicles or motor vehicle engines that are not affiliated with 
the dealer’s franchise manufacturer. 
 
“Telematics information” means information generated and collected by the operation of 
the vehicle and transmitted by using wireless communications to a remote receiving point 
where the information is stored. It includes specified information, such as remote 
diagnostic information, automatic airbag deployment and crash notifications, stolen 
vehicle locations, etc. A “telematics system” means a telematics service or other remote or 
information service, delivered to (or derived from) a motor vehicle by wireless 
communications. 
 
Fair and Reasonable Terms and Applicability 
 
For purposes of the bill’s requirements, when deciding whether an offer to purchase 
information or tools is given on “fair and reasonable terms,” consideration may be given 
to specified factors (e.g., the cost for preparing and distributing the information, the price 
charged by other manufacturers for similar information, etc.). 
 
The bill also specifies several situations to which its requirements should not be construed 
to apply. For example, nothing in the bill may be construed to require a manufacturer to 
divulge a trade secret. 
 
Diagnostic and Repair Information 
 
Generally, a manufacturer must make available for purchase by owners and independent 
repair facilities the same diagnostic and repair information that the manufacturer makes 
available to its dealers through its Internet-based diagnostic and repair information system 
(or other electronically accessible manufacturer’s repair information system). However, 
this requirement only applies to (1) model year 2002 and newer motor vehicles and 
(2) model year 2013 and newer heavy-duty vehicles. 
 
All content in a manufacturer’s repair information system must be made available to 
owners and to independent repair facilities in the same form and manner (and to the same 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1429/ Page 3 
extent) as the content is made available to dealers using the diagnostic and repair 
information system. 
 
The diagnostic and repair information must be made available for purchase on a daily, 
monthly, or yearly subscription basis and on fair and reasonable terms. 
 
Generally, a manufacturer may not require a dealer to purchase diagnostic, service, or 
repair information in a proprietary format if it sells the same information to an independent 
repair facility or other third-party provider (1) in a format that is standardized with other 
manufacturers and (2) on terms and conditions more favorable than those under which a 
dealer obtains the same information. However, a manufacturer may require a dealer to 
purchase diagnostic, service, or repair information in a proprietary format if the format 
includes specified operations information or functionality that is not available in the 
standardized format. 
 
A manufacturer may exclude diagnostic, service, and repair information necessary to reset 
an immobilizer system or security-related electronic modules from information provided 
to owners and independent repair facilities. If a manufacturer does so, an owner or 
independent repair facility may obtain the information through the National Automotive 
Service Task Force or any other reliable and accepted system. 
 
Diagnostic Repair Tools 
 
Generally, a manufacturer must make available for purchase by owners and independent 
repair facilities all diagnostic repair tools incorporating the same diagnostic, repair, and 
wireless capabilities that the manufacturer makes available to its dealers. However, this 
requirement only applies to (1) model year 2002 and newer motor vehicles and for 
(2) model year 2013 and newer heavy‐duty vehicles. The tools must incorporate the same 
functional repair capabilities that the manufacturer makes available to dealers. A 
manufacturer must offer the tools for sale to owners and to independent repair facilities on 
fair and reasonable terms. 
 
If a manufacturer sells diagnostic tools or information necessary to diagnose, service, or 
repair a motor vehicle to an independent repair facility on terms that are more favorable 
than those that are offered to a dealer for the same tools or information, the manufacturer 
must offer the tools or information to the dealer in the same manner and on the same terms 
and conditions as provided to the independent repair facility. 
 
Generally, a manufacturer may not require a dealer to purchase a proprietary tool and 
interface if (1) it sells diagnostic tools necessary to diagnose, service, or repair a motor 
vehicle to independent repair facilities and (2) the diagnostic tool communicates with the 
vehicle using the same nonproprietary interface used by other manufacturers. However, a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1429/ Page 4 
manufacturer may require a dealer to purchase a proprietary tool and interface if the 
interface has a capability that is not available in the nonproprietary interface. 
 
A manufacturer must provide diagnostic repair information to aftermarket scan tool 
companies and third-party service information providers with whom the manufacturer has 
a licensing, contractual, or confidentiality agreement for the sole purpose of building 
aftermarket diagnostic tools and third-party service information publications and systems. 
A manufacturer that complies with this requirement is not responsible for the content and 
functionality of aftermarket diagnostic tools or service information systems. 
 
Requirements Related to Onboard Diagnostic Systems 
 
Generally, beginning in model year 2018, a manufacturer must provide access to the 
manufacturer’s onboard diagnostic and repair information system using an off-the-shelf 
personal computer with sufficient memory, processor speed, connectivity, and other 
capabilities as specified by the vehicle manufacturer. Additionally, it must provide access 
to one of the following: 
 
 
a nonproprietary vehicle interface device that complies with specified standards; 
 
an onboard diagnostic and repair information system integrated and entirely 
self-contained within the vehicle, including service information systems integrated 
into an onboard display; or 
 
a system that provides direct access to onboard diagnostic and repair information 
through a nonproprietary vehicle interface, such as ethernet, universal serial bus, or 
digital versatile disc. 
 
A manufacturer must provide owners and independent repair facilities with the same access 
to onboard diagnostic and repair information that is available to the manufacturer’s dealers, 
including technical updates to the onboard systems, through the nonproprietary vehicle 
interfaces as required under the bill. 
 
Nothing in the bill may be construed to require a dealer to use a nonproprietary vehicle 
interface or to prevent a manufacturer from developing a proprietary vehicle diagnostic and 
reprogramming device if the manufacturer meets specified requirements. A manufacturer 
may not be prohibited from making proprietary tools available to dealers if the tools meet 
certain requirements. 
 
If a proprietary tool is available to the aftermarket on fair and reasonable terms, provision 
of a proprietary tool pursuant to these requirements is not a violation of the bill even if the 
tools provide functions not available through a nonproprietary vehicle interface required 
by the bill. Additionally, a manufacturer is not authorized to exclusively develop 
proprietary tools, without a nonproprietary equivalent, for diagnostic or repair procedures 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1429/ Page 5 
that fall outside the above requirements or to otherwise operate in a manner inconsistent 
with the requirements in the bill related to nonproprietary vehicle interfaces. 
 
Telematics Systems 
 
A manufacturer that sells motor vehicles equipped with a telematics system must install an 
open data platform in each motor vehicle with such a system beginning with  
model year 2025; any such system must meet several requirements specified by the bill  
(e.g., standardized across all makes and models, allows an owner to easily access the 
information, etc.). 
 
OAG must develop a document that explains (1) what a telematics system is and (2) an  
owner’s rights relating to those systems. A motor vehicle dealer must give a consumer 
buying a motor vehicle with a telematics system the required document at the time of 
purchase. 
 
Enforcement Provisions 
 
An independent repair facility or owner that believes that a manufacturer has failed to 
provide information or a tool required by the bill must notify the manufacturer in writing, 
through the National Automotive Service Task Force Service Information Request process. 
The manufacturer may cure the failure within 30 days of receiving the notice. If the 
manufacturer cures the failure within that time period, damages must be limited to actual 
damages in any subsequent litigation in accordance with MCPA. 
 
If a manufacturer fails to respond to the notice, or if an owner or independent repair facility 
is not satisfied with the manufacturer’s cure, the facility or owner may bring an action 
against the manufacturer in accordance with specified provisions of MCPA. A complaint 
must include specified documentation and evidence. 
 
A dealer may exercise the rights and remedies provided in the bill, including rights and 
remedies authorized for an independent repair facility. 
 
Farm Equipment Repair 
 
Any contractual agreement purporting to waive, avoid, restrict, or limit a farm equipment 
manufacturer’s compliance with the bill is void. A farm equipment manufacturer is 
prohibited from knowingly misrepresenting or withholding farm equipment part numbers 
from a customer for the purpose of preventing the customer from shopping for a competitive 
price on a replacement part. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1429/ Page 6 
The bill’s farm equipment repair provisions apply only to farm equipment that is sold or 
used in the State. 
 
Agreements Between Original Equipment Manufacturers and Authorized Repair Providers 
 
The bill may not be construed to require an equipment manufacturer or authorized repair 
provider to (1) divulge a trade secret to an owner or to an independent repair provider 
except as necessary to provide documentation, parts, and tools on fair and reasonable terms 
or (2) provide access to documentation that does not serve a security reset, diagnostic, 
service, or repair purpose. 
 
Moreover, the bill may not be construed to require an OEM to make available a part that 
is no longer available. However, any term in an arrangement between an authorized repair 
provider and an OEM that purports to waive, avoid, restrict, or limit the OEM’s obligations 
to comply with the bill is void and unenforceable.  
 
Security Functions 
 
A farm equipment manufacturer that sells farm equipment that contains a security-related 
function must make available to an owner or independent repair provider (on fair and 
reasonable terms) any special documentation, tools, and parts needed to reset the lock or 
function. If necessary for security purposes, a farm equipment manufacturer may provide 
information necessary to reset an immobilizer system or security-related electronic module 
through a secure data release system.  
 
Current Law:  An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, 
among other acts, any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, 
visual description, or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, 
or effect of deceiving or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, 
rental, loan, or bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; 
the extension of consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual 
purchase of consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose 
business includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
CPD is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating the complaints of aggrieved 
consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, issue a cease and desist 
order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of 
up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. 
In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1429/ Page 7 
guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are independent repair facilities (as defined 
by the bill) may meaningfully benefit under the bill, as the bill requires manufacturers to 
make information and tools available that allow for the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair 
of vehicles. Dealers, to the extent they are small businesses, may face greater competition. 
 
Small businesses that utilize or repair farm equipment in the course of doing business may 
meaningfully benefit under the bill, which requires farm equipment manufacturers to make 
information available that allows for the diagnosis, maintenance, or repair of farm 
equipment. Authorized repair providers, to the extent they are small businesses, may face 
greater competition.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7