START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1416 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1416 
(Delegates J. Long and Woods) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement and Recipients of State Funding - Electric Vehicle Charging 
Equipment - Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
This bill requires that, for State contracts involving the procurement and installation of 
electric vehicle (EV) charging equipment, agencies establish an expected level of minority 
business enterprise (MBE) participation for that portion of the contract equal to the MBE 
goal for the unit’s overall procurements. Furthermore, the bill requires, to the extent 
practicable and permitted by the U.S. Constitution, that a person receiving a State grant or 
loan of $100,000 or more for the purchase or installation of EV charging equipment comply 
with the State’s MBE program as a condition of receiving funding. The Office of Small, 
Minority, and Women Business Affairs (OSBA) within the Department of Social and 
Economic Mobility, in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), must 
also establish a clear plan for setting reasonable and appropriate MBE participation goals 
and procedures for the purchase and installation of EV charging equipment funded by the 
State. These goals and procedures must be based on laws and regulations governing the 
MBE program, and the recipient must submit a report to OSBA on compliance within 
12 months after receiving State funding. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund expenditures increase by between $75,000 and 
$500,000 in FY 2027 for a disparity study, as discussed below. OSBA, in consultation with 
OAG, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill’s requirements only apply to State contracts, grants, and 
loans. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1416/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For a detailed overview of the State’s MBE program, please see the 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program. MBE program requirements 
currently apply only to State contracts or other specified contracts for goods or services, 
and not to any grants or loans made by the State. 
 
Procurement solicitation documents (i.e., requests for proposals or invitations for bids) 
issued by State agencies must include the expected degree of MBE participation for each 
solicitation. MBE participation goals for each contract must be based on:   
 
 
the potential subcontract opportunities available in the contract; 
 
the availability of certified MBEs to respond competitively to the potential 
subcontract opportunities; 
 
the contract goal and subgoal guidelines developed by OSBA; and 
 
other factors that contribute to constitutional goal setting. 
 
An agency may, in some cases, determine that an MBE goal is not appropriate for a specific 
contract if it determines that the contract does not have subcontracting opportunities or that 
MBEs are not available to perform any portion of the contract. Agencies are barred from 
using quotas or any goal-setting process that relies only on the statewide goal or that fails 
to consider the factors outlined above. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Disparity Study for EV Charging Stations Supplies and Services 
 
As discussed in the Appendix, the Supreme Court’s 1989 Croson decision held State or 
local MBE programs using race-based classifications to strict scrutiny under the equal 
protection clause of the fourteenth amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The ruling also 
required an MBE program to demonstrate clear evidence that the program is narrowly 
tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the jurisdiction that operates the 
program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the State’s MBE program, the State 
conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is continued evidence that MBEs are 
underutilized in State contracting.  
 
While a disparity study was recently concluded in 2025 and supports the State’s continued 
implementation of the MBE program, the disparity study did not specifically analyze the 
market for the supply and installation of EV charging equipment. Moreover, as noted 
above, current law forbids the setting of a contract MBE goal using only the statewide 
MBE goal and without considering additional specified factors. The absence of a disparity 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1416/ Page 3 
analysis and the requirements outlined in current law likely render the bill’s goal-setting 
requirements legally indefensible.  
 
As a result, prior to the application of the MBE program to supplies and services related to 
EV charging stations, a disparity analysis must be conducted to demonstrate that there is 
an actual disparity that needs to be addressed. Prior analyses related to wind turbine 
installation and licensing of medical cannabis growers, processors, and dispensaries have 
concluded that a reanalysis of existing disparity data from the most recent study will cost 
between $75,000 and $100,000. If data on services related to EV charging stations is not 
available and a separate study must be conducted, the cost may be as much as $500,000. 
 
Assuming any supplemental disparity study completed for EV charging stations supplies 
and services indicates disparity within the market, OSBA and OAG should be able to 
handle requirements to set MBE goals for contracts with existing resources. 
 
State Grants for Electric Vehicle Charging Stations with Federal Funds 
 
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, signed into federal law in November 2021, 
established new programs to address climate change, including the National Electric 
Vehicle Infrastructure (NEVI) Program to provide formula funding that the 
Federal Highway Administration was required to distribute among states to strategically 
deploy EV charging infrastructure. Maryland has been apportioned about $63 million in 
federal fiscal years 2022-2026 NEVI Program funding. 
 
The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) uses this federal funding to issue 
grants for the installation of and operation of EV charging infrastructure. Grant awards 
provide funding for up to 80% of eligible costs to install, operate, and maintain the chargers 
for five years, with the requirement that recipients must provide approximately $2.5 million 
in private matching funds and must ensure the chargers are operational 97% of the time. 
 
MDOT advises that any grants that the State distributes that are funded in whole or in part 
with funding from the U.S. Department of Transportation are expected to be subject to the 
federal Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) program, not the State MBE program. 
Traditionally, MDOT has not applied the DBE program and the MBE program goals on 
the same contracts, and it is unclear whether federal guidelines allow the State to place 
MBE requirements on grants that use federal funding. Therefore, it is unclear how the 
application of MBE requirements may affect much of the State’s grant funding for 
EV charging stations. The Department of Legislative Services notes that MDOT has 
already awarded approximately one-third of the NEVI grants in two rounds of grant 
awards. A third round is scheduled for March 2026, before the bill takes effect. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1416/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide supplies and services related to 
EV charging stations and that are also certified MBEs may benefit from expanded 
opportunities for participating in State contracts (or contracts using State funds). However, 
prime contractors that are small businesses fulfilling State contracts for the supply or 
installation of EV charging will need to make sure the EV charging portion of a contract 
meets MBE participation requirements, which may create administrative burdens. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Department of 
General Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1416/ Page 5 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
(OSBA, now housed within the Department of Social and Economic Mobility or DoSEM), 
in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, the Chief Procurement Officer, and 
the Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. 
 
In August 2013, OSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2026. OSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total + 2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1416/ Page 6 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require OSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, the State periodically conducts a 
disparity study to determine whether there is continued evidence that MBEs are 
underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The most recent disparity study, completed in September 2025, identified continued and 
ongoing disparities in annual wages, business earnings, and business ownership rates for 
minority- and women-owned businesses when compared to nonminority and male-owned 
businesses. The study found that minority-owned businesses in the Maryland Marketplace 
made up 47.4% of all businesses but captured only 17.6% of total sales, while nonminority 
male-owned businesses accounted for 29.9% of businesses and 66.7% of total sales. The 
study likewise identified disparities in the State’s contracting with minority- and 
women-owned businesses, finding that these firms were consistently underutilized relative 
to their availability to perform State contracts. For instance, minority-owned businesses 
overall had an availability rate of 26.1% but were awarded contracts valued at only 
15.2% of the total contract value awarded by the State. Nonminority women-owned 
businesses had an availability rate of 13.7% but were awarded contracts valued at only 
7.1% of the total contract value awarded by the State. According to the analysis, these 
differences are large and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026; Chapters 620 and 621 of 2025, 
which reauthorized the program, also extended the due date for the new disparity study to 
September 2025 to inform the subsequent reauthorization process. As previously noted, 
this study was completed and published by the due date and is expected to serve as the 
empirical basis for the program’s reauthorization. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation 
rates for major Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during 
fiscal 2023 and 2024, the most recent data available; as the exhibit shows, rates can vary 
considerably from year to year. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1416/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2023 and 2024 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Aging 
1.2% 
11.2% 
Agriculture 
3.2% 
6.2% 
Budget and Management 
32.9% 
3.0% 
Commerce 
53.8% 
77.5% 
Education 
11.5% 
21.9% 
Environment 
37.9% 
17.5% 
Executive Department 
4.6% 
2.2% 
General Services 
19.5% 
21.4% 
Health 
8.4% 
12.8% 
Higher Education Commission 
3.0% 
20.9% 
Housing and Community Development 
48.5% 
40.4% 
Human Services 
10.5% 
38.9% 
Information Technology 
14.4% 
23.7% 
Juvenile Services 
6.5% 
15.5% 
Labor 
18.6% 
3.7% 
Military 
22.3% 
27.5% 
Natural Resources 
10.2% 
5.9% 
Planning 
0.0% 
3.9% 
State Police 
20.9% 
12.7% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
6.2% 
28.5% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.1% 
20.4% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
20.2% 
25.1% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
48.5% 
21.0% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
13.1% 
16.4% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
21.7% 
27.0% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
12.0% 
n/a 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.4% 
19.8% 
Statewide Total1 
17.9% 
22.0% 
 
MBE:  Minority Business Enterprise 
n/a:  not available 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
Source:  Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1416/ Page 8 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by,  
one or more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own 
it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A “socially disadvantaged individual” is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An “economically disadvantaged 
individual” is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2026 is $2,192,035. 
 
The Office of Minority Business Enterprise (OMBE) handles MBE certification for the 
State. Chapter 605 of 2025 transferred OMBE from the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT), which had been the State’s certification agency, to the new 
DoSEM. However, as procurement regulations have not been updated to reflect this 
transfer, MDOT is still designated as the MBE certification agency in regulations. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8