START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1457 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1457 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Washington County - Juveniles - Truancy Reduction Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Circuit Administrative Judge of the Fourth Circuit to establish a 
Truancy Reduction Pilot Program (TRPP) in the juvenile court in Washington County. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $155,000 annually 
for program grant funding. The bill may have an operational impact on the Office of the 
Public Defender, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
155,000 
155,000 
155,000 
155,000 
155,000 
Net Effect 
($155,000) 
($155,000) 
($155,000) 
($155,000) 
($155,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local grant revenues and corresponding expenditures for 
Washington County increase by $155,000 annually from grant funding and program 
implementation. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect county finances, 
as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Truancy Reduction Pilot Program  
 
Under § 7-301 of the Education Article, subject to limited exceptions, each child who 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1457/ Page 2 
resides in the State and is age 5 or older and younger than age 18 must attend a public 
school regularly during the entire school year. A child who is required by law to attend 
school and is habitually truant can be designated a Child in Need of Supervision, which 
makes the child subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court under Title 3, Subtitle 8A 
of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. However, current law (Title 3, Subtitle 8C 
of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article) also sets forth specific procedures for 
addressing truancy in jurisdictions in which a TRPP has been established. In a county in 
which a TRPP has been established, an authorized school official may file with the juvenile 
court a petition alleging that a child who is required to attend school failed to do so without 
lawful excuse, as specified.  
 
Circuit Administrative Judges of the First, Second, Third, and Seventh circuits may 
establish TRPPs within their judicial circuits. Dorchester, Frederick, Harford, Kent, 
Prince George’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester counties are currently 
authorized to have TRPPs. 
 
Dispositions under a Truancy Program 
 
When making a disposition on a petition that has been filed as part of a TRPP, the court 
may order the child to (1) attend school; (2) perform community service; (3) attend 
counseling, including family counseling; (4) attend substance abuse evaluation and 
treatment; (5) attend mental health evaluation and treatment; or (6) keep a curfew with the 
hours set by the court. The court must retain jurisdiction until every condition of the court’s 
order is satisfied. 
 
Truancy Programs – Adults 
 
Section 7-301 of the Education Article also requires a person who has legal custody or care 
and control of a child who is at least age 5, but younger than age 16, to see that the child 
attends school or receives instruction. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor. For a 
first conviction, the violator is subject to maximum penalties of a fine of $50 per unlawful 
day of absence and/or three days imprisonment. For a second or subsequent conviction, the 
violator is subject to maximum penalties of a fine of $100 per day of unlawful absence 
and/or five days imprisonment. 
 
Any person who induces or attempts to induce a child to be unlawfully absent from school 
or employs or harbors any child who is absent unlawfully from school while school is in 
session is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment 
for up to 30 days. In a county that has established a TRPP, a charge may be filed in the 
juvenile court and assigned to a truancy docket for disposition. The court may condition 
marking a charge as a stet on the defendant’s participation in the appropriate TRPP. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1457/ Page 3 
Annual Reporting Requirements 
 
By November 1 of each year, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland must 
report to the General Assembly on each established TRPP. Chapter 577 of 2025 requires 
the annual report to include (1) the number of TRPPs established in the State; (2) the 
number of participants in each TRPP; (3) information on the outcomes of the participants 
in each TRPP; and (4) recommendations to improve the function of current TRPPs. 
Chapter 577 terminates December 31, 2026.  
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  The Judiciary’s Office of Problem-Solving Courts (OPSC) 
advises that it provides annual reimbursable grants to each circuit court that operates a 
truancy program, and $155,000 is the standard annual anticipated cost for a truancy 
program. OPSC previously advised that county supporting agencies do provide support 
staff or services where needed for TRPPs (e.g., a pupil placement worker provided by a 
local school board). While Washington County did not respond to a request for information 
on the fiscal and operational impact of the bill, it is assumed Washington County can 
otherwise implement a TRPP with existing resources.  
 
OPD advises that truancy programs generate additional cases based on charges against 
parents for truant behavior and increased level of effort in juvenile cases with clients who 
have both a delinquency matter and a truancy matter, to ensure that their rights are 
protected. Based on projected caseloads and best practices standards, OPD estimates the 
need for 150 attorneys and 37 secretaries if a TRPP is established in Washington County. 
At this time, the Department of Legislative Services is unable to independently verify the 
need for any additional OPD resources solely as a result of the implementation of a TRPP 
in Washington County. Should actual workloads necessitate additional personnel, OPD 
can request those resources through the annual budget process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 715 (Washington County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Juvenile Services; Office of the Public Defender; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3