START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1520 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1520 
(Delegate Tomlinson) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Courts - Exemption From Judgment - Alterations and Additions 
 
 
This bill generally (1) expands the items exempt from execution on a judgment; (2) adds 
certain provisions applicable only to disabled persons, disabled veterans, and elderly 
persons; and (3) increases the value of certain items of a debtor that are exempt from 
execution.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances.    
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:     
 
Definitions Under the Bill 
 
“Disabled” means having a physical or mental disability that makes an individual unable 
to engage in substantial gainful employment and (1) has lasted or can be expected to last 
at least 12 months or (2) can be expected to result in death.  
 
“Disabled veteran” means an individual who is honorably discharged or released under 
honorable circumstances from active military, naval, or air service as defined in 38 U.S.C. 
§ 101 and has been declared by the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs to have a permanent 
100% service‐connected disability that results from blindness or other disabling cause that 
(1) is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the veteran and (2) was not caused or 
incurred by misconduct of the veteran.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1520/ Page 2 
“Elderly” means at least 60 years of age.  
 
Exemptions from Execution on a Judgment  
 
Under current law, the following items, among others, are exempt from execution on a 
money judgment:  
 
 
the debtor’s interest, of up to $1,000 in value, in certain items that are held primarily 
for the personal, family, or household use of the debtor or any dependent of the 
debtor (described in more detail below); 
 
money payable in the event of the sickness, accident, injury, or death of any person, 
including compensation for loss of future earnings – the exemption includes money 
payable 
for 
judgments, 
arbitrations, 
compromises, 
insurance 
benefits, 
compensation, and relief, but does not include disability income benefits if the 
judgment is for necessities contracted for after the occurrence of the disability;  
 
up to $500 in a deposit account or other account of the debtor held by a depository 
institution, without election of the debtor, subject to specified requirements;  
 
up to $6,000 of cash or property of any kind, if the debtor elects to exempt such cash 
or property within 30 days from the date of attachment or the levy by the sheriff, 
and subject to additional limitations; and 
 
money payable or paid according to an agreement or court order for child support. 
 
The bill increases, from $1,000 to $5,000, the value of the debtor’s interest in household 
furnishings, household goods, wearing apparel, appliances, books, animals kept as pets, 
and other items that are held primarily for the personal, family, or household use of the 
debtor or any dependent of the debtor that is exempt from execution on a judgment. For a 
disabled veteran, the debtor’s interest in the above items of up to $10,000 is exempt from 
execution on a judgment.  
 
The bill also adds provisions to exempt:   
 
 
the debtor’s interest up to $3,000 in value in firearms;  
 
the debtor’s interest up to $10,000 in value, in one motor vehicle necessary for 
practice of the debtor’s occupation, trade, or enrollment in any public or private 
elementary, secondary, or career and technical education school or institution of 
higher education;   
 
for a debtor who is elderly or disabled, the debtor’s interest up to $25,000, in one 
motor vehicle necessary for practice of the debtor’s occupation, trade, or enrollment 
in any public or private elementary, secondary, or career and technical education 
school or institution of higher education; and  
 
payments under § 24 (child tax credit) and § 32 (earned income tax credit) of the 
Internal Revenue Code.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1520/ Page 3 
The aforementioned exemption does not apply to a motor vehicle used to commute to an 
occupation, a trade, or an educational program that is not otherwise necessary for use in 
the course of the occupation, trade, or educational program. 
 
Under current law, in any federal bankruptcy proceeding under Title 11 of the U.S. Code 
(the federal Bankruptcy Code), an individual debtor domiciled in the State may claim the 
statutory exemptions from execution on a money judgment and further exempt other 
specified assets. These assets include owner‐occupied residential real property, including 
a condominium unit or a manufactured home that has been converted to real property or a 
cooperative housing corporation that owns property that the debtor occupies as a residence. 
The bill adds a mobile home as defined in § 8A‐101 of the Real Property Article to this 
provision.  
 
Under current law, the exemption allowed for these assets/interests may not exceed the 
amount specified and adjusted under the U.S. Code ($31,575 as of April 1, 2025). The bill 
repeals this limit, instead establishing that exemptions under this provision may not exceed 
$300,000 in value. However, the allowed exemption is $600,000 if the owner or dependent 
of the owner of the property is elderly or disabled.    
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide goods and services on credit and 
pursue post‐judgment proceedings related to debt collection may be negatively impacted 
by the (1) additional categories of debtors with higher exemption values than current 
debtors for specified items; (2) additional specified items that are exempt; and (3) higher 
exemption values for current debtors.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3