START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1550 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1550 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Eminent Domain and Condemnation Authority - Repeal (Property Rights 
Protection Act) 
 
   
This proposed constitutional amendment, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, repeals the authority of the State and local governments to take, or 
condemn, private property for public use as authorized under the Maryland Constitution 
and numerous provisions of the Maryland Code. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in State expenditures due to the repeal of 
condemnation authority, resulting in additional costs associated with the delay/canceling 
of State capital projects, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in local expenditures due to the repeal of 
condemnation authority, resulting in additional costs associated with the delay/canceling 
of local government capital projects, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This 
bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Eminent Domain  
 
The power to take, or condemn, private property for public use is one of the inherent powers 
of state government and, through the state, its political subdivisions. Courts have long held 
that this power, known as “eminent domain,” is derived from the sovereignty of the state. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1550/ Page 2 
Both the federal and State constitutions limit the condemnation authority. Both 
constitutions establish two requirements for taking property through the power of eminent 
domain:  (1) the property taken must be for a “public use” and (2) the party whose property 
is taken must receive “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair market value 
of the real property. In either event, the party whose property is being taken is generally 
entitled to a judicial proceeding prior to the taking of the property. However, the 
Maryland Constitution 
does 
authorize 
“quick-take” 
condemnations 
in 
limited 
circumstances prior to a court proceeding.  
 
Other entities have been given express statutory authority by the State to exercise 
condemnation powers under specified circumstances, including the major subdivisions of 
the State, municipalities, and specified utilities such as gas, oil pipeline, railroad, telephone 
and telegraph, and water companies.  
 
Public Use  
 
There is no clear-cut rule to determine whether a particular use of property taken through 
eminent domain is a “public use,” and Maryland courts have broadly interpreted the term. 
The Court of Appeals has recognized takings that encompass a “public benefit” or a “public 
purpose”. Maryland’s courts have given great deference to a legislative determination as 
to whether property should be taken for a particular public purpose.  
 
Damages Awarded  
 
Title 12 of the Real Property Article specifies that the damages to be awarded for the taking 
of land is the land’s fair market value.  
 
For the taking of a part of land, damages awarded is the fair market value of the part taken, 
but not less than the actual value of the part taken plus any severance or resulting damages 
to the remaining land by reason of the taking and of future use by the plaintiff of the part 
taken. The severance or resulting damages must be diminished to the extent of the value of 
the special (particular) benefits to the remainder arising from the plaintiff's future use of 
the part taken.  
 
In addition, statute specifies that moving, relocation expenses, and other compensation may 
be paid to the displaced person by the displacing agency as a result of a condemnation.  
 
Condemnation Proceeding  
 
 
Fair Market Value  
 
Pursuant to the Real Property Article, the fair market value of property in a condemnation 
proceeding is the price as of the valuation date for the highest and best use of the property 
which a vendor, willing but not obligated to sell, would accept for the property, and which 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1550/ Page 3 
a purchaser, willing but not obligated to buy, would pay, excluding any increment in value 
proximately caused by the public project for which the property condemned is needed. In 
addition, fair market value includes any amount by which the price reflects a diminution in 
value occurring between the effective date of legislative authority for the acquisition of the 
property and the date of actual taking if the trier of facts finds that the diminution in value 
was proximately caused by the public project for which the property condemned is needed, 
or by announcements or acts of the plaintiff or its officials concerning the public project, 
and was beyond the reasonable control of the property owner. 
 
Maryland Code – State and Local Condemnation Authority 
 
Numerous provisions in the Maryland Code grant State and local governments 
condemnation authority to take private property for a public use if the party whose property 
is taken receives “just compensation,” which may not be less than the fair market value of 
the real property. For illustrative purposes, examples of State condemnation authority, 
include:  
 
 
State Highway Administration – Condemnation Proceedings 
 
The State Highway Administration, within the Maryland Department of Transportation, 
has the general power to acquire for the State, by condemnation under Title 12 of the Real 
Property Article, or by other specified means, any private property for any public purpose 
it considers necessary or desirable to perform its duties or for any other purpose authorized 
under Title 8 of the Transportation Article. 
 
 
 
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation  
 
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF) was created by the 
Maryland General Assembly to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland, limit 
the extent of urban development, and protect agricultural land and woodland as open space. 
MALPF, with the assistance and cooperation of landowners and local governments, 
purchases development rights easements as a means of protecting agricultural land and 
woodland production activities.  
 
Statute specifies that State law provisions governing MALPF do not prohibit an agency of 
the State or of a county or other governmental authority from acquiring by condemnation 
land, which is under an agricultural preservation easement held by MALPF or a county 
agricultural land preservation program if such acquisition is for a public purpose.  
 
MALPF regulations establish that an owner of land subject to a MALPF easement may not 
grant or permit another easement, right-of-way, or other servitude in that land without 
MALPF’s written permission. MALPF may grant permission, subject to conditions it 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1550/ Page 4 
deems necessary to protect and maintain the agricultural integrity of the farm, under 
specified circumstances, including:  
 
 
if the overlay easement enhances a public road or bridge for the public health, safety, 
or welfare, where a minimal amount of land is required for the project and the 
grantee of the proposed overlay easement has condemning authority; and  
 
if the overlay easement is used to install a utility easement for electricity, telephone, 
cable, oil, gas, or similar utility and the grantee of the proposed overlay easement 
has condemning authority.  
 
State and Local Expenditures:  Costs of State and/or local capital projects increase, to 
the extent projects require access or other property rights (e.g., an easement for utility 
infrastructure and transportation improvements) on privately owned property due to: 
 
 
a need to pay a higher cost to obtain those property rights, through negotiation, than 
is otherwise paid, in the absence of the bill, through condemnation; or 
 
a need to modify and relocate the project. 
 
Any such increased costs either increase overall State and/or local capital expenditures or 
result in delay or canceling of other capital projects. The extent of any impact on State or 
local capital expenditures or other capital projects cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses meaningfully benefit from protection of private 
property due to the repeal of State and local government condemnation authority. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4