START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1570 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1570 
(Delegate Young) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Government - Governmental Procedures - Development and Review of 
Standards 
 
 
This bill requires units of State government to follow specified procedures and rely on 
specified data and tools when developing “standards,” as defined by the bill. When 
developing standards, units of State government must, among other things, use a  
“decision-support algorithm” and resolve disputes through independent third-party 
technical reviews, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) likely increase beginning in FY 2027, 
potentially significantly, to the extent State entities must procure “decision-support 
algorithms” and third-party experts to independently review their standards and resolve 
disputes. However, a reliable estimate is not feasible, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
directly affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Standards” means operational, technical, or procedural benchmarks used to guide 
implementation processes. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1570/ Page 2 
“Decision-support algorithm” means a computer program used by a unit of State 
government to improve decision making that is evaluated by a technical expert before being 
used. 
 
Development of Standards 
 
In developing standards, a unit of State government must:   
 
 
rely only on feasible, transparent, and reproducible data; 
 
incorporate first-hand knowledge, including best practices and real-world 
experiences; 
 
seek consensus among stakeholders; 
 
resolve disputes through independent third-party technical review using 
recognized research and expertise and reference to recognized international 
standards; 
 
avoid relying on technical experts found to be biased, as determined by 
independent reviews; 
 
take into account (1) transformative large-scale economic efficiency;  
(2) scientific standards; (3) cultural practices; (4) comparative advantages; and 
(5) structured input from multidisciplinary experts; and 
 
use a decision-support algorithm. 
 
Any initial standards adopted by a unit of State government must be based on existing 
codes and regulations (unless otherwise specified), confirm existing practices and 
standards, and clearly define goals, risks, and methods. They must be reviewed periodically 
using current technological best practices and independent peer input. 
 
Current Law:  Current law does not specify, in broad terms, how State agencies must 
develop standards. The bill does not specify that artificial intelligence (AI) systems must 
be used in the development of standards, but “decision-support algorithms” are used in 
such systems. For a discussion of the status of AI in the State and the nation, please see the 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence. 
 
State Expenditures:  Several of the bill’s requirements likely result in increased 
expenditures, but any such effect varies to the extent agencies develop or reassess their 
standards. Several State agencies advise that the bill does not have a material fiscal or 
operational effect on them. For other agencies, the bill requires the use (and therefore the 
procurement of) “decision-support algorithms, which are presumed to comprise AI 
systems. To the extent that the bill requires State entities to procure sophisticated AI 
systems to develop standards, expenditures (all funds) for State agencies may increase, 
potentially significantly. However, to the extent that agencies can use “off-the-shelf” AI 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1570/ Page 3 
systems to inform their standard-setting processes, existing resources may be sufficient to 
comply with that requirement. 
 
In addition, the bill prohibits the use of technical experts found to be biased, as determined 
by an independent review. Finally, the bill requires agencies to resolve disputes that arise 
during the standard-setting process using independent third-party technical reviews. 
Therefore, agencies may need to procure third-party experts to (1) assess the level of bias 
in technical experts they use to develop standards and (2) resolve disputes that arise during 
the standard-setting process. A reliable estimate of any such procurement costs is not 
feasible because it depends on whether agencies suspect that their technical experts are 
biased and whether disputes arise during the standard-setting process that must be resolved. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Commerce; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of General Services; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland 
Energy Administration; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1570/ Page 4 
 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 
Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise 
provide additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some 
students use AI to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 
Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems 
that host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased 
energy costs; 
 
Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 
Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to 
make “deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to 
differentiate from actual events; 
 
AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data 
privacy. 
 
Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 
Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1570/ Page 5 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human‑defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State 
government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1570/ Page 6 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1570/ Page 7 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 7