START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1567 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1567 
(Delegate Odom) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Vehicle Laws - Bicycles, Motor Scooters, and EPAMDs - Overtaking and Passing 
(Pass Pedestrians Safely Act) 
 
 
This bill (1) authorizes a person to operate an electric personal assistive mobility device 
(EPAMD) that is equipped with specified audible devices; (2) alters provisions pertaining 
to audible devices on specified vehicles; and (3) requires a person operating a bicycle, 
motor scooter, or EPAMD to engage in specified cautionary measures when approaching 
a vehicle or pedestrian, subject to secondary enforcement and a civil penalty of $25. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Audible Devices 
 
Under current law, a person may operate a bicycle or motor scooter that is equipped with 
a bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet. 
The bill adds horns and EPAMDs to this provision. 
 
Under current law, a bicycle or motor scooter may not be equipped with a siren or whistle; 
moreover, a person may not use, on a bicycle, any siren or whistle. Under the bill, both of 
these prohibitions apply to bicycles, motor scooters, and EPAMDs. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1567/ Page 2 
Exercising Due Care and Maintaining a Minimum Distance When Passing and Overtaking 
 
Under current law, § 21-1209 of the Transportation Article requires the driver of a vehicle 
to (1) exercise due care to avoid colliding with any bicycle, EPAMD, or motor scooter 
being ridden by a person and (2) when overtaking a bicycle, EPAMD, or motor scooter, 
pass safely at a distance of at least three feet, unless specified exceptions apply. 
 
The bill establishes a substantially similar requirement for operators of bicycles, 
motor scooters, and EPAMDs with respect to vehicles and pedestrians. Under the bill, a 
person operating a bicycle, motor scooter, or EPAMD must (1) exercise due care to avoid 
colliding with a vehicle or pedestrian and (2) when overtaking and passing a vehicle or 
pedestrian, if practicable, pass safely at a distance of at least three feet. The bill further 
requires an operator of a bicycle, motor scooter, or EPAMD to give an audible warning by 
voice, bell, horn, or other device before overtaking and passing a pedestrian. A police 
officer may enforce these requirements only as a secondary action when the officer detains 
an operator for a suspected violation of another provision of the Annotated Code of 
Maryland. A violation is subject to a civil penalty of $25. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert and Prince George’s counties; City of Annapolis; 
Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department 
of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2