START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1572 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1572 
(Delegate Ghrist) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard – Eligible Sources – Waste–to–Energy 
 
 
This bill includes “waste-to-energy” as a Tier 1 renewable source for purposes of the 
State’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS). “Waste-to-energy” means energy 
generated from a facility that (1) does not use combustion; (2) is capable of generating 
energy on a continuous basis to meet base load; (3) uses a carbon-recovery system;  
(4) does not produce byproducts that require land application or landfill disposal; (5) has a 
minimum waste-to-energy conversion ratio of 80%; and (6) meets specified interim 
guidance from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) relating to perfluoroalkyl 
and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) and materials containing PFAS. The bill applies to 
all RPS compliance years starting on or after January 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances in the  
five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note, special fund revenues for the 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) may decrease in future years due to a decrease in 
alternative compliance payments (ACPs) generated through the State’s RPS, as discussed 
below. The potential future effect on electric utility rates is discussed in the Additional 
Comments below. 
 
Local Effect:  While the bill is not anticipated to materially affect local expenditures in 
the short term, the potential future effect on electric utility rates is discussed in the 
Additional Comments below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none in the short term. Potential meaningful effect in 
future years, as discussed in the Additional Comments below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1572/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard  
 
Maryland’s RPS was enacted in 2004 to facilitate a gradual transition to renewable sources 
of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs 
for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal.  
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (including energy from 
photovoltaic technologies and solar water-heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane 
from the anaerobic decomposition of organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment 
plant; geothermal, including energy generated through geothermal exchange from or 
thermal energy avoided by, groundwater or a shallow grand source; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified renewable sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than  
30 megawatts; poultry litter-to-energy; thermal energy from a thermal biomass system; and 
raw or treated wastewater used as a heat source or sink for heating or cooling. Tier 2 
includes only hydroelectric power (other than pump storage generation). 
 
Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025 removed waste-to-energy and refuse-derived fuel from RPS 
eligibility. The exclusion generally applies to all RPS compliance years starting on or after 
January 1, 2025, except for a facility owned by a public instrumentality of the State  
(i.e., Montgomery County), which applies beginning July 1, 2026. Waste-to-energy was 
not previously defined in statute or regulation, but annual RPS compliance reports 
categorized “waste-to-energy” in statute as “municipal solid waste.”  
 
For additional information on the State’s RPS, see the Appendix – Renewable Energy 
Portfolio Standard. 
 
Federal Interim Guidance on the Destruction and Disposal of Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances and Materials Containing Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl 
Substances – Version 2 (2024) 
 
As part of its comprehensive national strategy to combat PFAS pollution, called the 
“Strategic Roadmap,” EPA has taken actions to restrict, remediate, and research PFAS 
contamination and impacts. To that end, EPA has taken several steps under numerous 
federal laws designed to protect human health. As one of several provisions addressing 
PFAS pollution under the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1572/ Page 3 
Congress required EPA to publish interim guidance on the destruction and disposal of 
PFAS substances and PFAS-containing materials, including aqueous film-forming foam, 
soil and biosolids, textiles, landfill leachate, and solid, liquid, or gas waste streams. 
 
In response, EPA published initial guidance information on the destruction of PFAS 
substances in 2020 and subsequently published Interim Guidance on the Destruction and 
Disposal of Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances and Materials Containing 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances – Version 2 (2024), which is available on 
its website. The interim guidance identifies currently available methods on the destruction 
and disposal of PFAS substances and PFAS-containing materials that are not consumer 
products. The guidance document includes information about thermal treatment of PFAS 
through permitted hazardous waste combustors, such as commercial incinerators, and the 
current state of science and associated uncertainties for thermal destruction. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund  
 
The Strategic Energy Investment Fund’s (SEIF) primary sources of revenue are the ACP 
revenues generated under Maryland’s RPS and proceeds from the sale of carbon dioxide 
emissions allowances under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative. Under the RPS, 
electric companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy 
credits (RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each 
year or else pay an ACP equivalent to their shortfall. The ACP revenues paid into SEIF are 
used for (1) several efforts that fund renewable and clean energy deployment;  
(2) administrative expenses of MEA, which administers SEIF; and (3) refunds or credits to 
residential distribution customers authorized under Chapters 625 and 626. 
 
State Revenues:  SEIF revenues from ACPs decrease by an indeterminate amount to the 
extent that waste-to-energy facilities that meet the bill’s requirements to be considered a 
Tier 1 renewable source produce RECs that electricity suppliers use, instead of ACPs, to 
comply with the Tier 1 RPS requirement. The extent to which the bill results in a decrease 
in ACP revenues, or when any such decrease may occur, cannot be reliably estimated at 
this time. No existing waste-to-energy facilities in the PJM region meet all six of the criteria 
established by the bill, and, on average, it takes 8 to 12 years for a new generation plant 
with this type of generation to produce energy. Accordingly, the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect SEIF revenues in the short term. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, if the amount of electricity sales in the State when Tier 1 
waste-to-energy RECs become available is similar to current electricity sales 
(approximately 56.2 million megawatt-hours in calendar 2024) and the applicable ACP is 
$22.35 per megawatt-hour (the statutory ACP in 2030 and future years) at that time, 
assuming electricity suppliers use an amount of Tier 1 waste-to-energy RECs equivalent 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1572/ Page 4 
to 1% of overall electricity sales to meet the Tier 1 RPS requirement, instead of ACPs, 
SEIF revenues decrease by approximately $12.6 million annually.  
 
Additional Comments:  Electric utility rates may be affected as a result of the bill’s 
inclusion of “waste-to-energy” as a Tier 1 renewable source for purposes of the RPS. The 
extent to which the bill results in a decrease or increase in rates cannot be reliably estimated 
at this time. In any event, electric utility customers, including the State, local governments, 
and small businesses, are affected by any changes in rates that may result from the bill. 
However, for the reasons discussed above, any impact is not anticipated to occur in the 
short term. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Energy Administration; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Public Service Commission; Maryland Environmental Service; Northeast Maryland Waste 
Disposal Authority; Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Andrés López Esquerra  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1572/ Page 5 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Electric 
companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy credits 
(RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each year 
or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. 
Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely through RECs, with 
negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that has not been the 
case more recently. Generally, the Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for 
purposes related to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2026, the requirements are 38.0% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 8.0% from solar 
and 0.50% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 
14.5% from solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1572/ Page 6 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a five-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the  
Generation Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by  
PJM Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of 
RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water‑heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; thermal energy from a thermal biomass system; and raw or treated 
wastewater used as a heat source or sink for heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large 
hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from Tier 1 
beginning in 2022, although some black liquor RECs remain eligible through the duration 
of certain contracts. Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025 removed waste-to-energy and 
refuse-derived fuel from RPS eligibility. The exclusion generally applies to all RPS 
compliance years starting on or after January 1, 2025, except for a facility owned by a 
public instrumentality of the State (i.e., Montgomery County), which applies beginning 
July 1, 2026. 
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $616.9 million in 2024:  $254.7 million 
for 7.0 million RECs and $362.3 million in ACPs. This continues a multi-year trend of 
increasing overall compliance costs, reliance on ACPs, and REC prices. Of note,  
2024 continues the trend of 2023 that ACPs have been used in a significant way for general  
Tier 1 compliance. In fact, 2024 had the fewest RECs retired since 2014. ACP prices were 
in many instances less expensive than REC prices and, as a result, suppliers chose to pay 
the ACP rather than retire RECs. Compliance costs and REC prices for the most recent 
five-year period are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1572/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2020-2024 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
RECs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$99.8  
$187.3  
$246.5  
$124.9  
$90.1  
Tier 1 Solar 
122.9 
144.4 
101.4 
109.6 
150.4 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
0.1 
2.2 
Tier 2  
0.4 
1.0 
4.4 
9.3 
12.0 
RECs Subtotal 
$223.1  
$332.7  
$352.3  
$243.8  
$254.7  
ACPs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1  
$0.0  
$0.2  
$0.7  
$262.4  
$319.4  
Tier 1 Solar 
0.0 
76.9 
85.9 
56.0 
37.2 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.6 
4.4 
Tier 2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
1.3 
ACPs Subtotal 
$0.1  
$77.1  
$86.6  
$320.4  
$362.3 
Total 
$223.2  
$409.8  
$438.9  
$564.2  
$616.9  
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$8.24  
$14.36  
$17.80  
$24.61 
$27.09  
Tier 1 Solar 
$66.10 
$72.59 
$57.80 
$56.67 
$58.56 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
$94.47 
$94.04 
Tier 2 
$1.06 
$6.45 
$7.42 
$10.50 
$11.16 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
n/a:  not applicable 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The post-2022 geothermal system 
carve-out became effective in 2023. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Approximately 45% of RECs used for compliance in 2024 came from in-state resources, 
up from 35% in 2023. RECs derived from three fuel types, solar (43.4%), black liquor 
(16.2%), and wind (15.1%), were the predominant sources of Tier 1 compliance in 2024. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1572/ Page 8 
Maryland facilities generated approximately 5.7 million RECs in 2024:  1.5 million Tier 1 
nonsolar RECs, 2.4 million Tier 1 SRECs, and 1.8 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can 
be used for compliance in both Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are 
geographic and energy source restrictions. 
 
Related Studies and Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2024, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
PPRP’s supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a 
goal of 100% by 2040 can be found here. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also issued an RPS report in 2025, which can be 
found here. The report contains additional detail on the program, significant statutory 
changes, and visualizations of planned and actual RPS percentage requirements over time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8