START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1509 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1509 
(Delegate Roberts) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Financial Institutions - Mortgage Servicers - Insurance Proceeds 
 
 
This bill requires a mortgage servicer to deposit insurance proceeds received due to damage 
to a dwelling or residential real estate into a “loss draft account” with a simple interest rate 
of at least 2%. The bill establishes additional requirements and regulations for mortgage 
servicers regarding:  (1) notifications to consumers; (2) handling of interest earnings; 
(3) disbursement of interest earnings, as specified; and (4) disbursement fees. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) can handle enforcement with 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Loss Draft Accounts 
 
A “loss draft account” is an account in which a mortgage servicer holds insurance proceeds 
pending a repair or rebuilding of residential real estate that has been damaged. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1509/ Page 2 
Within five business days of receiving insurance proceeds, a mortgage servicer must 
deposit the insurance proceeds into a loss draft account in a Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation insured banking institution with a simple interest rate of at least 2% per annum. 
 
Management of Interest Earnings 
 
A borrower must elect to have the interest earnings (1) credited to the loss draft account or 
(2) paid directly to them. 
 
A mortgage servicer must allow the borrower to select at least two of the following  
four methods for disbursement of interest earnings (if the borrower chooses to have the 
interest paid directly to them):   
 
 
wire transfer; 
 
direct deposit; 
 
cashier’s check delivered by mail; or 
 
certified check delivered by mail. 
 
A mortgage servicer must disperse any interest earnings within 10 days after receiving 
notice from a borrower, as specified. 
 
A mortgage servicer may not charge a fee for the disbursement of interest earnings via 
direct deposit, but may charge the borrower a fee for the disbursement of interest earnings 
via wire transfer. However, the fee may not:   
 
 
be unreasonable; 
 
have the effect of lowering the interest earnings to an amount that would equate to 
an interest rate of less than 2%; and 
 
exceed the actual costs incurred by the mortgage servicer for the disbursement. 
 
Required Notification to Borrowers 
 
Within 10 business days of receiving insurance proceeds, a mortgage servicer must notify 
the borrower, either electronically or by mail, of the:   
 
 
amount of insurance proceeds held in the loss draft account; 
 
the borrower’s right to receive the interest earnings; 
 
disbursement options; 
 
applicable fees; and 
 
the time frame for receiving the disbursement. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1509/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Dwelling” means a residential structure or mobile home that contains one to four family 
housing units or individual units of condominiums or cooperatives. 
 
A “dwelling” does not include a residential structure or mobile home unless the residential 
structure of mobile home, or at least one unit contained in the residential structure of mobile 
home is owner-occupied. 
 
A “mortgage lender” means any person who (1) is a mortgage broker; (2) makes a mortgage 
loan to any person; or (3) is a mortgage servicer. A “mortgage lender” does not include 
(1) a financial institution that accepts deposits and is regulated under Title 3, 4, 5, or 6 of 
the Financial Institutions Article; (2) the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation; 
(3) the Federal Nation Mortgage Association; (4) the Government National Mortgage 
Association; (5) any person engaged exclusively in the acquisition of all or any portion of 
a mortgage loan under any federal, State, or local governmental program of mortgage loan 
purchases; or (6) an affiliated insurance producer-mortgage loan originator, as specified. 
 
“Residential real estate” means any owner-occupied real property located in Maryland on 
which a dwelling is constructed or intended to be constructed. 
 
Escrow Accounts, Generally 
 
An “escrow account” is an expense or escrow account, which tends to protect the security 
of a loan by the accumulation of funds for the payment of taxes, insurance premiums, or 
other expenses. 
 
Any bank, savings bank, or savings and loan association in the State that makes a loan to 
a borrower secured by a first mortgage on residential property, and creates an 
escrow account in connection with the loan, must pay interest to the borrower on the funds 
at an annual rate that is no less than the weekly average yield on United States Treasury 
securities, as specified. Among other things, interest on the funds must be paid to the 
borrower annually by crediting the interest to the escrow account, as specified. 
 
Generally, after a mortgage has been fully paid the remaining balance of the 
escrow account within a mortgage servicer’s control must be returned to the borrower. 
 
The Office of Financial Regulation 
 
OFR is responsible for licensing and regulating mortgage lenders, brokers, servicers and 
loan originators, and other financial institutions. The office also supervises and regulates 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1509/ Page 4 
State-chartered financial institutions including State-chartered banks, credit unions, and 
trust companies. Supervision includes periodic on-site evaluations as well as off-site 
monitoring programs. The office responds to consumer complaints and oversees retail 
credit accounts, retail installment contracts, and credit grantor contracts. 
 
When approving a mortgage lender licensee, OFR must determine if the licensee is in good 
standing with their primary state or federal regulator (including OFR for licensees) and is 
in material compliance with applicable State and federal law. OFR must notify a mortgage 
lender licensee of approval in writing. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Mortgage servicers that are small businesses may lose revenue 
from interest earnings and incur additional costs under the bill to create and manage new 
loss draft accounts and set up payment mechanisms for the interest accrued. However, they 
may charge a fee for any disbursals made by wire transfer. 
 
Additional Comments:  Generally, when processing an insurance claim for a mortgaged 
property, an insurance company may issue the property owner a check with the mortgage 
servicer as a payee. This insurance check is sometimes referred to as a “loss draft” check. 
Because the mortgaged property is collateral on the loan, the mortgage servicer has an 
insurable interest in the property. Each mortgage servicer may have different regulations 
governing how and when a loss draft check is endorsed and sent back to the property owner. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4