START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1599 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1599 
(Delegate Jacobs, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Chesapeake Bay Enhancement Program - Established 
 
   
This bill establishes a Chesapeake Bay Enhancement Program in the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) to provide funding for oyster propagation and replenishment projects 
that mitigate the effects on the State’s oyster population of transportation projects that 
maintain or expand the Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore (including dredging and 
specified construction or maintenance). For fiscal 2028 and each fiscal year thereafter, the 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $2.0 million to the 
program from the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF). 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  TTF expenditures increase by up to $2.0 million annually beginning in  
FY 2028, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute requires DNR to take measures, which in its judgment seem best 
calculated to increase the productivity or utility of oyster resources in the State, including 
(1) identifying and using effective methods of cleaning diseased oyster bars; (2) providing 
clean shell for the bars; (3) using hatchery produced oysters to replant sites; and 
(4) applying for a permit to dredge buried oyster shells.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1599/ Page 2 
DNR and the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) indicate that they have had 
a formal agreement for approximately 30 years under which MDOT provides funding to 
DNR for oyster recovery/reseeding efforts – titled (in its current form) the Agreement 
Between the Maryland Department of Transportation and the Maryland Department of 
Natural Resources for the Chesapeake Bay Enhancement Program (Oyster Recovery).  
 
The agreement has been modified and extended numerous times – most recently in  
April 2022, which extended the term of the agreement through June 30, 2026, and included 
the following language:   
 
“MDOT shall pay to DNR the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000) 
annually. These funds shall be used by DNR solely for the activities that 
support oyster recovery within the Maryland Waters of the Chesapeake Bay. 
To the greatest extent practicable DNR shall ensure that no less than  
nine hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($925,000) shall be spent annually 
on oyster propagation and replenishment efforts through 2027. DNR shall 
coordinate annually with the county oyster committees and Maryland oyster 
harvesters on the enhanced funding for the public fishery that may be spent 
on oyster replenishment plantings, activities, and projects.” 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Fiscal 2027 
 
While the bill establishes the Chesapeake Bay Enhancement Program in statute on  
October 1, 2026, this analysis assumes that the bill does not materially affect DNR’s oyster 
restoration efforts, or State finances, in fiscal 2027. The purpose of the program – to 
provide funding for oyster propagation and replenishment projects that mitigate the effects 
of transportation projects that maintain or expand the Helen Delich Bentley Port of 
Baltimore – appears intended to be primarily achieved through the mandated 
appropriations of TTF funding beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
For context regarding DNR’s existing oyster restoration efforts, the Governor’s FY 2027 
Budget Highlights (Appendix I) reflect a total of $8.2 million in funding for oyster 
restoration efforts under the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced. 
 
Fiscal 2028 and Future Years 
 
TTF expenditures increase by up to $2.0 million annually in fiscal 2028 and future years, 
reflecting the difference, if any, between (1) the $2.0 million in TTF funding required under 
the bill to be included in the budget bill for each fiscal year and (2) TTF funding that MDOT 
provides to DNR in those fiscal years in the absence of the bill. This estimate assumes that:   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1599/ Page 3 
 
the $2.0 million annual mandated appropriation under the bill effectively codifies 
(or replaces) any funding that is otherwise provided to DNR by MDOT for oyster 
propagation and replenishment activities in the absence of the bill; and 
 
the funding under the bill can be used for purposes similar to those for which DNR 
has used MDOT funding to date (and would in the future), which includes use of a 
portion of the funding for personnel costs of staff working on oyster restoration 
efforts (if the funding under the bill cannot be used to support those personnel costs, 
other special or general fund expenditures increase to cover those costs).  
 
As mentioned under Current Law, the current formal agreement between DNR and MDOT 
ends June 30, 2026. DNR indicates that the two agencies are currently communicating 
about funding going forward, for fiscal 2027 and potentially future years; however, the 
level of funding in those years is uncertain at this time.  
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent the bill increases funding for oyster propagation and 
replenishment efforts in comparison to funding in the absence of the bill, small business 
oyster harvesters may meaningfully benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 558 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3