START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1527 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1527 
(Delegate Arikan) 
Health 
 
 
Complementary and Alternative Health Care - Practice Authorized 
(Complementary and Alternative Health Care Practice Act) 
 
   
This bill authorizes an individual to practice “complementary or alternative health care” 
without obtaining a license, certification, or other authorization under the Health 
Occupations Article. A practitioner of complementary or alternative health care must 
(1) provide every client with specified written notice; (2) obtain signed acknowledgement 
that the client has received the notice; (3) retain the acknowledgment for at least two years; 
and (4) provide the client with a copy of the acknowledgment. An individual acting within 
the scope of a license, certificate, or other authorization under the Health Occupations 
Article is not subject to these requirements. Unless otherwise licensed, certified, or 
authorized, an individual practicing complementary or alternative health care may not 
(1) represent to the public that the individual is a licensed health care practitioner; 
(2) recommend discontinuation of prescribed medical treatment; (3) perform surgery; 
(4) expose another to x-ray radiation; (5) set a fracture; (6) prescribe or dispense a 
prescription drug or controlled substance; or (7) manipulate a spine or other joint. The bill 
may not be construed to waive or limit any common law or statutory claim for relief that a 
person may bring against a complementary or alternative health care practitioner.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Department of Health (MDH) special fund expenditures increase 
by at least $244,300 beginning in FY 2027 for staff, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
244,300 
279,300 
292,800 
306,300 
319,800 
Net Effect 
($244,300) 
($279,300) 
($292,800) 
($306,300) 
($319,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1527/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Complementary or alternative health care” includes acupressure; 
anthroposophy; aromatherapy; ayurveda; cranial sacral therapy; culturally traditional 
healing practices; detoxification practices and therapies; energetic healing; polarity 
therapy; folk practices; healing practices using food, food supplements, nutrients, and the 
physical forces of heat, cold, water, touch, and light; Gerson therapy; colostrum therapy; 
healing touch; herbology or herbalism; homeopathy; iridology; bodywork; meditation; 
mind-body healing practices; reflexology and reiki; traditional naturopathy; noninvasive 
instrumentalities; traditional Oriental practices; qigong; and energy healing. 
 
The written notice provided to clients must contain (1) the name, title, business address, 
and telephone number of the practitioner; (2) a statement indicating whether the 
practitioner holds a license, certificate, or other authorization issued by a health 
occupations board; (3) a description of the service that the practitioner provides; and 
(4) any educational credential, training, experience, or other qualification held by the 
practitioner. 
 
The bill adds exceptions to the requirement to be licensed (or certified) by 19 or the 
20 health occupations boards for an individual practicing alternative or complementary 
medicine. Exhibit 1 lists the exceptions made under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1527/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1  
Exceptions to Licensure 
 
Board 
Exempt From Requirement to Be Licensed to Practice 
Acupuncture  
Acupuncture 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid  
  Dispensers, Speech-Language 
  Pathologists, and Music Therapists 
Audiology, hearing aid dispensing, speech-language pathology, or 
music therapy, or assist in the practice of speech-language pathology 
or audiology 
 
Chiropractic  
Chiropractic 
Dental  
Dentistry, dental hygiene, dental radiation technology 
Dietetic Practice 
Dietetics 
Massage Therapy  
Massage therapy 
Nursing 
Registered nursing, licensed practical nursing, advanced practice 
registered nursing, nursing assistant, dialysis technician, medication 
technician, electrology (including teach an electrology education 
program), direct-entry midwifery, and certified midwifery 
 
Long-Term Care Administrators 
Nursing home administrator or assisted living manager 
Occupational Therapy  
Occupational therapy or limited occupational therapy 
Optometry 
Optometry 
Pharmacy 
Pharmacy, pharmacy technician, registered pharmacy intern 
Physical Therapy  
Physical therapy or limited physical therapy 
Physicians 
Medicine, respiratory care, radiation therapy, radiography, nuclear 
medicine technology, radiology assistance, polysomnography, 
athletic training, perfusion, naturopathic medicine, genetic 
counseling, physician assistant 
 
Podiatric  
Podiatry 
Professional Counselors and 
  Therapists 
Alcohol and drug counseling, marriage and family therapy, 
professional art therapy, professional counseling, behavior analysis 
 
Psychologists 
Psychology or psychology associate 
Social Work Examiners 
Social work or clinical social work 
Residential Child Care Program  
  Professionals 
 
Program administrator or residential child and youth practitioner 
Environmental Health Specialists 
Environmental health specialist 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1527/ Page 4 
Current Law:  Twenty health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating 
various health professions in Maryland. With specified exceptions, an individual must be 
licensed, certified, registered, or permitted by the respective health occupations board 
before the individual may practice in the State. Licensure, certification, registration, and 
permit requirements vary by profession but typically require, among other things, specified 
education and experience, passage of a national and/or State examination, and a criminal 
history records check.  
 
Under most health occupations boards, an individual may not practice, attempt to practice, 
or offer to practice a health occupation unless licensed, certified, or registered by the 
appropriate board. Additionally, an individual may not misrepresent to the public that the 
individual is authorized to practice the health occupation in the State. An individual who 
violates these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to a fine and/or 
imprisonment, as well as a civil fine.  
 
State Expenditures:  Some health occupations boards advise that the bill may lead to more 
complaints requiring investigations. To handle complaints, the Maryland Board of 
Pharmacy (MBOP) and the Maryland Board of Physicians (MBP) advise that they each 
require one investigator and additional legal support. Thus, MDH special fund expenditures 
increase by $244,281 total in fiscal 2027, which reflects both MBP and MBOP staff needs. 
 
Several other boards indicated that the bill would have no fiscal impact. To the extent that 
future need arises for investigative or legal staff to handle complaints, special fund 
expenditures for other health occupations boards may increase by an indeterminate amount 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027.  
 
Board of Physicians 
 
MBP special fund expenditures increase by $125,559 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one full‑time investigator and one part-time (50%) legal counsel to handle any complaints 
related to misrepresentation or practice. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start‑up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$108,319 
Operating Expenses 
    17,240 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$125,559 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1527/ Page 5 
Board of Pharmacy 
 
MBOP special fund expenditures increase by $118,722 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for 
the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one full‑time investigator and one part-time (50%) counsel to handle any complaints 
related to misrepresentation or practice. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start‑up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$101,482 
Operating Expenses 
    17,240 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$118,722 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Individuals may start small businesses in alternative or 
complementary health care without a license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5