START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1598 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1598 
(Delegates McCaskill and Toles) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Horse Racing - Racetrack Facility Renewal Account Grants - Alterations 
 
 
This bill allows standardbred racing licensees to receive a grant for a capital construction 
plan from the Racetrack Facility Renewal Account (RFRA) without providing and 
expending a matching fund, as required under current law. The bill requires a racing 
licensee that receives the grant without providing and expending a matching fund to 
conduct live racing in the State for at least 10 years after completion of the capital 
construction plan. The Maryland Racing Commission (MRC) must calculate, on a pro rata 
basis, and recapture grant funds if the licensee does not conduct live racing in the State for 
at least 10 years as required. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill allows a standardbred racing licensee to access RFRA funds 
without providing matching funds but does not alter the overall funding for RFRA. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except for the video lottery facility in Allegany County, 1% of video lottery 
terminal (VLT) proceeds from each video lottery facility is distributed to RFRA, which is 
under the authority of MRC, for the first 16 years of operations at each video lottery facility. 
Grants from RFRA are provided to racing licensees for racetrack facility capital 
construction and improvements. MRC must allocate 80% of RFRA funds to the 
thoroughbred tracks (Pimlico Race Course, Laurel Park, and the racecourse in Timonium) 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1598/ Page 2 
and 20% to the standardbred tracks (Rosecroft Raceway and Ocean Downs Race Course). 
The amount of VLT proceeds distributed to RFRA for the standardbred tracks is estimated 
at $2.4 million in both fiscal 2027 and 2028. The current RFRA balance is $17.1 million. 
 
Generally, in order to obtain a grant, a holder of a license to hold a race meeting in the 
State must submit a capital construction plan to MRC and provide matching funds. After a 
grant has been provided, MRC must, in consultation with the Department of 
General Services, monitor the implementation of the approved capital construction plan 
and make provisions for the recapture of funds under specified circumstances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 762 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2