START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1585 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1585 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation - Major Information Technology 
Development Projects - Project Management 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) to 
participate on the project management team for a major information technology 
development project (MITDP) by working with the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT), State agencies, or vendors. On a pilot basis and as a demonstration 
project, MEDCO must serve as the primary project manager on an MITDP on behalf of a 
unit of State government, as specified. The bill also requires MEDCO to evaluate the 
feasibility of using alternative financing mechanisms for MITDPs; MEDCO must submit 
a report summarizing its findings and recommendations for financing MITDPs to the 
Secretary of Information Technology and General Assembly by December 1, 2026. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect assumed for FY 2026. Nonbudgeted expenditures for MEDCO 
may increase beginning in FY 2027 for operating costs associated with project 
management of MITDPs depending, in the short-term, on the project ultimately selected 
for the pilot demonstration required by the bill. MEDCO can likely complete the required 
study using existing budgeted resources. DoIT can handle the bill’s requirements using 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1585/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MEDCO is authorized to participate on the project management team for 
a MITDP by working with DoIT, State agencies, or vendors on: 
 
 
defining the scope of the project; 
 
managing the budget and schedule for the project; 
 
identifying and mitigating risks; 
 
providing transparency on the status of the project; and 
 
successful delivery and implementation of the project.  
 
By July 1, 2026, MEDCO must report to the General Assembly on the identification of the 
demonstration project, including appropriate details about the project. By October 1, 2026, 
and quarterly thereafter until project completion, MEDCO must report to the Secretary and 
General Assembly on the progress of the identified project, including:  
 
 
a summary of any problems or issues with the demonstration project MEDCO 
identifies; 
 
a review of the initial IT project request and whether the estimates made are 
reasonable, supported, and in alignment with the status of the project; 
 
documentation of changes to project scope, schedule, or costs, and the justification 
for and reasonableness of those changes; 
 
documentation of the qualifications of the employees and vendors; and  
 
identification of potential problems that may develop with the project.  
 
MEDCO’s evaluation of alternative financing mechanisms required by the bill must 
include funding mechanisms used in other states that could be used in Maryland.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Major Information Technology Development Projects 
 
For a project to be considered a MITDP, it must (1) be estimated to cost at least  
$5.0 million; (2) support critical business functions associated with the public health, 
education, safety, or financial well-being of the citizens of Maryland; or (3) be determined 
to require special attention and consideration by the Secretary of Information Technology 
due to specified reasons. 
 
MITDPs are generally funded through the Information Technology Investment Fund 
(ITIF). In order to request funding for a project from ITIF, a State agency must follow a 
specified statutory process. The Secretary of Information Technology must review the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1585/ Page 3 
requests and, with the advice of the Secretary of Budget and Management, approve projects 
and specifications for consistency with all statewide plans, polices, and standards, 
including a systems development life cycle plan.  
 
Chapters 845 and 846 of 2025 made various changes to the statutory framework governing 
the oversight of MITDPs by DoIT. Notably and among various other requirements, the 
Acts created within DoIT the (1) Maryland Office of Digital Experience (MODE);  
(2) Maryland Digital Service Unit (MDSU); and (3) Major Information Technology 
Development Project Oversight Division (MIDPOD).  
 
 
MODE must (1) provide oversight, leadership, intervention, and strategic 
modernization for MITDPs, including large-scale, high impact, multi-agency 
projects, in a transparent manner that ensures a positive return on investment and 
(2) direct the development of modernized systems in a specified manner; 
 
as a unit within MODE, MDSU must collaborate with units of State government to 
support improved service delivery to State residents and agency staff to implement 
user-centered design, software development, and project management best 
practices; and  
 
as a division within MODE, MIDPOD must consult with DoIT to (1) adopt new 
standards with which MITDPs are required to comply, as specified; (2) monitor the 
performance of project management teams for MITDPs, as specified; and  
(3) provide expertise, support, and intervention as necessary for project 
management teams to successfully implement projects, as specified.  
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation 
 
MEDCO is a nonbudgeted, quasi-public entity created in 1984 by the General Assembly 
to, among other purposes, promote economic development in the State through ownership, 
financing, and development of real and personal property projects. MEDCO purchases or 
develops property that is leased to others and makes loans to companies throughout the 
State to maintain or develop facilities. MEDCO has broad powers to finance projects and 
most often is a conduit issuer of tax-exempt revenue bonds to an eligible tax-exempt 
borrower. MEDCO has also issued its bonds to finance its own projects, which it owns and 
operates. MEDCO-owned projects consist mostly of student housing projects. Generally, 
MEDCO debt is not debt of the State, and there is no implied State guaranty or State 
obligation to protect bondholders from losses.  
 
State Expenditures:  MEDCO advises, and the Department of Legislative Services 
concurs, that the bill’s initial impact on MEDCO’s operations and finances depends on the 
MITDP selected for the pilot demonstration required by the bill. While MEDCO has 
experience and expertise with project management in a variety of fields, most notably real 
estate, it may not have the technical knowledge needed to effectively manage a large IT 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1585/ Page 4 
project. As a result, MEDCO may need additional expert staff or contractual assistance, 
increasing its nonbudgeted expenditures accordingly.  
 
Moreover, depending on the results of the pilot and MEDCO’s involvement in MITDP 
management after the pilot is completed, any additional staff and/or contractual assistance 
engaged by MEDCO may need to become permanent; however, any such impact cannot 
be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 787 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Economic 
Development Corporation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4