START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1596 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1596 
(Delegate Qi) 
Economic Matters and Appropriations 
 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Maryland Growth Initiative - 
Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Growth Initiative in the Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation (TEDCO) to support the growth of start-up companies in the 
State. The bill also establishes a related special fund – the Maryland Growth Initiative 
Fund. The Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million 
for the initiative. TEDCO is authorized to adopt regulations to implement the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million 
annually beginning in FY 2028 due to the mandated appropriation; special fund  
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0)   
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1596/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Purpose of the Initiative 
 
The purpose of the initiative is to support the growth of start-up companies in the State by 
(1) identifying promising companies in the phase between early start-up development and 
scaling; (2) providing access to experts in regulatory processes, manufacturing, clinical 
trials, market launches, and other areas of business; (3) facilitating private investment in 
companies; (4) assisting in the acquisition of infrastructure, including office space, 
equipment, and support for product development; and (5) providing technical and business 
expertise. 
 
Maryland Growth Initiative Fund 
 
The Maryland Growth Initiative Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund with the purpose of 
providing postseed and Series A funding to qualified businesses in the State to scale up 
without needing to relocate. TEDCO must administer the fund. 
 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, public and private 
investment funds, interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted 
for the benefit of the fund. The fund may only be used for the purpose of the fund (as 
described above) and to pay the costs necessary to administer the initiative. Any investment 
earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund. 
 
The mandated funding provided under the bill must be used to supplement, not supplant, 
any funds that would otherwise be provided to the initiative. 
 
Curated List of Companies 
 
The initiative must create a curated list of companies in the State that are between the start-
up and scaling phases. Priority must be given to companies that are (1) current or prior 
recipients of funding from the Maryland Innovation Initiative (see Current Law);  
(2) current or prior recipients of funding from any other program administered by TEDCO; 
and (3) minority business enterprises. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1596/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation – Generally 
 
TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 
to enhance the transfer of technology from universities and federal laboratories to the 
private sector and foster the growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. 
TEDCO investments must meet statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a 
business to have and subsequently maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs 
typically assist companies based on a company’s stage of development, from early stage 
and technology transfer to growth stage. 
 
Maryland Innovation Initiative 
 
Chapter 450 of 2012 established the Maryland Innovation Initiative and a related  
special fund in TEDCO to promote technology transfer from Maryland’s public and private 
nonprofit research institutions to the private sector. The initiative is authorized to provide 
grant funding or equity investment financing to a qualifying university, qualifying 
university-based entrepreneur, or other start-up entity to promote the commercialization of 
technology developed in whole or in part by a qualifying university. Chapter 217 of 2025 
established the Maryland Innovation Initiative Institution Partnership Extension Program. 
Administered by the Maryland Innovation Initiative, the purpose of the extension program 
is to expand opportunities at eligible institutions for technology validation, entrepreneurial 
development, and industry engagement. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
(OSBA, now housed within the Department of Social and Economic Mobility), in 
consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, the Chief Procurement Officer, and the 
Office of the Attorney General. In a year in which there is a delay in establishing the overall 
goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to establish 
biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether to establish 
subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which there is a 
delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. 
 
In August 2013, OSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2026. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1596/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  There is no effect in fiscal 2027. General fund expenditures increase 
by $5.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2028 due to the bill’s mandated appropriation. 
Special fund revenues to the Maryland Growth Initiative Fund – and expenditures from the 
fund – increase commensurately. 
 
The bill explicitly authorizes TEDCO to use the fund to pay the costs necessary to 
administer the initiative. While TEDCO can administer the initiative (and fund) with 
existing staff, TEDCO anticipates using the $5.0 million in available funding each year as 
follows: 
 
 
$1.0 million annually for operating costs – likely involving the use of contractors 
and leveraging existing TEDCO programs – to identify eligible companies, provide 
start-up and business development support services, and handle other programmatic 
and administrative tasks; and 
 
$4.0 million annually to provide investment awards to eligible start-ups, with 
investment awards likely ranging from $500,000 to $1.25 million each. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are start-up companies – in the phase 
between early start-up development and scaling – benefit to the extent they receive support, 
technical and business expertise, and/or investment awards from the initiative. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 763 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4