START OF PAGE 1
HB1520/463928/1

BY: Judiciary Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1520
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Tomlinson” and substitute
“Delegates Tomlinson, Conaway, Simmons, Taylor, and Valentine”; and in lines
5 and 6, strike “altering the allowable exemptions for a debtor proceeding through
bankruptcy;”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, in line 17, strike “DISABLED” and substitute “DISABILITY”.

On pages 1 and 2, strike beginning with “HAVING” in line 17 on page 1 down
through “DEATH” in line 1 on page 2 and substitute “A PHYSICAL OR MENTAL
IMPAIRMENT THAT RESULTS IN A SUBSTANTIAL IMPEDIMENT TO EMPLOYMENT”.

On page 2, strike in their entirety lines 2 and 3; in lines 4, 7, and 8, strike “(4)”,
“(5)”, and “(6)”, respectively, and substitute “(3)”, “(4)”, and “(5)”, respectively; and in
line 28, strike “DISABLED VETERAN” and substitute “DEBTOR WHO IS ELDERLY OR
WHO HAS A DISABILITY”.

On page 3, in line 13, strike “DISABLED” and substitute “WHO HAS A
DISABILITY”.

AMENDMENT NO. 3
On page 5, in lines 15 and 16, strike “, A MOBILE HOME AS DEFINED IN § 8A–
101 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE,”; in line 20, strike “1.”; in lines 20, 22, and
23, in each instance, strike the bracket; in lines 20 and 21, strike “EXCEPT AS
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1520/463928/01 Judiciary Committee
Amendments to HB 1520
Page 2 of 2

PROVIDED IN SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, THE”; in line 24,
strike “$300,000 IN VALUE”; and strike in their entirety lines 25 through 27, inclusive.
END OF PAGE 2