START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1554 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1554 
(Delegates Hornberger and Sample-Hughes) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Electricity for Agriculture Purposes - Study and Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Comptroller’s Office, in consultation with the Public Service 
Commission and PJM Interconnection to study and report on exempting electricity from 
the sales and use tax if that electricity is purchased by a farmer to (1) raise livestock or 
poultry; (2) prepare, irrigate, or tend the soil; or (3) plant, service, harvest, store, clean, dry, 
or transport seeds or crops. The report must be submitted to the General Assembly by 
December 15, 2026, and must include an estimate of the fiscal impact of the sales and use 
tax exemption. An electric company must provide, on request from the Comptroller’s 
Office, aggregate usage and billing information that is determined to be necessary to 
prepare the required report.  The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office may increase in 
FY 2027 to conduct the required study. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State sales and use tax does not apply to a sale of the following items 
for an agricultural purpose:  (1) livestock; (2) feed or bedding for livestock; (3) seed, 
fertilizer, fungicide, herbicide, or insecticide; (4) baler twine or wire; (5) fuel for use in 
farm equipment or a farm tractor; and (6) if bought by a farmer, a container to transport 
farm products that the farmer raises to market; a specified farm vehicle when used in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1554/ Page 2 
farming; a milking machine, when used in farming; fabrication, processing, or service, by 
a sawmill, of wood products for farm use in which the farmer retains title; and farm 
equipment when used to (a) raise livestock; (b) prepare, irrigate, or tend the soil; or 
(c) plant, service, harvest, store, clean, dry, or transport seeds or crops. 
 
Sales and Use Tax 
The general State sales and use tax rate is 6%. Higher sales and use tax rates apply to the 
retail sale of alcoholic beverages and adult-use cannabis, which is taxed at 9% and 12%, 
respectively. 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $6.1 billion in fiscal 2026 and $6.2 billion in fiscal 2027, 
according to the December 2025 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax 
rates in surrounding states and the District of Columbia. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks; 14.95% for transient 
accommodations; 18.0% for motor vehicle parking in commercial 
lots 
Maryland 
6.0%; 9.0% for alcoholic beverages;12.0% for adult-use cannabis 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
* An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, Patrick, and 
Pittsylvania counties, and the City of Danville; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in James City County,  
York County, and Williamsburg (Historic Triangle). The sales and use tax rate for food and personal hygiene 
products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1554/ Page 3 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) the following percentage of 
the remaining sales and use tax revenues: 
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out-of-state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 678 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Public Service Commission; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
Third Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3