START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1537 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1537 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Newborn Screening Program - Metachromatic Leukodystrophy 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to screen for metachromatic 
leukodystrophy (MLD) as part of the State’s Newborn Screening Program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As MDH is currently in the process of implementing screening for MLD 
through the Newborn Screening Program, the bill has no fiscal or operational impact. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDH’s Newborn Screening Program is a statewide system for screening 
all newborn infants in Maryland for certain hereditary and congenital disorders associated 
with severe problems of health or development (except when the parent or guardian of the 
newborn objects). 
 
The program was codified and centralized by Chapter 256 of 2008, which established the 
MDH public health laboratory as the sole laboratory in Maryland allowed to perform the 
screening tests. The system for newborn screening includes laboratory testing, reporting of 
test results, and follow-up activities to facilitate the rapid identification and treatment of an 
affected child. The laboratory is required to screen for 61 first-tier metabolic hereditary 
disorders on all screening specimens collected. These conditions are listed in Maryland 
regulations (COMAR 10.10.13.12). Second-tier tests can only be performed when 
requested by an individual authorized to request a medical laboratory test. MDH is 
required, in consultation with the State Advisory Council on Hereditary and Congenital 
Disorders, to establish fees for newborn screening that do not exceed an amount sufficient 
to cover the administrative, laboratory, and follow-up costs associated with the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1537/ Page 2 
performance of screening tests. Fees are deposited into the Newborn Screening Program 
Fund, a special fund that is administered by the Secretary of Health to cover costs 
associated with performing newborn screening tests. 
 
Chapters 177 and 178 of 2024, among other things, altered the Newborn Screening 
Program to require MDH to implement testing for a core condition listed in the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services’ Recommended Uniform Screening Panel 
(RUSP) within 18 months of its addition to RUSP. If MDH is unable to implement testing 
within this timeframe due to a delay in the procurement of necessary equipment or supplies, 
MDH must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee (now the House Health Committee) on the delay. Specifically, 
MDH must report on the reason for the delay and the anticipated timeline for 
implementation within 15 months of the core condition being added to RUSP and every  
3 months thereafter until testing is implemented. 
 
MLD was added to RUSP in December 2025. Therefore, MDH advises that it is currently 
working to add the test to Maryland’s screening panel. 
 
Additional Comments:  MLD is a rare genetic disorder that causes the buildup of fatty 
substances in cells – especially in the spinal cord, peripheral nerves, and brain. Those with 
MLD have a deficiency of sulfatides, an enzyme that would otherwise help break down the 
fatty substances. Though the disorder can come in three different forms, the infantile form 
is most common. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Mayo Clinic; U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2