START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1578 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1578 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland 
Department of Social and Economic Mobility) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Procurement - Procurement Preferences - Reauthorization and Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) extends the termination date for the Minority Business Enterprise 
(MBE) program by five years to July 1, 2031; (2) repeals existing legislative findings on 
disparity in State contracting and establishes new findings; (3) establishes quarterly 
reporting requirements for specified procurement programs and alters reporting deadlines 
for annual reporting by the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
(OSBA); (4) requires OSBA to develop regulations to review small business certification; 
(5) amends the definition of small business to include joint ventures; and (6) makes 
corresponding adjustments to the termination and due dates for MBE contracting 
requirements and related disparity analyses under current law. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Agencies can handle additional reporting requirements with existing 
resources. The bill is otherwise technical and procedural in nature and has no effect on 
State government finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Social and Economic Mobility (DoSEM) has 
determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment as discussed 
below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1578/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
For a detailed description of the State’s MBE program, please see the Appendix – 
Minority Business Enterprise Program. As the appendix notes, the MBE program is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026. 
 
Legislative Findings 
 
The bill repeals existing legislative findings used to support the MBE program and 
establishes new findings. These findings generally affirm Maryland’s commitment to 
providing equal access to business formation and growth and address the disadvantages 
that minority- and women-owned businesses face. Specific findings, among others, 
include: 
 
 
the elimination of discrimination against minority- and women-owned businesses is 
of paramount importance to the future welfare of all Marylanders and the State; 
 
the General Assembly has accepted and carefully reviewed the 2025 disparity study 
and finds that the study provides a strong basis in evidence demonstrating persistent 
intentional discrimination against minority- and women-owned businesses; 
 
as a result of ongoing discrimination and the present-day effects of past 
discrimination, minority- and women-owned businesses combined continue to be 
significantly underutilized relative to the availability of minorities and nonminority 
women to perform work in the overwhelming majority of the procurement 
categories in which the State does business; 
 
despite the fact that the State has employed, and continues to employ, numerous and 
robust race-neutral remedies, including aggressive outreach and advertising, 
training and education, small business programs, efforts to improve capital, and 
other efforts, there is a strong basis in evidence that discrimination persists even in 
public sector procurement in which these efforts have been employed; 
 
race-neutral efforts will be used to the maximum extent feasible and race-conscious 
measures will be used only where necessary to eliminate discrimination that was not 
alleviated by race-neutral efforts; and 
 
these findings ensure that the operation of the MBE program is consistent with the 
disparity study data and narrowly tailored to the compelling interests of the State. 
 
Annual Reporting of Minority Business Participation 
 
Under current law, within 90 days after the end of the fiscal year, each procurement unit 
must report specified data on minority business participation in State contracts to OSBA 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1578/ Page 3 
and the Office of Minority Business Enterprises in DoSEM. By December 31 of each year, 
OSBA must submit a report summarizing the information the office receives to the Board 
of Public Works (BPW), the Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), and the Joint Committee 
on Fair Practices and State Personnel Oversight. 
 
The bill requires agencies to report their participation data within 60 days after the end of 
the fiscal year. It also changes the deadline for OSBA to submit its report to the 15th day 
of the regular legislative session. Furthermore, except for the quarter in which a unit is 
submitting an annual report, each unit must report quarterly to OSBA (1) MBE 
participation data; (2) MBE program compliance assessments; and (3) any other 
information requested based on criteria established by OSBA. The report that OSBA 
submits to BPW, LPC, and the Joint Committee on Fair Practices and State Personnel 
Oversight may be prepared in conjunction with the annual report OSBA must submit to the 
Governor and General Assembly under the State Government article.  
 
Small Business Certification and Reporting 
 
Under current law, OSBA has established regulations and procedures for compiling and 
maintaining a comprehensive bidder’s list of qualified small businesses that must be posted 
online, but small businesses are generally responsible for self-certifying as a small 
business.  
 
The bill requires OSBA to adopt regulations to establish a certification review process.  
 
As with MBE data, current law requires each procurement unit to submit a report to OSBA 
within 60 days after the enactment of the budget bill that complies with regulations for the 
small business reserve (SBR) program. The regulations require that each unit shall at a 
minimum report on (1) the total number and dollar value of awards the unit made to small 
businesses under designated SBR contracts; (2) the total number and dollar value of awards 
the unit made to small businesses under nondesignated SBR contracts, including purchase 
card procurements; (3) the total dollar value of awards the unit made under procurement 
contracts; and (4) any other such information as required by OSBA. Furthermore, within 
90 days after the end of each fiscal year, each unit must submit a report containing the same 
information to OSBA. By December 31 of each year, OSBA must submit a report 
summarizing the information the Office receives to BPW and LPC. 
 
The bill shortens the number of days after the end of the fiscal year in which each unit must 
report to OSBA to 60 days. It requires units to submit quarterly reports to OSBA, except 
for the quarter in which a unit is submitting an annual report. The quarterly reports must 
report on (1) SBR annual designated and nondesignated achievement awards made and 
(2) any other information requested based on criteria established by OSBA. The bill also 
changes the deadline for OSBA to submit its report to BPW and LPC to the 15th day of the 
regular legislative session. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1578/ Page 4 
Veteran Owned Small Business Reporting 
 
By December 1 of each year, OSBA must report to LPC on (1) the number and dollar value 
of contracts awarded to veteran-owned small business enterprises (VSBEs) under existing 
contracts and (2) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the VSBE program. 
 
The bill changes the deadline for OSBA to submit its report on VSBEs to the 15th day of 
the regular legislative session and allows the report to be prepared in conjunction with the 
annual report OSBA must submit to the Governor and General Assembly under the 
State Government article. Furthermore, it requires each procurement unit to submit a report 
to OSBA within 60 days after the end of the fiscal year and each quarter thereafter. The 
report must include the number and dollar value of contracts awarded to VSBEs under 
existing contracts and any other information requested by OSBA. 
 
Cannabis Licenses 
 
To the extent practicable and authorized by the U.S. Constitution, a cannabis licensee must 
comply with the State’s MBE program, and the State must review the 2025 disparity study 
to evaluate whether application of the MBE program to cannabis licenses would comply 
with federal or constitutional requirements. Within six months after the issuance of a 
cannabis license, OSBA, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), and the Office of 
Social Equity must work with the licensee to establish a clear plan for setting reasonable 
and appropriate MBE participation goals and procedures for the procurement of goods and 
services related to cannabis, including the cultivation, manufacturing, and dispensing of 
cannabis. To the extent practicable, these goals and procedures must be based on current 
MBE laws and regulations.  
 
The bill incorporates the findings and evidence relied on by the General Assembly for the 
continuation of the MBE program with respect to cannabis licenses. It clarifies that in 
evaluating the program for conformity with federal and constitutional requirements, the 
State must use the 2025 disparity study as well as any future disparity studies or related 
analyses. The bill also establishes a July 1, 2031 termination date for the authorization to 
use MBE participation goals and procedures in cannabis licensing.  
 
Offshore Wind Projects 
 
To the extent practicable and authorized by the U.S. Constitution, approved applicants for 
a proposed offshore wind project must comply with the State’s MBE program. Within 
six months of the approval of an offshore wind renewable energy credit (OREC) by the 
Public Service Commission (PSC), OSBA, in consultation with OAG and an approved 
applicant, must establish a clear plan for setting reasonable and appropriate MBE 
participation goals and procedures for each phase of the qualified offshore wind project. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1578/ Page 5 
To the extent practicable, the goals and procedures for offshore wind projects must be 
based on the requirements of the State’s MBE program. Every six months following the 
approval of an OREC application, an approved applicant must submit a report to PSC on 
its progress in establishing and implementing MBE participation goals and procedures. 
These requirements terminate July 1, 2026. 
 
The bill extends the termination date for the authorization to use MBE participation goals 
and procedures in offshore wind projects to July 1, 2031. The bill also extends the deadline 
for the analysis of the disparity study to September 30, 2030. 
 
Public-private Partnerships 
 
To the extent practicable and permitted by the U.S. Constitution, the provisions of the MBE 
program apply to public-private partnerships (P3s). BPW cannot approve a P3 agreement 
until a reporting agency, in consultation with OSBA, OAG, and the private entity, if 
permissible, establishes reasonable and appropriate MBE participation goals and 
procedures for the project, as specified. To the extent practicable, these goals and 
procedures must be based on current MBE laws and regulations. 
 
The bill establishes the termination date for the authorization to use MBE participation 
goals and procedures in P3s to July 1, 2031. The bill also extends the deadline for the 
analysis of the disparity study to September 30, 2030. 
 
Video Lottery Terminals 
 
A video lottery operation applicant or a licensee is subject to the minority business 
participation goal established under current law for any construction related to video lottery 
terminals (VLTs) and for any procurement, including the procurement of equipment and 
ongoing services, related to the operation of VLTs. If a county in which a video lottery 
facility will be located has a higher MBE participation goal than the State, an applicant 
must meet the county’s higher standard to the extent possible. A county in which a 
video lottery facility will be located may impose local business, local minority business 
participation, and local hiring requirements to the extent authorized by local law and 
allowed by the United States Constitution. These requirements terminate July 1, 2026. 
 
The bill extends these requirements to July 1, 2031, to align with the new termination date 
of the MBE program. It also requires an applicant or licensee to put forth a good faith effort 
to meet minority business participation goals. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1578/ Page 6 
Sports Wagering Licensees 
 
To the extent practicable and permitted by the U.S. Constitution, a sports wagering licensee 
must comply with the State’s MBE program. Within six months after the issuance of a 
sports wagering license, OSBA, in consultation with OAG and the sports wagering 
licensee, must establish a clear plan for setting reasonable and appropriate MBE 
participation goals and procedures for the procurement of goods and services related to 
sports wagering, including construction, equipment, and ongoing services. These 
provisions will terminate on July 1, 2026. 
 
The bill extends these requirements to July 1, 2031, to align with the new termination date 
of the MBE program. 
 
Capital Projects 
 
Chapter 728 of 2021, as previously amended, requires OSBA, by July 1, 2026, to establish 
policies and guidelines for the development of MBE contract goals for capital projects that 
receive State capital grants of $3.0 million or more from a miscellaneous grant program, a 
House of Delegates initiative, or a Senate initiative. Following the issuance of policies and 
guidelines, OSBA must – prior to the release of funds to an eligible grant recipient – review 
each project for subcontracting opportunities under the State’s MBE program and, if 
practicable, establish MBE subgoals for the project. Finally, it requires OSBA to report to 
the General Assembly by December 31, 2026, on the establishment of MBE subgoals in 
accordance with the Act. 
 
The bill extends the deadline for OSBA to establish policies and guidelines to July 1, 2031. 
It also extends the deadline for OSBA’s report to the General Assembly to  
December 31, 2031. 
 
State Retirement and Pension System Brokerage and Investment Management 
 
Chapter 641 of 2022, as previously amended, requires MDOT and OSBA, in consultation 
with specified entities, to conduct a study regarding brokerage and investment management 
services used by the State Retirement and Pension System to evaluate whether remedial 
measures to assist minority- and women-owned businesses in those sectors are consistent 
with specified federal or constitutional requirements. MDOT and OSBA must submit the 
findings of their study to LPC by December 31, 2026. The Act also requires GOSBA to 
develop race- and gender-neutral approaches to address the needs of minority and 
women-owned businesses in the brokerage and investment management services industry 
and market. It must submit its report to LPC by December 31, 2026. 
 
The bill extends both reporting deadlines to December 31, 2031. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1578/ Page 7 
Other Provisions 
 
The bill expands the definition of small business to include a joint venture of two or more 
persons associated to carry out a single business activity for a limited purpose or time that 
meets existing criteria for small businesses.  
 
The bill adds the Secretary of Labor or designee to the Governor’s Subcabinet on 
Socioeconomic Procurement Participation, and replaces the Special Secretary of OSBA on 
the Subcabinet with the Secretary of DoSEM. 
 
Background:  Since its enactment in 1978, Maryland’s MBE law has been updated and 
periodically renewed to remain effective and constitutionally defensible. Following the 
landmark Supreme Court ruling in City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. in 1989 and the 
strict scrutiny required in the use of race-based classifications, the State has had to conduct 
periodic disparity studies to analyze whether the MBE program aligns with the basis in 
evidence for discrimination in State contracting. The State’s MBE program now includes 
multiple design features that support narrow tailoring under strict scrutiny, with the 
disparity study acting as the evidentiary basis for the program. Before the 2025 disparity 
study was completed, the State had previously used a disparity study completed in 2017 as 
the basis for the MBE program. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DoSEM determined that extending the applicability of the MBE 
program to additional procurement-related activities may create additional procurement 
and contracting opportunities to small businesses that are certified as MBEs. However, the 
bill primarily extends the MBE program expiration date for procurement-related activities 
that are well-established) under current law, and does not extend the program to any new 
procurement-related activities. Therefore, DLS disagrees with DoSEM’s assessment and 
concludes that the bill has a minimal impact on small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Office of the 
Attorney General; Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1578/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1578/ Page 9 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
(OSBA, now housed within the Department of Social and Economic Mobility or DoSEM), 
in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, the Chief Procurement Officer, and 
the Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. 
 
In August 2013, OSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2026. OSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total + 2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1578/ Page 10 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require OSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, the State periodically conducts a 
disparity study to determine whether there is continued evidence that MBEs are 
underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The most recent disparity study, completed in September 2025, identified continued and 
ongoing disparities in annual wages, business earnings, and business ownership rates for 
minority- and women-owned businesses when compared to nonminority and male-owned 
businesses. The study found that minority-owned businesses in the Maryland Marketplace 
made up 47.4% of all businesses but captured only 17.6% of total sales, while nonminority 
male-owned businesses accounted for 29.9% of businesses and 66.7% of total sales. The 
study likewise identified disparities in the State’s contracting with minority- and 
women-owned businesses, finding that these firms were consistently underutilized relative 
to their availability to perform State contracts. For instance, minority-owned businesses 
overall had an availability rate of 26.1% but were awarded contracts valued at only 
15.2% of the total contract value awarded by the State. Nonminority women-owned 
businesses had an availability rate of 13.7% but were awarded contracts valued at only 
7.1% of the total contract value awarded by the State. According to the analysis, these 
differences are large and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026; Chapters 620 and 621 of 2025, 
which reauthorized the program, also extended the due date for the new disparity study to 
September 2025 to inform the subsequent reauthorization process. As previously noted, 
this study was completed and published by the due date and is expected to serve as the 
empirical basis for the program’s reauthorization. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation 
rates for major Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during 
fiscal 2023 and 2024, the most recent data available; as the exhibit shows, rates can vary 
considerably from year to year. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1578/ Page 11 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2023 and 2024 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Aging 
1.2% 
11.2% 
Agriculture 
3.2% 
6.2% 
Budget and Management 
32.9% 
3.0% 
Commerce 
53.8% 
77.5% 
Education 
11.5% 
21.9% 
Environment 
37.9% 
17.5% 
Executive Department 
4.6% 
2.2% 
General Services 
19.5% 
21.4% 
Health 
8.4% 
12.8% 
Higher Education Commission 
3.0% 
20.9% 
Housing and Community Development 
48.5% 
40.4% 
Human Services 
10.5% 
38.9% 
Information Technology 
14.4% 
23.7% 
Juvenile Services 
6.5% 
15.5% 
Labor 
18.6% 
3.7% 
Military 
22.3% 
27.5% 
Natural Resources 
10.2% 
5.9% 
Planning 
0.0% 
3.9% 
State Police 
20.9% 
12.7% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
6.2% 
28.5% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.1% 
20.4% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
20.2% 
25.1% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
48.5% 
21.0% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
13.1% 
16.4% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
21.7% 
27.0% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
12.0% 
n/a 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
19.4% 
19.8% 
Statewide Total1 
17.9% 
22.0% 
 
MBE:  Minority Business Enterprise 
n/a:  not available 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
Source:  Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1578/ Page 12 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by,  
one or more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own 
it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A “socially disadvantaged individual” is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An “economically disadvantaged 
individual” is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2026 is $2,192,035. 
 
The Office of Minority Business Enterprise (OMBE) handles MBE certification for the 
State. Chapter 605 of 2025 transferred OMBE from the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT), which had been the State’s certification agency, to the new 
DoSEM. However, as procurement regulations have not been updated to reflect this 
transfer, MDOT is still designated as the MBE certification agency in regulations. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1578/ Page 13 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Procurement - Procurement Preferences - Reauthorization and 
Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 1578 
 
PREPARED BY: Davon Gardner  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING  
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
 
__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS  
 
OR  
 
✓ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES  
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS  
 
Small businesses, particularly firms that are cross certified in the State’s socioeconomic 
procurement programs, may experience a moderate positive impact due to the 
reauthorization of the MBE Program. By extending the applicability of the MBE Program 
to additional procurement-related activities, existing or prospective certified firms may 
see increased contracting and subcontracting opportunities throughout Maryland’s 
twenty-four jurisdictions. This would help spur economic development on the local level. 
 

END OF PAGE 13