START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1524 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1524 
(Delegate J. Long) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Labor and Employment - Paid Leave - Attendance at School Functions 
 
 
This bill requires an employer with at least 15 employees and governmental units to 
provide each employee who is a parent with at least 20 hours each year of paid leave to 
attend a school function at the public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school at which 
the employee’s child is enrolled. An employee may not use more than 2 hours of leave 
provided under the bill each month, and the bill specifies other terms and conditions of the 
leave. If the Commissioner of Labor and Industry determines that an employer has violated 
the bill, the commissioner must issue an order compelling compliance with the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expenditures (all funds) may increase, potentially significantly for some 
State agencies, beginning in FY 2027 for overtime costs related to coverage for employees 
using paid leave to attend school functions. State revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2027 for 
overtime costs related to coverage for local government employees using paid leave to 
attend a school function. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland law does not require private-sector employers to provide leave 
to employees to attend a school function. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1524/ Page 2 
Annual and Personal Leave in the State Personnel Management System 
 
Most employees in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), except temporary 
employees, earn annual and personal leave, in addition to sick leave. Annual leave accruals 
are based on the employee’s years of service, which range from a maximum of 80 hours of 
annual leave each year for employees with less than 5 years of service to a maximum of 
200 hours of annual leave each year for employees with at least 20 years of service. Annual 
leave may be used for any reason, upon supervisor approval. State employees in SPMS are 
generally entitled to six days (seven days during a leap year) of personal leave with pay at 
the beginning of the first full pay period of the calendar year. If an employee begins 
employment on or after March 1, the number of personal days is reduced, based on the 
employee’s start date. Personal leave may be used for any purpose, generally, after notice 
is given to the employee’s immediate supervisor. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Maryland Department of Labor anticipates needing to create 
and post on its website a frequently asked questions document for the program and mail 
letters to employers in violation of the bill to compel compliance, which it can do with 
existing resources. 
 
State Agencies 
 
In general, expanding the State’s leave policy does not directly affect State expenditures 
for most State agencies, since regular employee salaries are already budgeted and existing 
annual and personal leave can be used for attending school functions. Additionally, State 
agencies do not generally hire temporary employees when employees are on leave. 
 
However, in limited circumstances, an affected agency may incur coverage costs for 
overtime or a loss of productivity. Overall, State expenditures (all funds) may increase, 
potentially significantly for some State agencies, to provide overtime coverage while 
employees who are parents use up to 2 hours a month, up to 20 hours annually, of paid 
leave to attend a school function. Any such costs are most likely to be incurred by agencies 
with 24/7 facilities, such as hospitals and prisons.  
 
Agencies may need to train human resources employees on the leave for school functions 
policy, and units with independent personnel systems may need to make configuration 
changes to those systems, which they can likely do with existing budgeted resources. 
Implementing a new type of leave creates an administrative burden of creating, testing, 
monitoring, and implementing new rules and regulations. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the effect described above for the State, local government 
expenditures may increase to provide employees who are parents with at least 20 hours 
annually of paid leave to attend a school function to local government employees. The 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1524/ Page 3 
Maryland Association of Counties anticipates the bill to have a significant effect on county 
finances and operations. Additionally, the Maryland Municipal League notes that some 
disruptions to municipal government operations may occur if employees regularly use the 
leave granted under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Employers with at least 15 employees must provide at least  
20 hours of paid leave to employees to use to attend a school function at the public or 
nonpublic elementary or secondary school at which the employee’s child is enrolled. 
Employees’ use of the required leave may be disruptive to the operations and finances of 
small businesses, which are less able than larger companies to provide coverage for absent 
employees. However, any disruptions are limited by the restriction that an employee may 
use only up to 2 hours of this paid leave per month. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); University System of Maryland; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3