START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1504 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1504 
(Delegate Healey) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Highways - Sidewalks and Bicycle Pathways - Construction and Reconstruction 
 
 
This bill requires the State Highway Administration (SHA), in determining funding for the 
construction and reconstruction of sidewalks and bicycle pathways in certain priority 
funding areas, to prioritize projects that are, or are adjacent to, highways that are subject to 
a complete streets policy or another similar Vision Zero program. In addition, for specified 
sidewalk or bicycle pathways – those in certain priority funding areas that are determined 
by SHA to be a substantial public safety risk or significant impediment to pedestrian access 
– SHA may fully fund the cost to acquire the necessary rights-of-way for the projects. 
Finally, the bill requires local governments, when submitting requests for sidewalk or 
bicycle pathways construction or reconstruction projects to SHA, to make the requests in 
annual priority letters for the Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) 
consideration for inclusion in the Consolidated Transportation Program (CTP).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect total Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures 
for sidewalk and bicycle pathway projects but may result in different projects being 
prioritized for funding beginning as early as FY 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances may be affected beginning as 
early as FY 2027, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1504/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Sidewalk and Bicycle Pathway Construction – Generally 
 
Sidewalks must be constructed at the time of construction or reconstruction of an “urban 
highway,” or in response to the request of a local government unless (1) SHA determines 
that the cost or impacts of constructing the sidewalks would be too great in relation to the 
need for them or their probable use or (2) the local government indicates there is no need 
for sidewalks. An “urban highway” is a highway, other than an expressway, that meets 
certain technical specifications, is located within the boundaries of a municipality, and is 
part of the State highway system. 
 
If sidewalks or bicycle pathways are constructed or reconstructed as part of a roadway 
construction or reconstruction project, SHA must fund the sidewalk or bicycle pathway 
construction or reconstruction as a part of the cost of the roadway project. In general, if 
sidewalks or bicycle pathways are constructed or reconstructed in response to a request 
from a local government and the adjacent roadway is not being concurrently constructed 
or reconstructed, the cost to construct or reconstruct the sidewalk or bicycle pathway must 
be shared equally between the State and local governments. However, other provisions 
apply with respect to sidewalks or bicycle pathways constructed or reconstructed within 
sustainable communities and priority funding areas, as discussed below. 
 
If sidewalks or bicycle pathways are being constructed or reconstructed in response to a 
request from a local government and the adjacent roadway is not being concurrently 
constructed or reconstructed, the local government must (1) provide public notice and 
opportunities for community involvement prior to the construction and (2) secure any 
necessary right-of-way that may be needed beyond the right-of-way already owned by the 
State. 
 
After any such sidewalk or bicycle pathway is constructed, it must be maintained and 
repaired by the political subdivision in which it is located. Subject to approval and the 
availability of funds, however, SHA must promptly reimburse a political subdivision for 
any preapproved and documented costs incurred in reconstructing a segment of sidewalk 
or bicycle pathway that has deteriorated to the extent that repair is not practical or desirable 
for public safety. 
 
Sidewalk and Bicycle Pathway Projects – Priority Funding Areas 
 
If a sidewalk or bicycle pathway within an area designated as a priority funding area is 
constructed or reconstructed in response to a request from a local government and the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1504/ Page 3 
adjacent roadway is not being concurrently constructed or reconstructed, and if SHA 
determines that construction would not occur due to insufficient contribution of funds by 
the local government, the cost of the project must be shared as follows:  75% by SHA; and 
25% by the local government. 
 
If a sidewalk or bicycle pathway within an area designated as a priority funding area is 
constructed or reconstructed based on a determination by SHA that a substantial public 
safety risk or significant impediment to pedestrian access exists and the adjacent roadway 
is not being concurrently constructed or reconstructed, then SHA (1) must categorize the 
project as “system preservation” and give corresponding funding priority to the project and 
(2) may fully fund the project. 
 
Neither of these funding requirements apply to sidewalk or bicycle pathways projects in a 
priority funding area that is a sustainable community. Instead, any such project may be 
funded entirely by the State. 
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas  
 
A “sustainable community” is defined as a part of a priority funding area that (1) is 
designated by the Sustainable Growth Subcabinet, as specified; (2) has been designated as 
a Base Realignment and Closure Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated 
a transit-oriented development.  
 
Chapter 759 of 1997 directs State funding for growth-related infrastructure to priority 
funding areas, providing a geographic focus for State investment in growth. Priority 
funding areas are existing communities and places where local governments want State 
investment to support future growth. Growth-related projects include most State programs 
that encourage or support growth and development, such as highways, sewer and water 
construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of new 
office facilities. The Act legislatively designated certain areas as priority funding areas and 
established criteria for locally designated priority funding areas. 
 
Complete Streets Policies 
 
“Complete streets policy” means a policy that provides information for the implementation 
of complete streets design features during the planning, design, construction, and 
reconstruction of a facility. 
 
Chapters 721 and 722 of 2018 established the Complete Streets Program as a competitive 
matching local grant program within MDOT. Under the program, a local government that 
develops a complete streets policy and is certified by MDOT may apply for matching 
grants to finance the design and planning of eligible projects. The stated purpose of the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1504/ Page 4 
program is to encourage local governments to, among other things, adopt and utilize 
complete streets design elements in transportation projects. The stated goals of the 
program, as modified by Chapters 572 and 573 of 2019, include, among other things, 
improving safety, reducing traffic congestion, promoting healthy communities, and 
providing healthy food and other necessities, especially in food deserts. 
 
Once certified by MDOT, a local government may apply for matching grants from the 
program. Grant funds may only be used for costs associated with the implementation of 
the complete streets policy, as specified, and the design and planning of eligible projects, 
which are specified projects that include the addition of or significant repair to facilities 
that provide access for users of multiple modes of transportation. 
 
Vision Zero  
 
The State’s traffic safety program was renamed Vision Zero by Chapter 377 of 2019 and 
is currently referred to as Zero Deaths Maryland. The purpose of Vision Zero is to develop 
strategies to make roadways safer for drivers and passengers of motor vehicles, bicyclists, 
and pedestrians. The goal of Vision Zero is to have zero vehicle-related deaths or serious 
injuries on roadways by 2030. MDOT must designate a coordinator to oversee the 
implementation of Vision Zero throughout the State. In implementing Vision Zero, the 
coordinator must, among other duties, collaborate with other State agencies and local 
authorities, including local transportation agencies, law enforcement agencies, educational 
institutions, and fire and rescue services. 
 
Consolidated Transportation Program 
 
Pursuant to current law, long-term transportation planning in the State is a collaborative 
process designed to consider input from the public, local jurisdictions, Metropolitan 
Planning Organizations, and elected officials. Among the numerous reports, meetings, and 
discussions that take place, the CTP, which is issued annually to the General Assembly, 
local elected officials, and interested citizens, provides a description of projects proposed 
by MDOT for development and evaluation or construction over the next six-year period. 
As part of the CTP process, local governments submit priority letters to MDOT each year 
to request projects for inclusion in the CTP and to generally advise MDOT on local 
transportation issues. 
 
State Expenditures:  While the bill requires the prioritization of sidewalks and bicycle 
pathways projects in certain priority funding areas – and authorizes SHA to fully fund costs 
to acquire rights-of-way for certain projects – the bill does not result in an increase in total 
expenditures, as MDOT’s capital program is fully subscribed. Accordingly, overall TTF 
expenditures are not affected, but the bill may result in different projects receiving funding 
from SHA compared to current law. Any such impact cannot be reliably estimated without 
actual experience under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1504/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the bill may result in different sidewalk and bicycle 
pathways projects receiving funding from SHA compared to current law. Some local 
governments may receive less funding, while others may receive more funding. Also, to 
the extent that SHA fully funds the acquisition of the necessary rights-of-way for any 
projects, affected local governments benefit from a decrease in acquisition costs. 
Accordingly, local government finances may be affected; however, any such impact cannot 
be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill. 
 
The bill’s requirement that requests from local governments for sidewalk and bicycle 
pathways projects be submitted in annual priority letters to MDOT can likely be handled 
using existing resources and is not anticipated to affect the amount of funding provided by 
SHA to local governments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 628 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Baltimore City; 
Harford and Montgomery counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5