START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1508 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1508 
(Delegate Nawrocki, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
State Highway Administration - Highway Work Permits - Notice 
 
   
This bill requires the State Highway Administration (SHA), on receipt of an application 
for a permit to complete specified types of work on a State highway, to immediately 
provide notice of the application to each member of the General Assembly who represents 
the State legislative district in which the proposed work is to be performed. The notice 
must include (1) the name of the applicant; (2) the location of the proposed work; (3) the 
expected starting date for the proposed work; and (4) a brief description of the nature of 
the proposed work. In addition, the notice must be submitted in accordance with  
§ 2-1257 of the State Government Article. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase, likely by several 
hundred thousand dollars annually beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
State Highway Work Permits 
 
SHA must construct, reconstruct, and repair State highways as necessary and maintain 
them in good condition. Unless a person has a permit from SHA, a person may not:  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1508/ Page 2 
 
make an opening in any State highway;  
 
place any structure on any State highway;  
 
change or renew any structure placed on any State highway;  
 
dig up any State highway for any purpose, including the placement of pipes, sewer, 
poles, wires, or rails;  
 
plant or remove any tree on any State highway; or  
 
place any obstruction or improvement on any State highway.  
 
If any such work is permitted by SHA, the work must be performed to the satisfaction of 
SHA and under its supervision. The person to whom the permit is issued or by whom the 
work is done must pay the cost of replacing the highway in as good a condition as before 
the work was done. 
 
Submissions of Notifications to the General Assembly  
 
Section 1257 of Title 2 of the State Government Article requires that for any report, study, 
or notification that an official or unit of State government intends to distribute or submit to 
the General Assembly or to any committee, staff agency, or employee of the 
General Assembly, the official or unit must:  
 
 
submit one copy to the President of the Senate and one copy to the Speaker of the 
House in the format requested by the President and Speaker;  
 
submit five printed copies to the library of the Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS); and  
 
in the case of a publication to be distributed to a committee of the General Assembly, 
(1) unless the publication is being submitted by the committee specifically required 
by law, obtain approval for the distribution from the committee chair and (2) comply 
with the distribution requirements of the committee.  
 
State Expenditures:  TTF expenditures increase, likely by several hundred thousand 
dollars annually beginning in fiscal 2027, to send the required notes. SHA cannot do so 
with existing resources. SHA processes more than 16,000 permit applications each year, 
and its existing intake process is handled only by a limited number of staff (generally, 
engineers who approve and oversee the permitted work) at SHA’s seven district offices. 
Moreover, many of the district offices do not have full-time administrative staff that could 
submit the required notices and handle any related correspondence. Accordingly, the bill – 
in large part due to the requirement to provide notice immediately on receipt of a permit 
application (rather than on issuance of a permit) – significantly increases SHA’s workload. 
 
Accordingly, SHA is likely to incur (1) ongoing staffing and/or consultant costs for each 
of its seven district offices beginning in fiscal 2027; (2) a one-time programming cost of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1508/ Page 3 
approximately $125,000 in fiscal 2027 to update its permit application system; and  
(3) ongoing mailing costs of approximately $30,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. A 
preliminary analysis by SHA estimates that, when accounting for staffing and/or consultant 
costs, TTF expenditures could increase by more than $800,000 in fiscal 2027 and by more 
than $600,000 annually thereafter. However, DLS cannot independently verify this 
estimate and notes that, over time, SHA may be able to develop a more centralized, 
efficient, and/or automated process that could substantially reduce ongoing administrative 
costs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3