START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1565 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1565 
(Delegate Miller, et al.) 
Health and Appropriations 
 
 
Public Health - Obesity Management and Treatment Programs (Healthy 
Maryland for Every Body) 
 
 
This bill requires the Secretary of Budget and Management to include an obesity treatment 
and management program in the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program (State plan). The bill also requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, 
and health maintenance organizations (collectively carriers) to provide coverage for an 
“obesity treatment and management program” to an individual who has been diagnosed 
with obesity, diabetes, or other obesity-related conditions. The bill’s provisions 
governing the State plan take effect October 1, 2026; insurance provisions take effect 
January 1, 2027, and apply to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, 
delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of 
filings and complaints can likely be handled with existing budgeted resources. State plan 
expenditures increase by a significant amount, likely tens of millions of dollars, beginning 
in FY 2027, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases the cost of health insurance, expenditures for 
local governments that purchase fully insured plans may increase. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1565/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program  
 
The obesity treatment and management program included in the State plan must (1) be 
developed in consultation with the Secretary of Health; (2) promote evidence‑based, 
intensive, multicomponent behavioral and lifestyle modification interventions that support 
healthy weight management for individuals diagnosed with obesity, diabetes, and other 
obesity‑related conditions; (3) for the purpose of preventing or delaying the onset of 
type 2 diabetes, include structured behavioral change sessions approved by the 
federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); (4) provide coverage for 
medication approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for chronic 
weight management in individuals diagnosed with obesity, diabetes, and other 
obesity‑related conditions, as well as metabolic and bariatric surgery; and (5) provide 
services in office‑based, virtual, and community‑based settings to support State employee 
access. 
 
The program may apply utilization management and prior authorization requirements to 
determine medical necessity for the treatment of obesity if such determinations are made 
using the same standards applied to the treatment of other chronic diseases and not applied 
in a manner that is more restrictive than those used for comparable medical or surgical 
benefits. 
 
Mandated Health Insurance Coverage for Obesity Treatment and Management Program 
 
An “obesity treatment and management program” required to be covered by a carrier means 
a program that (1) promotes evidence‑based, intensive, multicomponent behavioral and 
lifestyle modification interventions that support healthy weight management for 
individuals diagnosed with obesity, diabetes, and other obesity‑related conditions; (2) for 
the purpose of preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes, includes structured 
behavioral change sessions approved by CDC; (3) provides FDA‑approved medication for 
chronic weight management in individuals diagnosed with obesity, diabetes, and other 
obesity‑related conditions, as well as metabolic and bariatric surgery; and (4) provides 
services in office‑based, virtual, and community‑based settings to support access. 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program  
 
The State plan is established in statute to provide health insurance benefit options to 
State employees and retirees. The Secretary of Budget and Management is charged with 
developing and administering the State plan, including selecting the insurance options to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1565/ Page 3 
be offered. The Secretary must include a wellness program in the State plan (developed in 
consultation with the Secretary of Health) that promotes the goals of the State Health 
Improvement Process and aims to achieve savings over time. 
 
Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. The federal Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential 
health benefits (EHBs). 
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the 
State benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must 
be the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 
For additional information on mandated health insurance benefits in Maryland, please see 
the Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The State plan is largely self‑insured for its medical contracts and, as such, except for the 
one fully insured integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is not subject to 
State health insurance mandates. However, the State plan generally provides coverage as 
otherwise required under State law. 
 
The State plan currently covers metabolic and bariatric surgery when consistent with 
guidelines approved by National Institutes of Health and deemed medically necessary. It 
also offers diabetes and weight loss programs (through carriers) and provides diabetic 
patients with a complementary cellular glucometer, unlimited test strips, diabetes coaching, 
and digital tools to support nutrition, exercise, and education (through the prescription 
benefits manager contract). Carriers offer a variety of discounted exercise/gym 
memberships and weight loss support through weight management programs. Each carrier 
reimburses up to $150 for weight loss programs and all plans offer support through 
coaching. Prescription drug coverage under the State plan excludes weight loss drugs. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management estimates that, assuming standard 
prior authorization for obesity coverage, typically available obesity management 
programs, and average utilization levels based on plan sponsors that currently provide such 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1565/ Page 4 
coverage, State plan expenditures (general, special, and federal funds) increase by between 
$25.0 million and $40.0 million annually to implement the bill’s prescription drug 
coverage component, and by an additional $2.0 million to $5.0 million annually for the 
program’s treatment components. 
 
To the extent that the obesity management and treatment program reduces obesity rates 
among enrollees, there may be long-term reductions in State plan spending on chronic 
diseases associated with obesity, such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and certain types 
of cancer. This estimate does not reflect such savings as they cannot be reliably projected. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the bill does not apply to the nongrandfathered 
individual and small employer markets. Should the bill be amended to apply to all markets, 
the State would be required to defray the cost of the new mandate to the extent it applies 
to the individual and small group ACA plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Legislation with related provisions (mandating coverage for 
prescription weight loss drugs) has been introduced within the last three years.  
See HB 1031 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1565/ Page 5 
Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
 
Overview 
 
Fully insured, large group plans and certain individual plans must cover Maryland’s 
mandated health insurance benefits. These mandates do not apply to most individual or 
small group plans, public health insurance, or plans issued outside of Maryland. However, 
individual and small group plans and plans sold through the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) must cover federal essential health benefits (EHBs). Thus, the type of 
plan an individual is enrolled in generally determines which benefits must be provided. 
 
Most Marylanders Are Insured by Employment-based Coverage 
 
Maryland residents generally obtain health insurance from one of three sources:  
(1) employment-based coverage; (2) private coverage in the individual market; or 
(3) public health insurance provided by the State and/or federal government (i.e., Medicaid, 
the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and military-related 
coverage). In calendar 2023 (the most recent data available), more than one-half (53.9%) 
of the State’s population had employment-based coverage, more than one-third (34.1%) 
were covered by public health insurance programs, and 5.7% purchased coverage in the 
individual market. The remaining 6.5% of Marylanders were uninsured. 
 
State Regulation of Insurance Applies Only to Certain Plans 
 
Employment-based coverage is either fully insured or self-insured. A fully insured plan is 
a traditional model for health insurance under which an employer pays a fixed premium to 
an insurer and the insurer assumes all financial risk and responsibility for paying claims. 
Fully insured plans are most common among small to mid-sized businesses as they offer 
more predictable costs and less administrative burden. In a self-insured plan, the employer 
assumes all financial risk and pays claims directly, usually through a third-party 
administrator. Self-insured plans are more common among larger employers with the 
resources to assume the financial risk. 
 
The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act preempts states’ ability to require 
private employers to offer health insurance coverage and exempts self-insured plans from 
state insurance regulation. As a result, only fully insured plans are regulated by state 
insurance regulators. Thus, in Maryland, self-insured plans are not regulated by the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and are not subject to Maryland law. 
 
In calendar 2024, 2.58 million Maryland residents younger than age 65 were insured 
through commercial health benefit plans, of which 890,245 were covered by a fully insured 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1565/ Page 6 
plan and 1.69 million were covered by a self-insured plan. Thus, only about one-third 
(34.5%) of those covered through commercial plans were in fully insured plans subject to 
State regulation. Overall, only 17.4% of the State’s nonelderly population was covered by 
a plan subject to State regulation. 
 
Mandated Benefits Apply Only to Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
Maryland law requires insurers, health maintenance organizations, and nonprofit health 
service plans to cover more than 50 specific benefits. These “mandated benefits” apply to 
expense-incurred contracts that provide “hospital, medical, and surgical benefits,” which 
include non-major medical products and federally excepted benefits (benefits outside of 
primary medical coverage that are not subject to certain federal requirements). These 
include fully insured, large group plans (≥50 employees), individual grandfathered plans 
in effect on or before March 23, 2010, when the federal Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) was enacted, and limited or specialty plans such as fixed-indemnity plans. 
Maryland’s State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
predominately self-insured and thus largely exempt from mandated benefits. However, the 
program generally provides coverage for these benefits as otherwise required under State 
law. 
 
Mandated benefits could apply to individual and small group policies. However, if the 
benefits go beyond those in the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that defines the 
minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group markets in 
Maryland), the State must cover the cost. Thus, mandated benefits are not typically applied 
to those policies. 
 
Mandated benefits do not apply to Medicaid/MCHP, Medicare, the Federal Employees 
Health Benefits Program, or military/Veterans Administration coverage. Mandated 
benefits also do not apply to health benefit plans issued outside of Maryland – such as when 
a Maryland resident works for an employer based in another state and the plan is issued in 
that state. In that instance, the plan is subject to the requirements (and mandated benefits) 
of the state in which it is issued. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes mandated benefits for large group and grandfathered plans. For 
further specifics on mandated benefits, see Title 15, Subtitle 8 of the Insurance Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1565/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland’s Mandated Health Insurance Benefits for 
Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
 Amino-acid elemental formula 
 Anesthesia for dental care 
 Biomarker testing 
 Blood products 
 Breast cancer screening 
 Breast prosthesis following a mastectomy 
 Child well visits and immunizations 
 Chlamydia screening 
 Cleft lip/palate treatment/management 
 Clinical trials 
 Colorectal cancer screening 
 Contraceptive drugs or devices 
 Diabetic equipment or supplies 
 Emergency room services 
 Fertility awareness-based methods 
 Fertility preservation due to medical 
treatment that may cause infertility 
 Gynecological care 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Human papilloma virus screening 
 Infertility benefits (including IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Laboratory services 
 Lung cancer screening 
 Lymphedema diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment 
 Male sterilization 
 Mastectomies 
 Medical foods 
 Mental health and substance use 
treatment 
 Morbid obesity surgical treatment 
 Osteoporosis prevention and treatment 
 Ostomy equipment and supplies 
 Physician services 
 Pregnancy and maternity benefits 
 Prescription benefits 
 Preventive services 
 Prosthetic devices 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Reconstructive breast surgery 
 Referrals to specialists 
 Second opinions and coverage of 
outpatient services 
 Smoking cessation 
 Surgical removal of testicles 
 Temporo-Mandibular Joint Syndrome 
treatment 
 X-rays 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Mandated benefits as of January 2025. Coverage of calcium score testing is required beginning 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1565/ Page 8 
Application of Mandated Benefits in Practice 
 
Legislation is frequently introduced to add new mandated benefits. For example, 
Senate Bill 518 of 2025 would have required coverage for preventive screenings for 
ovarian cancer for individuals aged 45 and older. The bill would have applied only to 
commercial health insurance, specifically fully insured large group plans and individual 
grandfathered plans. Coverage would not have applied to self-insured plans, 
nongrandfathered individual or small group plans, plans issued in another state to a 
Maryland resident, or any public health insurance program (in the same way that current 
mandated benefits do not apply to these plans). 
 
Essential Health Benefits Apply to Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Maryland law requires that EHBs be included in the State benchmark plan and in all 
qualified health plans offered through MHBE. Exhibit 2 summarizes the EHBs required 
as of September 2025. For further specifics, see MIA’s Essential Health Benefits Chart:  
Individual and Small Group Plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1565/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 2 
Essential Health Benefits for Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
 Allergy serum 
 Ambulance service 
 Bariatric surgery 
 Blood and blood products 
 Breast reconstructive surgery/prosthesis 
 Cardiac rehabilitation 
 Care in office for illness or injury 
 Case management 
 Chiropractic services 
 Controlled clinical trials 
 Diabetic treatment/equipment/supplies 
 Durable medical equipment 
 Emergency services 
 Family planning services 
 General anesthesia/associated care for 
dental care for children 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Hospice 
 Infertility services (excludes IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Medical food 
 Mental health and substance use 
benefits 
 Nutritional services 
 Outpatient hospital services 
 Outpatient laboratory/diagnostic 
services 
 Outpatient short-term rehabilitation 
 Patient centered medical homes 
 Pediatric dental 
 Pediatric vision 
 Pregnancy and maternity 
 Prescription drugs 
 Preventive services 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Pulmonary rehabilitation 
 Skilled nursing facility 
 Transplants 
 Wellness benefits 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Essential health benefits as of September 2025. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9