START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1536 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1536 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Maryland Enforcement Limits and Transparency (MELT) Act 
 
 
This bill prohibits a “person” from knowingly “aiding in immigration enforcement” in a 
manner that violates the constitutional rights of another, except as required by “judicial 
warrant” or State or federal law. A person harmed by a violation may bring an action 
against the violator or a person who aided the violator, and the court is authorized to award 
economic and noneconomic damages, declaratory relief, injunctive relief, and reasonable 
attorney’s fees. The Board of Public Works (BPW) and applicable licensing authorities are 
authorized to take specified actions for violations of the bill. Under certain circumstances, 
the Attorney General may also bring an action and, among other relief, recover the costs 
of the action for the use of the State. A violator is also subject to (1) a civil penalty up to 
$25,000 for each violation; (2) punitive actions or procurement restrictions by BPW; and 
(3) disciplinary actions by applicable licensing authorities. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $214,800 in FY 2027 for staff and 
computer programming; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. 
Potential additional increase in State expenditures (not reflected below) if the bill results 
in higher payments from the State Insurance Trust Fund for claims filed under the bill or 
increased litigation of cases, as discussed below. Potential decrease in federal fund 
revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
FF Revenues 
(‐) 
(‐) 
(‐) 
(‐) 
(‐) 
GF/SF Expenditure 
214,800 
240,100 
251,100 
262,400 
273,900 
Net Effect 
($214,800) 
($240,100) 
($251,100) 
($262,400) 
($273,900) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1536/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential increase in expenditures for local governments, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Requirements for Interactions with Immigration Enforcement 
 
For every interaction with immigration enforcement, a person must (1) document the 
person’s instances of cooperation with immigration enforcement; (2) retain all records of 
instances of cooperation for at least five years after each occurrence; and (3) notify any 
individual whose information was shared, including, to the extent permitted by law, what 
information was shared. 
 
Actions by the Attorney General 
 
To investigate a violation of the bill’s provisions, the Attorney General may (1) issue 
subpoenas; (2) administer oaths; (3) compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses; 
and (4) compel the production of records, books, papers, contracts, and other documents. 
The bill establishes procedures for service of a subpoena and authorizes the 
Attorney General to apply to a circuit court in the county in which the subpoena was served 
to enforce compliance if a person fails or refuses to comply with a subpoena. 
 
If the Attorney General determines that a violation of the bill’s provisions has occurred, 
the Attorney General must: 
 
 
publish (1) a summary of the activity constituting the violation; (2) if the violation 
is ongoing or likely to recur, the remedial measures necessary to correct the 
violation or prevent a recurrence of the violation; and (3) any other relevant 
information; and 
 
refer the matter to (1) any licensing entity that holds authority over a license held 
by the violator and (2) for a matter that involves federal tort claims, the 
U.S. Department of Justice. 
 
If the Attorney General has reason to believe that a violation has occurred and is likely to 
recur, the Attorney General may bring an action to enforce the bill’s provisions in the 
circuit court for any county in which the violation is alleged to have occurred only after:  
(1) conducting an investigation, as specified; (2) at least 30 days before bringing the action, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1536/ Page 3 
providing notice to the governing body of the county where the violation is alleged to have 
occurred; and (3) making reasonable efforts to notify an alleged violator. However, if the 
Attorney General determines that a delay in the civil action would pose an imminent and 
serious threat to life, health, or public safety, the Attorney General may bring an action to 
enforce the bill’s provisions without complying with the requirements listed above. As part 
of an action, the Attorney General must provide written certification of compliance with 
these requirements. In such actions, the court may award economic and noneconomic 
damages to any person harmed by a violation, injunctive relief, and declaratory relief; the 
Attorney General is also entitled to recover the costs of the action for the use of the State. 
 
Procurement Requirements 
 
If a person that has entered into a procurement contract with the State violates the bill’s 
prohibition against voluntarily assisting in immigration enforcement, as specified, BPW 
may void the procurement contract, decline to renew the procurement at expiration, or 
impose conditions on the continuation of the procurement contract. Any procurement 
contract with the State must include a requirement that the person entering into the 
procurement contract not voluntarily aid in immigration enforcement in violation of the 
bill’s provisions and respect all rights of others that are secured by law. 
 
Licensing Authority Requirements 
 
An applicable licensing authority may institute a disciplinary proceeding against, and may 
suspend or revoke the licensure of, a licensee that violates (1) prohibitions against 
voluntarily assisting in immigration enforcement, as specified; (2) the bill’s requirements; 
or (3) an individual’s rights secured by the Maryland Constitution or the Maryland 
Declaration of Rights. Before a license is issued or renewed and as a part of the applicable 
licensing procedure, a licensee or an applicant for a license must certify, in writing, that 
the applicant or licensee will respect all rights of others that are secured by law. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Aid in immigration enforcement” means:  (1) providing access to an area that would 
otherwise require a judicial warrant for law enforcement to access; (2) sharing personal 
information of another with immigration authorities; or (3) delaying the departure of or 
detaining another by force or deceit with the intent to make the individual accessible to 
immigration authorities. 
 
“Judicial warrant” means a warrant signed by a judge, magistrate, or District Court 
commissioner of competent jurisdiction. “Judicial warrant” does not include an 
administrative warrant, including an Immigration and Customs Enforcement Form I-200 
or Form I-205. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1536/ Page 4 
“License” means an occupational or professional license issued to an individual by the 
State, including a license issued under the Business Occupations and Professions Article, 
the Business Regulation Article, and the Health Occupations Article. 
 
“Licensing authority” means a State entity that issues a license to an individual. 
 
“Person” includes:  the State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, and any agency, 
officer, employee, contractor, or agent of the State or a unit of local government. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Immigration Enforcement 
 
While immigration is controlled by federal law, the U.S. Immigration, Customs, and 
Enforcement Division (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security have initiated 
numerous programs that involve state and local law enforcement agencies as allies and 
additional resources. For example, the Criminal Alien Program (CAP) supports ICE 
Enforcement and Removal Operations in executing its mission through the arrest and 
removal of undocumented immigrants who threaten the safety of the nation’s communities 
and the integrity of U.S. immigration laws. CAP focuses on the identification, arrest, and 
removal of incarcerated undocumented immigrants at federal, state, and local levels, as 
well as at-large criminal undocumented immigrants. 
 
Federal law does not mandate that state and local law enforcement agencies become 
involved in immigration efforts. However, federal law does prohibit a state or local 
government from prohibiting or in any way restricting any government entity or official 
from sending to or receiving from ICE information regarding the citizenship or 
immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual. It also prohibits restrictions on 
any of the following with respect to information regarding the immigration status, lawful 
or unlawful, of any individual:  (1) sending such information to, or requesting or receiving 
such information from, ICE; (2) maintaining such information; or (3) exchanging such 
information with any other federal, state, or local government authority. 
 
287(g) Agreements and Immigration Detainers 
 
Section 287(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (codified as 8 U.S.C. § 1357(g)) 
authorizes the Attorney General of the United States to enter into agreements, commonly 
referred to as “287(g) agreements,” with state and local governments authorizing state or 
local personnel “to perform a function of an immigration officer in relation to the 
investigation, apprehension, or detention of aliens in the United States.” A 
287(g) agreement is not required for a local jurisdiction to cooperate with federal 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1536/ Page 5 
immigration authorities; however, federal law does require that each agreement provide 
that participating personnel have adequate training regarding immigration law. 
 
Chapters 1 and 2 of 2026 prohibit the State, a unit of local government, a county sheriff, 
or any agency, officer, employee, or agent of the State or a unit of local government from 
entering into an “immigration enforcement agreement.” “Immigration enforcement 
agreement” means a contract, an agreement, an intergovernmental service agreement, or a 
memorandum of understanding with the federal government that authorizes the State, a 
unit of local government, a county sheriff, or any agency, officer, employee, or agent of 
the State or a unit of local government to enforce civil immigration law. “Immigration 
enforcement agreement” includes an agreement made in accordance with (1) 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1103; (2) 8 U.S.C. § 1357; or (3) any other federal law. 
 
Immigration Enforcement in Sensitive Locations 
 
Chapter 718 of 2025 requires (1) a federal law enforcement officer to notify specified 
individuals regarding a federal immigration enforcement action at a “sensitive location” 
and (2) a public school, a public library, or a unit of the Executive Branch of State or local 
government that operates at a sensitive location to deny access to any portion of the 
sensitive location that is not accessible to the general public to any individual seeking to 
enforce federal immigration law, unless the individual presents a valid judicial warrant or 
exigent circumstances exist (without applicability to a State or local correctional facility or 
a detention facility in a District Court or circuit court location). 
 
Attorney General Guidance:  Chapter 718 also requires the Attorney General to develop 
and publish guidance that informs the public and relevant State agencies about: 
 
 
delineating between immigration enforcement within the public portions of 
sensitive locations and the nonpublic or private portions of sensitive locations; 
 
verifying the identity of immigration enforcement agents and validating 
immigration enforcement documentation seeking specific individuals; 
 
limiting liability exposure for State, local, and private institutions and the 
participation of the employees of those institutions in immigration enforcement at 
sensitive locations; 
 
facilitating relationships between federal law enforcement officers and State and 
local officials and law enforcement officers in order to conduct immigration 
enforcement activities through the least dangerous and disruptive means; and 
 
complying with existing legal obligations and limitations on State and local agencies 
while maintaining public safety and accessibility to those agencies. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1536/ Page 6 
Private entities are encouraged to adopt policies consistent with the guidance developed by 
the Attorney General if the private entities provide services related to (1) physical or 
mental health; (2) education; (3) shelter care; or (4) access to justice. 
 
The required guidance and policies are not subject to the Administrative Procedure Act 
under Title 10, Subtitles 1, 2, and 3 of the State Government Article. 
 
Governmental Entity Procedures:  Pursuant to Chapter 718, each public school, public 
library, and unit of the Executive Branch of State or local government that operates a 
sensitive location must implement a policy consistent with the guidance issued by the 
Attorney General. 
 
By July 1, 2026, each governmental entity must (1) in consultation with the Department of 
Information Technology, develop and publish procedures that prevent the sale and 
redisclosure of personal records and geolocation data provided or made available by the 
governmental entity in a way that harms the privacy of residents of the State and (2) submit 
a copy of the procedures developed to the General Assembly. The procedures must 
specifically address: 
 
 
any possible contractual limitations on the sale or redisclosure of personal records 
or geolocation data that a governmental entity may place on a person who receives 
personal records or geolocation data that are provided or made available by the 
governmental entity; 
 
considerations regarding (1) the threat to privacy posed by data brokers who utilize 
personal records or geolocation data for commercial purposes; (2) the risk that 
personal records or geolocation data may be used for purposes other than the 
purposes for which the personal records or geolocation data were developed or 
collected; and (3) geolocation, genetic, and other sensitive data; and 
 
any other considerations necessary to (1) protect the privacy of residents of the 
State; (2) discourage the development of a secondary commercial market for 
personal records or geolocation data that are provided or made available by a 
governmental entity; and (3) limit a person who receives personal records or 
geolocation data that are provided or made available by a governmental entity from 
selling or redisclosing the data with other persons. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Sensitive location” means: 
 
 
a public school; 
 
a public library; 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1536/ Page 7 
 
a health care facility operated by a unit of State or local government; 
 
a facility operated by the Comptroller; 
 
a courthouse; or 
 
any other location that (1) provides State-funded services related to physical or 
mental health, education, shelter care, or access to justice and (2) as determined by 
the Attorney General, requires special consideration for immigration enforcement 
activities. 
 
“Collateral immigration enforcement” means federal immigration enforcement actions that 
affect individuals who are not the primary target of the enforcement action but are present 
at the location of the enforcement action. 
 
“Immigration enforcement” means federal immigration enforcement actions. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under the Maryland Tort Claims Act (MCTA), the State 
statutorily waives its own common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA 
applies to tortious acts or omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel 
performed in the course of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made 
without malice or gross negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign 
or governmental immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the 
state employee committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004). 
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the 
scope of the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the 
State’s color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable. 
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if liability of 
the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a 
constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following limits on 
liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic damages may 
not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, 
regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a 
wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award 
for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of 
claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award. Separate provisions apply to claims 
involving child sexual abuse. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1536/ Page 8 
The State does not waive its immunity for punitive damages. Attorney’s fees are included 
in the liability cap under MTCA. Under MTCA, attorneys may not charge or receive a fee 
that exceeds 20% of a settlement or 25% of a judgment. 
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act 
 
The Local Government Tort Claims Act (LGTCA) defines local government to include 
counties, municipal corporations, Baltimore City, and various agencies and authorities of 
local governments such as community colleges, county public libraries, special taxing 
districts, nonprofit community service corporations, sanitary districts, housing authorities, 
and commercial district management authorities. 
 
In general, LGTCA limits the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual 
claim and $800,000 per total claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from 
tortious acts or omissions (including intentional and constitutional torts). However, for 
claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if the liability of a local government arises from 
intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a constitutional right committed by 
a law enforcement officer, the following limits on liability apply:  (1) the combined award 
for both economic and noneconomic damages may not exceed a total of $890,000 for all 
claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, regardless of the number of claimants 
or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a wrongful death action in which there 
are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award for noneconomic damages may not 
exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the 
award. Separate provisions apply to claims involving child sexual abuse. 
 
LGTCA further establishes that the local government is liable for tortious acts or omissions 
of its employees acting within the scope of employment, so long as the employee did not 
act with actual malice. Thus, LGTCA prevents local governments from asserting a 
common law claim of governmental immunity from liability for such acts or omissions of 
its employees. 
 
A local government is not liable for punitive damages. However, a local government, 
subject to the liability limits, may indemnify an employee for a judgment for punitive 
damages entered against the employee. A local government may not enter into an 
agreement that requires indemnification for an act or omission of an employee that may 
result in liability for punitive damages. 
 
Lawsuits Under 42 USC § 1983 and Federal Qualified Immunity 
 
42 USC § 1983 is a federal law that allows individuals to sue state or local government 
officials acting under color of law for constitutional rights violations. Plaintiffs can seek 
damages, injunctive relief, declaratory relief and attorney’s fees. Section 1983 lawsuits are 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1536/ Page 9 
against a person (e.g., the government employee). States and the federal government cannot 
be named as defendants in these lawsuits; however, local government units and 
municipalities can be named as defendants. 
 
In general, judges, prosecutors, and legislators performing their legitimate functions are 
examples of individuals who have absolute immunity from § 1983 lawsuits. 
Qualified immunity, which dates back to 1871 when Congress adopted 42 USC § 1983, is 
a legal doctrine created by the U.S. Supreme Court under which a government official is 
shielded from civil liability if the official’s actions do not violate “clearly established 
statutory or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would have known”.  
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982). 
 
State Procurement Contract Requirements 
 
In General:  Each procurement contract must include clauses covering:  (1) termination for 
default; (2) termination wholly or partly by the State for its convenience if the head of the 
primary procurement unit determines that termination is appropriate; (3) variations that 
occur between estimated and actual quantities of work in a procurement contract;  
(4) liquidated damages, as appropriate; (5) specified excuses for nonperformance;  
(6) except for real property leases, the unilateral right of the State to order in writing 
changes in the work, if the changes are within the scope of the procurement contract, and 
a temporary stop or delay in performance; (7) the obligation of the contractor to comply 
with the political contribution reporting requirements under Title 14 of the Election Law 
Article, to which the contractor may be subject as required, as specified; and (8) nonvisual 
access for information technology as required under § 3A-312 of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article. Each procurement contract must also include a clause that gives to 
the parties notice that preexisting regulations apply to the procurement contract, as 
specified. 
 
At any time after the parties enter into a procurement contract, they may include additional 
clauses in the procurement contract by consent, without consideration. Statute includes 
additional requirements applicable to procurement contracts for construction. 
 
Nondiscrimination Clause:  In addition, each contract for procurement must include a 
nondiscrimination clause. The nondiscrimination clause must: 
 
 
prohibit discrimination in any manner by the contractor against an employee or 
applicant for employment because of sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
disability, race, age, color, creed, or national origin; 
 
require the contractor to include a similar clause in every subcontract except a 
subcontract for standard commercial supplies or raw materials; and 
 
require each contractor and subcontractor subject to this clause to post 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1536/ Page 10 
conspicuously a notice that sets forth the provisions of the clause in a place that is 
available to employees and applicants for employment. 
 
If the nondiscrimination clause is omitted from a contract or subcontract, the State may 
declare the contract to be void. In that event, the contractor is entitled to the reasonable 
value of work that has been performed and materials that have been provided. 
 
If a contractor willfully fails to comply with the requirements of the nondiscrimination 
clause and the contract is partly executory, the State may compel the contractor to continue 
to perform under the contract, but the State (1) is liable for no more than the reasonable 
value of work performed and materials provided after the date on which the breach of 
contract was or should have been discovered and (2) must deduct any money that has been 
paid under the contract from the money that becomes due. 
 
If a subcontractor willfully fails to comply with the requirements of a nondiscrimination 
clause, the contractor may void the subcontract. In that event, the contractor is liable for no 
more than the reasonable value of work performed or materials provided. 
 
Any person, including an employee or prospective employee, who has information about 
a violation of a nondiscrimination clause may inform BPW. BPW must cause an immediate 
investigation of the charge and if it concludes that the charge is true, may invoke any 
remedy available by law. 
 
Licensing Authority 
 
Generally an individual must obtain a license from the appropriate licensing authority 
before practicing or engaging in specified occupations in Maryland. State licensure 
requirements vary by profession but generally mandate education, examination, and 
background checks, overseen by specific State boards. Disciplinary actions for misconduct 
- including negligence, fraud, or criminal convictions – range from fines and reprimands 
to license suspension or revocation. Generally, if a license is denied or disciplined, 
applicants may request a hearing with the appropriate board and if an agreement is not 
reached, applicants may pursue a contested case hearing through the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $214,789 in fiscal 2027 
for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and the Judiciary. State expenditures 
(multiple fund types) may increase for additional training, updates to contracts, and 
potential disciplinary actions to meet the bill’s requirements. In addition, State 
expenditures may increase for costs associated with litigation and payment of claims. 
Potential decrease in federal fund revenues. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1536/ Page 11 
It is not clear the extent to which the bill’s provisions interact with the MTCA. The bill 
does not mention the MTCA and is not drafted to those provisions. As discussed above, 
the MTCA is a limited waiver of the State’s sovereign immunity, subject to specified 
requirements, liability limits, and limits on attorney’s fees. 
 
MTCA claims are filed against the State, not the State employee whose actions form the 
basis of the claim. The State is not typically named in 42 U.S.C. § 1983 lawsuits because 
of its Eleventh Amendment immunity. The extent to which the bill increases claims against 
the State and related expenses cannot be reliably determined at this time. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
Although the full extent of potential litigation against (or initiated by) the State cannot be 
estimated at this time, this estimate assumes that OAG engages in enough investigations 
and potential litigation that additional resources are required. Thus, general fund 
expenditures for OAG increase by $202,451 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one assistant 
Attorney General and one investigator to investigate and potentially litigate claims under 
the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$184,169 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
FY 2027 OAG Personnel Expenditures 
$202,451 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Although OAG is entitled to recover the costs of any action for the use of the State, such 
impact is speculative and therefore not accounted for in this analysis. 
 
Judiciary 
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by at least $12,338 in fiscal 2027 for 
one-time computer programming changes to make necessary adjustments to licensing 
systems. 
 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
The Maryland Department of Transportation receives federal fund revenues which require 
assurances regarding upholding federal immigration laws. If the department is unable to 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1536/ Page 12 
meet federal grant requirements due to the bill, federal funding revenues are likely reduced. 
However, a reliable estimate is not feasible without experience under the bill. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services advises that the department 
needs to develop contract monitoring protocols in order to meet the bill’s procurement 
contract requirements. However, the department further advises that it contracts with 
multiple vendors and that without standardized language, the department may be subject 
to liability as it may incorporate language in contracts that are either over-inclusive or 
under-inclusive relative to the bill's requirements. 
 
Maryland State Department of Education 
 
The Maryland State Department of Education and Local Education Agencies likely incur 
costs associated with compliance measures required by the bill including updating policies, 
training staff, and implementing systems for the documentation and retention of records. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
The bill has an operational impact on the Maryland Department of Health as procedural 
updates are likely necessary to ensure compliance with the bill’s documentation and 
notification requirements. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures under the bill may increase for litigation and 
updates to contracts and training. As with the MTCA, it is unclear the extent to which the 
bill’s provisions interact with the LGTCA. However, local governments likely need to 
update contracts and training for employees to ensure compliance with the bill’s 
requirements. Local jurisdictions with limited legal and administrative capacity may face 
disproportionate burdens to implement the bill’s requirements, including documentation, 
recordkeeping, and disciplinary actions. Wicomico County reports that the bill likely 
results in additional legal fees, litigation, and lost contracts for the county. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on small business law firms 
that litigate these types of claims. To the extent that a small business contracts with a State 
or unit of local government, the business is prohibited from aiding immigration 
enforcement; thus, the business is required to maintain records of cooperation with 
immigration enforcement. If there is an alleged violation, the business is potentially subject 
to an investigation, court action, or revocation of a license. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1536/ Page 13 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Department of Aging; Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico 
counties; Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; 
Maryland Cannabis Administration; Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Human Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Public Service 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 13