START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1506 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1506 
(Delegate Ross) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Condominiums and Homeowners Associations - New Owner Fees - Limitations 
 
 
This bill limits the amount that a condominium or homeowners association (HOA) may 
charge a new owner/purchaser (other than an initial owner/purchaser) as an initial capital 
contribution or similar fee to be paid at closing. Specifically, an initial capital contribution 
or similar fee may not exceed the amount of monthly assessments paid by an existing owner 
at the time of closing. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State statute does not expressly limit initial capital contributions or similar 
fees charged at closing. Generally, the Maryland Condominium Act (MCA) and the 
Maryland Homeowners Association Act (MHAA) authorize the governing body of these 
communities to fund common expenses through assessments and require reserve studies, 
funding plans, and annual budgets. However, the MCA and MHAA do require certain 
disclosures during the resale of specified units and lots within condominiums and HOAs. 
Those disclosures include, among other information, the current assessments, 
delinquent/unpaid amounts, and other necessary fees. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1506/ Page 2 
For more information on condominiums and HOAs, which are commonly referred to as 
common ownership communities, see the Appendix – Common Ownership 
Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1506/ Page 3 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, the person may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,200 community 
associations with an estimated 1.1 million residents in these associations in the State in 
2024. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowner’s association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the  
Real Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own an individual unit; instead, the person 
owns an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 

END OF PAGE 3