START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1526 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1526 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Carroll County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class 1 Distillery On-Premises 
Consumption Permit 
 
   
This bill establishes a Class 1 distillery on-site consumption permit in Carroll County and 
authorizes the Carroll County Board of License Commissioners to issue the permit to a 
holder of a Class 1 distillery license. The permit authorizes the holder to sell food, 
nonalcoholic beverages, and alcoholic beverages, including brandy, rum, whiskey, and 
neutral spirits that are distilled, rectified, blended, and bottled at the distillery for  
on-premises and off-premises consumption to the extent the permit holder is authorized 
under the Class 1 distillery license. The Carroll County Health Department must approve 
the authorization to sell food and nonalcoholic beverages. The application for a permit must 
include a diagram of the proposed area for consumption under the permit and show clear 
delineation from the manufacturing and processing facilities. The board must adopt 
regulations to carry out the requirements of the bill including setting the annual permit fee. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations.   
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County revenues may increase minimally beginning FY 2027 to the 
extent permits are issued under the bill at the permit fee set by the board. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.   
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1526/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A Class 1 distillery license authorizes the establishment and operation of 
a plant for distilling brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits at the location 
described in the license. It also authorizes the sale and delivery of those alcoholic 
beverages, with specified restrictions. The annual license fee is $2,000. 
 
Local licensing boards may grant an on-site consumption permit to a holder of a Class 1 
distillery license, which authorizes the license holder to use up to 7,750 gallons of liquor 
annually for mixed drinks sold through an on-premises consumption permit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 959 (Carroll County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2026 
 
me/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2