START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1569 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1569 
(Delegates Young and Woorman) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Parking Enforcement - Vehicles in Custody or Control of Auto Repair or Storage 
Facility 
 
 
The bill establishes that, if a parking citation is issued for a motor vehicle while it is in the 
custody or control of an auto repair or storage facility, the auto repair or storage facility, 
and not the registered owner, may be held liable for the parking citation as well as any 
associated fines or late fees. The bill prohibits an auto repair or storage facility from 
requiring a customer to waive their rights established under the bill as a condition of 
service. The bill does not limit the authority of a parking enforcement agency to enforce 
parking laws under its jurisdiction. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Auto repair or storage facility” means a person engaged in the repair, 
servicing, storage, or maintenance of motor vehicles for compensation. “Custody or 
control” means possession of a motor vehicle pursuant to a repair order, service agreement, 
or other authorization from the registered owner. 
 
If a parking citation is issued while a motor vehicle is in the custody or control of an 
auto repair or storage facility, the registered owner of the motor vehicle may not be held 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1569/ Page 2 
liable for the parking citation or for any associated fine or late fee arising from the parking 
citation. Instead, the auto repair or storage facility may be held liable for the parking 
violation. 
 
It is an affirmative defense to liability for a parking citation if the cited registered owner 
demonstrates that the motor vehicle was in the custody or control of an auto repair or 
storage facility at the time of the violation. If a registered owner is found not liable by 
asserting the affirmative defense, a court must (1) immediately waive all fines and fees and 
(2) dismiss the citation against the registered owner, regardless of whether liability is 
transferable to the auto repair or storage facility. 
 
If sufficient evidence is available to indicate that a motor vehicle was in the custody or 
control of an auto repair or storage facility at the time of the violation, the parking 
enforcement agency may reissue the citation for the parking violation directly to the 
auto repair or storage facility. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Authority to Regulate Parking 
 
Generally, any State agency authorized by law and any political subdivision of the State 
may adopt ordinances or regulations that: 
 
 
regulate the parking of vehicles; 
 
provide for the impounding of vehicles parked in violation of the ordinances or 
regulations; 
 
regulate the towing of vehicles from publicly owned and privately owned parking 
lots; and 
 
provide for the issuance of a citation by an officer for a violation of an ordinance or 
regulation that is adopted pursuant to this authorization. 
 
Citation for Parking Violations 
 
An officer who discovers a vehicle parked in violation of an ordinance or regulation must 
(1) deliver a citation to the driver or, if the vehicle is unattended, attach a citation to the 
vehicle in a conspicuous place and (2) keep a copy of the citation, bearing the officer’s 
certification under penalty of perjury that the facts stated in the citation are true. In the 
absence of the driver, the registered owner of the vehicle is presumed to be the person 
receiving the citation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1569/ Page 3 
Effect of Parking Violations on Vehicle Registration 
 
If a person cited for a parking violation fails to pay the fine by the specified date, failed to 
file a notice of an intention to stand trial, or failed to appear for trial for the violation, the 
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) may not register or transfer the registration of the 
vehicle. MVA may suspend the registration of the vehicle if it is notified that the violator 
is a chronic offender. MVA must continue to maintain this position until it is notified that 
the cited person satisfied the charge, appeared for trial, or pleaded guilty and paid the fine. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on small business 
auto repair and storage facilities that are held liable for parking violations and any 
associated fines or late fees as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3