START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1514 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1514 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Government, Labor, and Elections and 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Calvert County - County Officials and Board of Education - Salaries and 
Benefits 
 
 
This bill increases, in Calvert County, the salary/compensation of:  (1) the president of the 
board of commissioners, from $50,500 to $58,000; (2) a member of the board of 
commissioners, from $48,000 to $53,000; (3) the president of the board of education, from 
$6,500 to $8,500; (4) a member of the board of education, from $5,500 to $7,500; and  
(5) the county treasurer, from $57,500 to $115,000. The bill establishes that a county 
commissioner who has completed ten years of service, regardless of age, is eligible to 
receive benefits under the county retiree health benefits program. Further, the bill 
authorizes the Treasurer, beginning with the term of office that begins on or after 
November 4, 2026, to receive the same pension benefits as county employees. Finally, the 
bill authorizes the salary for the Calvert County State’s Attorney to increase during the 
term of office to the extent the salary for a circuit court judge increases by repealing the 
provision that specifies any salary increase takes effect at the beginning of the elected term 
of office and may not increase during the term. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the 
increases take effect at the beginning of the next terms of office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Calvert County expenditures increase by at least $52,300 in FY 2027 and 
by a minimum of $95,000 in FY 2028 and beyond, as discussed below. Calvert County 
revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1514/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Calvert County Board of Commissioners 
 
Five county commissioners make up the Calvert County Board of Commissioners. The 
annual salary for the president of the Calvert County Board of Commissioners is $50,500. 
The salary for each associate member of the board is $48,000. Commissioners are eligible 
to participate in the county’s retiree health benefits program.  
 
Calvert County Board of Education  
 
The Calvert County Board of Education consists of five voting members and one nonvoting 
student member. The board elects from its membership a president and vice president. The 
president of the Calvert County Board of Education receives annual compensation of 
$6,500. The other (voting) members of the board receive annual compensation of $5,500.  
 
State’s Attorney for Calvert County 
 
The State’s Attorney for Calvert County receives an annual salary equal to the salary of a 
circuit court judge; however, any salary increase for the state’s attorney takes effect at the 
beginning of the elected term of office and may not increase during the term. Pursuant to 
Joint Resolutions 2 and 3 of 2022, the salary of a circuit court judge increased from 
$184,433 to the current salary of $214,433 over fiscal 2023 through 2026. 
 
Treasurer of Calvert County 
 
The annual salary of the Calvert County Treasurer is $57,500. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Calvert County expenditures increase by at least $52,300 in 
fiscal 2027 and by at least $95,000 in fiscal 2028 and beyond. The Department of 
Legislative Services notes that for the Calvert County State’s Attorney, future salary 
amounts depend on action taken by the General Assembly regarding judicial salaries. 
Legislation to increase judicial salaries has been introduced this session (Senate Joint 
Resolution 2 / House Joint Resolution 6) based on recommendations proposed by the 
Judicial Compensation Commission; however, because the General Assembly has the 
authority to further amend the resolution, as specified in statute, judicial salaries for the 
next four years cannot be reliably predicted in advance. Further, in the absence of additional 
information from the county, this estimate does not reflect (1) increased expenditures 
related to pensions and other benefit payments as modified by the bill and (2) increased 
fringe benefits from the higher salaries. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1514/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3