START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1593 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1593 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Health 
 
 
Developmental Disabilities Administration - Self-Directed Services Manual - 
Public Comment 
 
 
This bill requires the Deputy Secretary for Developmental Disabilities to provide notice to 
the public before making changes to the Self-Directed Services Manual developed by the 
Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA). If the Deputy Secretary proposes to 
make changes to the manual, the Deputy Secretary must receive and consider comments 
on the proposed changes from the public for at least 90 days after notice is provided to the 
public. The Deputy Secretary may not adopt the proposed changes until after the public 
comment period has ended. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DDA provides self-directed services through three special Medicaid waiver 
programs known as the Medicaid home- and community-based services programs, 
including the Family Supports, Community Supports, and Community Pathways waivers. 
Medicaid waiver programs allow states to make exceptions to specified rules and enable 
services to be provided in different settings that are tailored to individuals with different 
needs or varying income levels. For those who qualify, the waiver programs offer services 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1593/ Page 2 
within the community as an alternative to receiving services in an institution. Applicants 
must meet specific technical, medical, and financial criteria to receive services. 
 
A participant in self-directed DDA services works with a coordinator of community 
services to identify needs and preferences and identify an allocated budget amount. A 
participant develops a self-directed budget for services authorized in their person-centered 
plan. Participants then select staff or vendors and arrange for services and supports as 
authorized in the person-centered plan. 
 
The Self-Directed Services Manual, most recently updated on May 19, 2025, is for people 
who are interested in or currently self-directing their Medicaid waiver services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 583 (Senator Jennings, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2