START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1557 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1557 
(Delegate Solomon)(By Request - Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
Procurement - Department of General Services - Real Estate Advisory 
Committee 
 
 
This bill establishes a Real Estate Advisory Committee in the Department of General 
Services (DGS). The Real Estate Advisory Committee must (1) advise State agencies of 
any issues of concern regarding real estate transactions before a formal action on the 
transaction; (2) immediately begin real estate transaction review upon the selection by DGS 
of a lead offeror; (3) not less than one year prior to the expiration of a lease, vote to make 
a recommendation as to whether a real estate transaction or specific provisions of a  
real estate transaction should be rejected, revised, or removed prior to submission to the 
Board of Public Works for approval; and (4) advise DGS on its lease procurement 
procedures. The bill specifies information that an agency must submit to the advisory 
committee for each proposed real estate transaction and establishes requirements for the 
advisory committee to report annually to the Governor and General Assembly. DGS must 
provide staff for the advisory committee, and the Secretary of General Services must 
designate the chair of the committee. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $189,400 beginning in FY 2027 for 
staff. Out-year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. The bill may delay 
approval of real estate transactions, which may increase costs, as discussed below. No 
effect on revenues. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
189,400 
223,800 
234,100 
244,700 
255,400 
Net Effect 
($189,400) 
($223,800) 
($234,100) 
($244,700) 
($255,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1557/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Real estate transaction” means a lease, lease renewal, or purchase of 
property by the State for land acquisition that has a total expected cost greater than 
$500,000 per year.  
 
Each agency that submits a request for proposals for a real estate transaction to the advisory 
committee must include:   
 
 
a full cost benefit analysis comparing similar or comparable properties and purchase 
options, including a comparison of lease options with purchase options, and lease 
consolidation options; 
 
an analysis of agency parking needs and costs, including any related considerations 
regarding the property; 
 
documents that justify (1) real estate terms of time or cost in excess of ordinary and 
regular State contract terms; (2) rent escalation rates in excess of market rates;  
(3) construction costs and costs for any other part of the real estate transaction, with 
consideration for the reasonableness and cost competitiveness of each item;  
(4) removal of any standard real estate provisions, including the right to terminate 
the lease or transaction; and (5) any issues regarding noncompetitive procurements; 
 
a full or significant renovation cost analysis, distinct from the overall lease cost 
benefit analysis, including (1) a justification for noncompetitive procurement of 
goods and services; (2) a demonstration that costs are necessary, reasonable, and 
appropriate; and (3) a demonstration that full funding is available for all 
renovations; and 
 
landlord payment documentation, including (1) total payments to date to the 
landlord; (2) prior lease payments; (3) tax credits or other State benefits granted to 
the landlord; and (4) tax credits or other State benefits for the location of the real 
estate transaction. 
 
A real estate transaction that is submitted to BPW must include all of this information as 
well as the advisory committee’s recommendations on the real estate transaction or specific 
provisions of the real estate transaction. A real estate transaction (or specific provisions) 
not recommended for approval by the advisory committee may be resubmitted to the 
committee for additional review. Nothing in the bill may be construed to prohibit or limit 
an agency from submitting a real estate transaction to BPW for approval. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1557/ Page 3 
The advisory committee must submit an annual report to the Governor and the  
General Assembly before January 1 of each year. The report must include:   
 
 
a list of all current real estate transactions by the State under State law regarding 
State leasing of real property and land acquisition, including the term of duration 
and costs associated with each real estate transaction; 
 
the total number of agencies that submitted requests for proposals for real estate 
transactions to the advisory committee; 
 
the final disposition of each request for proposals for a real estate transaction; 
 
the subsequent action taken by the agency following final disposition of each 
request for proposals for a real estate transaction; and  
 
following BPW approval, the status of real estate transactions published in 
eMaryland Marketplace, listing whether the real estate transaction publication was 
on time or late. 
 
DGS must publish all data required in the annual report on its website or on a publicly 
accessible online dashboard for public review.  
 
Committee members may not receive compensation as members of the committee but are 
entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State Travel Regulations. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Land Acquisition 
 
The Land Acquisition Division within DGS is exclusively responsible for negotiating the 
acquisition of land for any public improvement. The Division must make each State 
acquisition in the name of the unit of the State government or the principal department of 
the State government to which the unit belongs. The division is not responsible for 
acquiring land for a local project or the development of any acquired land. 
 
Before execution, a contract for the acquisition of land must be reviewed by the Secretary 
of General Services and approved by BPW (unless otherwise specified in regulations). 
Except for any capital expenditure by the Maryland Aviation Administration, the Maryland 
Port Administration, or the Maryland Transit Administration, the division must, at least  
40 days before BPW may act on a land acquisition, give written notice of a potential land 
acquisition to the governing body of the county in which the land is located and, if the land 
is located within a municipal corporation, to the governing body of the municipal 
corporation. Within 30 days after receiving notice, the governing body may submit written 
comments to the division. The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to any capital 
expenditures by the Department of Transportation or the Maryland Transportation 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1557/ Page 4 
Authority in connection with State roads, bridges, or highways or to the acquisition of land 
by the Department of Natural Resources. BPW is responsible for supervising the 
expenditures of any money that the General Assembly appropriates for the acquisition of 
land. 
 
Except when real property is acquired by gift, before any real property is acquired from a 
private owner, BPW must obtain two independent appraisals of the property. 
 
State Leasing of Real Property 
 
DGS must give written notice of each proposed initial lease of property to (1) the governing 
body of each political subdivision in which the property is located and (2) each member of 
the General Assembly in whose legislative district the property is located. Within 30 days 
after receiving notice, the governing body or member of the General Assembly may submit 
written comments to DGS, and a lease for a site may not be executed until 31 days after 
the day that notice is received. 
 
DGS must advertise any need of the State to rent building space at least 20 days before 
proposals for a lease are due. The Department must advertise the leasing by posting a 
publication on the DGS website and eMaryland Marketplace, as well as in a daily or weekly 
newspaper with circulation sufficient to provide notice to the people of the State, or at least 
to the people of the affected locality. The advertisement must contain the number of square 
feet proposed to be leased and the general area in which the States desires to lease the 
space.  
 
Unless BPW regulations require otherwise, the Secretary of General Services must submit 
each proposal for the lease of building space by the State, along with any recommendation 
of the Secretary, to BPW for final approval. 
 
These requirements do not apply to (1) intergovernmental lease transactions; (2) lease 
transactions involving property located outside the State; (3) lease transactions declared by 
the Secretary of General Services to be necessary because of an emergency; (4) lease 
transactions where the State is the lessor; or (5) lease transactions involving up to  
5,000 square feet of property. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Department of General Services 
 
The bill requires the Real Estate Advisory Committee to review and make 
recommendations on all State real estate transactions (purchases and leases) with an 
expected cost exceeding $500,000. To do so, the committee must collect and review 
documentation submitted by State agencies for every proposed purchase and lease 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1557/ Page 5 
transaction. For the committee to make informed recommendations, it requires staff to 
gather the required materials and review them for completeness and accuracy. Although 
the Office of Real Estate within DGS is responsible for managing real estate transactions, 
the Office of State Procurement is also responsible for preparing submissions to BPW. 
 
DGS is responsible for providing staff to the committee, but it does not currently have 
sufficient existing budgeted resources to absorb the resulting workload. Accordingly, 
general fund expenditures increase by $189,418 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a  
90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring two administrative staff to revise policies and procedures for the committee, 
verify all documentation has been sufficiently and accurately submitted to the Advisory 
Committee, prepare BPW submissions, and oversee annual reporting by the committee. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$171,136 
Operating Expenses 
    18,282 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$189,418 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Real Estate Transactions 
 
The bill effectively adds another layer of review to an already extended approval process 
for proposed real estate transactions. BPW approval alone can take between four and  
six weeks once a lease or sale is agreed upon. Protracted approvals of real estate 
transactions can disadvantage the State when it is competing for land or office space with 
private buyers or lessors, who can typically complete transactions more expeditiously. This 
can limit the lease and purchasing options available to the State, which can result in it 
paying a premium in the real estate marketplace. Any such effect cannot be reliably 
estimated, but it may be meaningful. 
 
Additional Comment:  The bill establishes that it may not be construed to prohibit or limit 
a State agency from submitting a real estate transaction to BPW, but it also requires that 
every real estate transaction that is submitted to BPW must include the committee’s 
recommendation. Thus, it is not clear to what extent, if any, an agency can bypass the 
committee’s review of a proposed real estate transaction. It is also not clear whether a 
favorable recommendation by the committee is a precondition for submission of a purchase 
or lease to BPW for approval, especially since transactions not recommended for approval 
can be resubmitted for the committee’s review. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1557/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6