START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1546 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1546 
(Delegate Metzgar) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Baltimore County - Homestead Property Tax Credit - Individuals at Least 65 
Years Old 
 
   
This bill reduces the State and county homestead property tax credit percentage to 0% for 
dwellings in Baltimore County belonging to homeowners who are at least 65 years old. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after  
June 30, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues decrease by approximately $0.8 million 
in FY 2027 and $0.6 million in FY 2028, which reflect the first two years of 
implementation. Future year revenues could decrease by a greater amount depending on 
rising property assessments. The revenue decrease may require either (1) an increase in the 
State property tax rate or (2) a general fund appropriation to cover debt service on the 
State’s general obligation (GO) bonds.    
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County property tax revenues decrease by approximately  
$4.8 million in FY 2027 and 2028, which reflect the first two years of implementation. 
Future year revenues could decrease by a greater amount depending on rising property 
assessments. County expenditures are not directly affected. This bill imposes a mandate 
on a unit of local government.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1546/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Homestead Property Tax Credit Program 
 
The homestead property tax credit program (assessment caps) provides tax credits against 
State, county, and municipal real property taxes for owner-occupied residential properties 
for the amount of real property taxes resulting from an annual assessment increase that 
exceeds a certain percentage or “cap” in any given year. The State requires the cap on 
assessment increases to be set at 10% for State property tax purposes; however, local 
governments have the authority to lower the cap. A majority of local subdivisions have 
assessment caps below 10%. The homestead assessment cap in Baltimore County is set at 
4%. Exhibit 1 lists the county assessment caps for fiscal 2025 through 2027. 
 
Subject to submitting a specified application to the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation and having the application approved, the department must authorize and the State, 
a county, or a municipality must grant a homestead property tax credit for a taxable year 
unless during the previous taxable year (1) the dwelling was transferred for consideration 
to new ownership; (2) the value of the dwelling was increased due to a change in the zoning 
classification of the dwelling initiated or requested by the homeowner or anyone having an 
interest in the property; (3) the use of the dwelling was changed substantially; or (4) the 
assessment of the dwelling was clearly erroneous due to an error in calculation or 
measurement of improvements on the real property. 
 
In addition, in order to qualify for the property tax credit, a homeowner must actually reside 
in the dwelling by July 1 of the taxable year for which the property tax credit is to be 
allowed. A homeowner may claim a property tax credit for only one dwelling. 
 
The homestead property tax credit program is administered as follows:   
 
 
Increases in property assessments are equally spread out over three years. For 
example, if a property’s assessment increased by $120,000, from $300,000 to 
$420,000, the increase would be phased in through increments of $40,000 annually 
for the next three years. 
 
If the assessment cap was set at 10%, however, the amount of assessment subject to 
taxes would increase by only $30,000 in the first year, $33,000 in the following 
year, and $36,300 in the third year. 
 
Since the assessment cap was set lower than the actual market increase, the 
homeowner does not have to pay taxes on the property’s full assessed value. 
 
The extent to which the homestead property tax credit program may actually restrict the 
ability of a county to raise property tax revenues depends on the county’s need for revenues 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1546/ Page 3 
from the property tax and other legal and practical limitations. For example, a county 
impacted by a charter-imposed property tax limitation measure would presumably reduce 
tax rates to offset the impact of rising assessments in the absence of the homestead credit. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
County Assessment Caps 
 
County 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
Allegany 
4% 
4% 
4% 
Anne Arundel 
2% 
2% 
2% 
Baltimore City 
4% 
4% 
4% 
Baltimore 
4% 
4% 
4% 
Calvert 
10% 
10% 
10% 
Caroline 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Carroll 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Cecil 
4% 
4% 
4% 
Charles 
7% 
7% 
7% 
Dorchester 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Frederick 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Garrett 
3% 
3% 
3% 
Harford 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Howard 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Kent 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Montgomery 
10% 
10% 
10% 
Prince George’s 
3% 
3% 
3% 
Queen Anne’s 
5% 
5% 
5% 
St. Mary’s 
3% 
3% 
3% 
Somerset 
10% 
10% 
10% 
Talbot 
0% 
0% 
0% 
Washington 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Wicomico 
5% 
5% 
5% 
Worcester 
3% 
3% 
0% 
 
Source:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1546/ Page 4 
Property Assessment Increases 
 
The real property tax base in Baltimore County is projected to increase by $4.9 billion in 
fiscal 2027, after accounting for the homestead property tax credits. This represents a 
4.6% annual increase in taxable assessments. As shown in Exhibit 2, the real property tax 
base in Baltimore County has realized modest growth since fiscal 2020, with higher growth 
rates in more recent years. Additional information on property tax assessments is provided 
in the Local Government Overview Report, which charts the triennial change in the 
full cash value for each assessment group since 2017.  
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Baltimore County Real Property Tax Base 
Annual Percent Change 
 
FY 20 
FY 21 
FY 22 
FY 23 
FY 24 
FY 25 
FY 26 
FY 27 
3.2% 
3.1% 
2.9% 
3.0% 
3.5% 
4.5% 
5.1% 
4.6% 
 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  ABF revenues decrease by approximately $0.8 million in fiscal 2027 
and $0.6 million in fiscal 2028, which reflect the first two years of implementation.  
Future year revenues could decrease by a greater amount depending on rising property 
assessments. Under current law, the 10% homestead assessment cap reduces the State 
property tax base in Baltimore County by $463.7 million. By lowering the homestead 
assessment cap to 0% for senior homeowners, a larger portion of the property tax base in 
Baltimore County would not be taxable for State purposes. This estimate is based on the 
following:   
 
 
282,591 taxable real property tax accounts in Baltimore County for State purposes. 
 
25% of real property tax accounts related to senior homeowners.  
 
State property tax base is reduced by $726.8 million in fiscal 2027 and by 
$518.4 million in fiscal 2028. 
 
State property tax rate is $0.112 per $100 of assessment. 
 
Impact on Debt Service Payments 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s GO bonds are paid from the ABF. Revenue sources 
for the fund include State property taxes, premium from bond sales, and repayments from 
certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General funds may be 
appropriated directly to the ABF to make up any differences between the debt service 
payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. The  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1546/ Page 5 
fiscal 2027 budget assumes $1.3 billion in State property tax revenues to the ABF. In 
addition, $177.7 million in general funds and $0.8 million in federal funds are budgeted to 
the ABF, since the State property tax rate is not set high enough to cover the full cost of 
the debt service payments on the State’s GO bonds.  
 
To offset the reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could 
increase in an amount equal to the decrease in the ABF revenues, or the State property tax 
rate would have to be increased to meet debt service payments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore County property tax revenues decrease by approximately 
$4.8 million in fiscal 2027 and 2028, which reflect the first two years of implementation 
as a result of reducing the county homestead assessment cap for senior homeowners.  
Future year revenues could decrease by a greater amount depending on rising property 
assessments, which could significantly increase the cost of the lower homestead assessment 
cap. This estimate is based on the following:   
 
 
282,568 taxable real property tax accounts in Baltimore County. 
 
25% of real property tax accounts related to senior homeowners.  
 
County property tax base is reduced by $439.6 million in fiscal 2027 and by 
$438.8 million in fiscal 2028. 
 
County property tax rate is $1.10 per $100 of assessment. 
 
Additional information on the homestead property tax credit program and the fiscal impact 
on county governments is provided in the Local Government Overview Report. Information 
on local tax rates and revenue collections for each county government is provided in the 
County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is available on the Department of 
Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1546/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6