START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1540 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1540 
(Delegate Harrison) 
Appropriations 
 
 
University of Maryland Capital Region Medical Center - Funding - Repeal of 
Termination Date 
 
   
This bill makes permanent a mandated appropriation for the University of Maryland 
Capital Region Medical Center (formerly known as the Prince George’s County Regional 
Medical Center (PGCRMC)). As a result, the Governor must continue to include a 
$10.0 million appropriation in the annual budget bill beyond fiscal 2028. The bill also 
repeals the June 30, 2028, termination date for other provisions relating to the transition of 
the medical center to the University of Maryland Medical System (UMMS) and repeals a 
related finding of the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2029. Revenues are not affected. This bill maintains a mandated appropriation 
beyond FY 2028. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
10,000,000 
10,000,000 
10,000,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
($10,000,000) 
($10,000,000) 
($10,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.       
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1540/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 13 of 2016 provided specified operating and capital funding to 
UMMS to assist in the transition of a new PGCRMC from Dimensions Health Care System 
to UMMS; Prince George’s County was likewise required to provide a combination of 
matching funds and other financial assistance to UMMS that constituted specified total 
financial assistance. Chapter 13 had a termination date of June 30, 2021; however, 
Chapter 19 of 2017 extended that termination date by seven years, through June 30, 2028. 
Among other things, Chapter 19 also altered the amount of operating grants the State was 
required to provide in fiscal 2018 through 2021, modified the timing for provision of capital 
funding, and required the Governor to include an annual appropriation for additional 
operating grants from fiscal 2022 through 2028.  
 
Ultimately, the Governor was required to include in the capital or operating budget bill the 
following amounts that equal the capital funds committed by Prince George’s County to 
be used for the construction of PGCRMC:  (1) for fiscal 2018, $11.3 million; (2) for 
fiscal 2019, $48.0 million; and (3) for fiscal 2020, $56.2 million. Prince George’s County 
had to provide matching funds of $208.0 million for the capital construction of PGCRMC. 
For the purpose of providing an operating grant to ensure and assist in the transition of a 
new PGCRMC to UMMS, the Governor must include in the budget bill an appropriation 
of (1) for fiscal 2018, $28.0 million; (2) for fiscal 2019, $27.0 million; (3) for  
fiscal 2020 and 2021, $15.0 million; and (4) for fiscal 2022 through 2028, $10.0 million.  
 
State and county funds must be used to support the transition of PGCRMC from operation 
under the Dimensions Health Care System to operation as a participating institution of 
UMMS and may only be used for (1) providing increased access to critical health care 
services for the region served by PGCRMC and improving the quality of the services 
provided and (2) facilitating cost containment measures to prevent additional operating 
losses for PGCRMC and its affiliated institutions. 
 
Also, pursuant to Chapter 19, the General Assembly finds that: 
 
 
the financial viability of PGCRMC and the State’s investment in the center is 
contingent on high quality clinical programs at the existing Prince George’s 
Hospital Center and the new PGCRMC; 
 
the ability of UMMS to develop and maintain high quality clinical programs at the 
existing Prince George’s Hospital Center and to transition to the new PGCRMC is 
contingent on State operating and capital funding in specific years; 
 
the ability to protect the State’s investment in the new PGCRMC is jeopardized by 
the provisions of the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2017, as 
introduced, that alter both the operating and capital obligations mandated by 
Chapter 13; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1540/ Page 3 
 
the changed circumstances and the need to protect the State’s investment require 
additional support in future years to ensure the financial viability of PGCRMC and 
ultimately the ability of the State to end State support for the center. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2029, 
and annually thereafter, due to the bill permanently maintaining the mandated 
appropriation to provide an operating grant to ensure and assist in the transition of 
PGCRMC to UMMS. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $10.0 million for the 
medical center. 
 
Additional Comments:  PGCRMC was renamed to be the University of Maryland Capital 
Region Medical Center in 2017. The center opened its doors on June 12, 2021.  
 
UMMS advises that the annual operating grant to the University of Maryland Capital 
Region Medical Center is critical to the operations of the hospital and the health and 
well‑being of Prince George’s County residents. Specifically, the grant has allowed the 
medical center to establish and expand clinical programs in cancer care, cardiac care, 
maternal fetal medicine, and other specialty areas, addressing long-standing access to care 
issues.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; University of Maryland Medical 
System; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3