START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1579 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1579 
(Chair, Government, Labor, and Elections 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Budget and 
Management) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Personnel - Family and Medical Leave - Limits and Use 
 
 
This departmental bill alters a prohibition on limiting leave under the federal Family and 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA) for all State units of the Executive Branch by repealing the 
requirement that employees must be married to one another to care for a child for specified 
reasons. Additionally, an employee within the State Personnel Management System 
(SPMS) may use, without submitting a certificate of illness or disability, up to 30 days of 
accrued sick leave (as authorized under current law) or paid family and medical leave 
(PFML). Lastly, the bill modifies regulations on FMLA that the Secretary of Budget and 
Management must adopt. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026; if the effective date of 
Chapter 606 of 2025 changes, the bill’s effective date changes too. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not expand total leave hours beyond existing statutory limits, 
but it may require some reconfiguration of personnel systems. As such, the bill’s changes 
can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1579/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Limits on Use of Leave for Birth, Adoption, Foster Placement, or Care of a Child 
 
Under current law, in implementing FMLA, all State units of the Executive Branch may 
not limit to less than 24 weeks the aggregate number of weeks of family and medical leave 
that two employees who are married to one another may use during a 12-month period to 
care for a child for:  the birth of the employees’ child; the adoption or placement of a child 
with the employees for foster care; a serious health condition of the employees’ minor 
child; or the care of the employees’ adult child if the adult child is incapable of self-care. 
The Secretary of Budget and Management must adopt regulations reflecting that and the 
regulations may require an eligible employee to use other available accrued leave 
concurrently with FMLA leave. 
 
The bill repeals the requirement that these employees be married. Additionally, FMLA 
regulations adopted by the Secretary of Budget and Management must reflect this, and the 
regulations no longer must specify that the leave used concurrently with FMLA leave be 
accrued. 
 
Sick Leave Use After Birth or Adoption 
 
Under current law, an employee within SPMS who is responsible for a child may use, 
without certification of illness or disability, up to 30 days of accrued sick leave following 
the birth or adoption of the child. If two employees within SPMS care for a child, each 
employee may use, without certification of illness or disability, up to 30 days of accrued 
sick leave following the birth or adoption of the child.  
 
The bill authorizes an employee to use accrued sick leave or PFML without certification 
of illness or disability and specifies that if two employees together are responsible for 
caring for a child, each employe may use accrued sick leave or PFML to care for a child 
without certification of illness or disability. The bill may not be construed to limit the 
amount of PFML an employee is eligible to receive. 
 
Background:  In fall 2024, DBM engaged in collective bargaining regarding the Family 
and Medical Leave Insurance (FAMLI) Program with exclusive representatives of State 
employees. The parties reached agreement about the FAMLI Program such that PFML is 
available beginning July 1, 2026, without eligibility and contribution requirements, in 
exchange for eliminating the paid parental leave program (which provided 60 days of paid 
parental leave to an employee in the Executive Branch of State government under specified 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1579/ Page 3 
circumstances). Legislation was needed to implement the agreed-upon terms, and  
Chapter 606 implemented that agreement. 
 
Chapter 606, which takes effect July 1, 2026, (1) repeals the existing paid parental leave 
program for Executive Branch employees; (2) establishes new PFML benefits for 
Executive Branch employees that generally mirror the benefits available under the FAMLI 
Program; and (3) requires the Secretary of Budget and Management or the governing body 
of a public institution of higher education to adopt regulations governing PFML benefits, 
which include conditions and procedures for requesting and approving PFML to the extent 
that the regulations do not conflict with statute. 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program  
 
Chapter 48 of 2022 established the FAMLI Program, to be administered by the Maryland 
Department of Labor. Chapters 258 and 259 of 2023, Chapters 266 and 267 of 2024, and 
Chapter 363 of 2025 made several modifications to the program, including delaying the 
program’s start date. Employer, employee, and self-employed individual contributions to 
the program begin January 1, 2027, and claims for benefits begin sometime between 
January 1, 2027, and January 3, 2028, as determined and announced by the Secretary of 
Labor. 
 
The program generally provides up to 12 weeks of benefits to a covered individual who is 
taking leave from employment due to caring for or bonding with certain family members, 
the individual’s own serious health condition, or a qualifying exigency arising out of a 
family member’s military deployment. The weekly benefit is based on an individual’s 
average weekly wage and is indexed to inflation. 
 
Federal Family and Medical Leave Act  
 
A private-sector employer is covered by the FMLA if it employs 50 or more employees in 
20 or more workweeks in the current or previous calendar year. An employee is considered 
to be employed each working day of the calendar week if the employee works any part of 
the week. FMLA generally requires covered employers to provide eligible employees with 
up to 12 work weeks of unpaid leave during any 12-month period for qualifying family and 
medical reasons (including for the birth, adoption, or foster placement of a child) and 
requires continuation of their group health benefits under the same conditions as if they 
had not taken leave. FMLA leave may be unpaid or used at the same time as 
employer-provided paid leave. Employees must be restored to the same or virtually 
identical position when they return to work after FMLA leave. 
 
Eligible employees are individuals employed by a covered employer who have been 
employed for at least 12 months, have at least 1,250 hours of service with the employer 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1579/ Page 4 
during the 12 months before their FMLA leave starts, and work at a location where the 
employer has at least 50 employees within 75 miles. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1579/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Personnel - Family and Medical Leave - Limits and Use 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 1579 
 
PREPARED BY:  Dana Phillips 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
   X     WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
           WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 5