START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1500 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1500 
(Delegate Howard, et al.) 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
 
State Agencies - Adoption of Regulations - Required 
 
 
This bill prohibits a unit of State government, if required by law to adopt regulations to 
implement a program that is authorized or required under State law, from collecting any 
fee or other payment under that program until the unit finalizes adoption of the regulations 
that implement the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State revenues (all/multiple fund types) may decrease beginning in FY 2027 
to the extent State agencies cannot collect fee revenue until any associated regulations are 
adopted. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State expenditures. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Adoption of Proposed Regulations – Generally 
 
All proposed regulations are submitted to the Administrative, Executive, and Legislative 
(AELR) Committee for review at least 15 days before they are submitted to the 
Maryland Register for publication. Often changes are negotiated between AELR and the 
unit before publication. AELR is not required to give its explicit approval in order for a 
proposed regulation to become effective. In the usual course, the unit may adopt a proposed 
regulation 45 days after the regulation was published in the Maryland Register. Thirty of 
the 45 days must be reserved as a public comment period. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1500/ Page 2 
If AELR cannot complete its review of the proposed regulation within the 45-day period, 
it may delay, or “hold,” the adoption of the regulation. During this time, AELR may suggest 
to the unit that certain changes be made. If no agreement is reached, the unit may 
subsequently notify AELR of its intent to adopt the regulation despite AELR’s hold. The 
hold period ends on the later of the 60th day after the unit’s notice to the committee or the 
105th day after the initial publication of the regulation in the Maryland Register. 
 
At any time, AELR may formally vote to oppose the adoption of the regulation. In this 
case, notice of the opposition is sent to the Governor and the unit, and further negotiations 
ensue. The Governor may instruct the unit to withdraw or modify the regulation. However, 
once AELR has opposed the adoption of the regulation, it may not be adopted unless 
approved by the Governor. 
 
Procedures for Emergency Regulations 
 
Emergency regulations, which bypass the normal public notice and comment period, 
remain in effect for a limited period of time – not to exceed 180 days – to meet 
exigent circumstances. Although emergency regulations are not published in the 
Maryland Register before adoption, notice of AELR’s receipt of the regulation is posted 
on the Maryland General Assembly website. In addition, the agency submitting the request 
for adoption of emergency status must post the text of the regulations on the agency website 
within 3 business days of submission to AELR. If a member of AELR requests a public 
hearing on the emergency adoption of a regulation, AELR must hold the hearing. If no 
public hearing is requested, staff to AELR may poll members on the emergency regulation 
as soon as 10 business days after receipt of the regulation. Approval by AELR is required 
for an emergency regulation to take effect. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State revenues (all/multiple fund types) may decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2027 to the extent State agencies are unable to collect any fee revenue until associated 
regulations are adopted. Some agencies indicate that they already wait until regulations 
take effect before collecting fees, but others advise that the bill’s requirement may disrupt 
or delay future fee collections. However, as it is unknown how many future programs will 
require regulations to be adopted or the extent to which any fees may be established, the 
actual amount of any revenue decreases cannot be estimated. 
 
The Maryland Department of Health advises that any fees established by emergency 
regulation may not satisfy the bill’s condition for the collection of fees until the unit 
finalizes the adoption of regulations, as “adoption” generally precludes any regulations 
promulgated by emergency regulation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1500/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1279 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland 
Cannabis Administration; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland 
Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3