START OF PAGE 1
HB1563/833120/1

BY: Health Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1563
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Bhandari” and substitute
“Delegates Bhandari, Alston, Bagnall, Cullison, Guzzone, Hill, Hutchinson, S.
Johnson, Kaufman, Kipke, Lopez, Martinez, Rosenberg, Ross, Taveras, White
Holland, and Woorman”; strike beginning with “prohibiting” in line 3 down through
“circumstances” in line 5 and substitute “authorizing the Maryland Insurance
Commissioner to conduct an examination of certain decisions by carriers related to
claims or authorization requests for services in, or related to services in, emergency
departments; authorizing the Commissioner to have certain decisions independently
reviewed under certain circumstances”; in line 6, strike “Maryland Insurance”; after line
20, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–10A–06
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”;

and in line 23, strike “15–504” and substitute “15–10B–21”.

On pages 1 and 2, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 26 on page
1 through line 2 on page 3, inclusive.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On pages 3 and 4, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 29 on page
3 through line 6 on page 4, inclusive.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1563/833120/01 Health Committee
Amendments to HB 1563
Page 2 of 3

On page 5, after line 29, insert:

“15–10B–21.

(A) THE COMMISSIONER MAY CONDUCT AN EXAMINATION OF A CARRIER
THAT HAS ISSUED A PATTERN OF ADVERSE DECISIONS OR GRIEVANCE DECISIONS
FOR A CLAIM OR AUTHORIZATION REQUEST FOR SERVICES IN, OR RELATED TO
SERVICES IN, AN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT.

(B) A CARRIER EXAMINED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL PRODUCE ALL DOCUMENTS RELATED TO AN ADVERSE DECISION OR
GRIEVANCE DECISION DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION,

INCLUDING DOCUMENTS OR ELECTRONIC DOCUMENTS IN THE POSSESSION OF A
PRIVATE REVIEW AGENT ACTING ON BEHALF OF THE CARRIER.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSIONER MAY HAVE AN ADVERSE DECISION OR
GRIEVANCE DECISION DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
REVIEWED BY AN INDEPENDENT REVIEW ORGANIZATION.

(2) THE COSTS OF A REVIEW CONDUCTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE PAID BY THE CARRIER.”;

and in line 30, strike “3.” and substitute “2.”.

On page 6, in line 2, after “Commission” insert “and representatives from the
post–acute care industry”.

On page 7, in lines 3 and 24, strike “4.” and “7.”, respectively, and substitute “3.”
and “4.”, respectively; in line 5, after “Commission” insert “and representatives from the
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB1563/833120/01 Health Committee
Amendments to HB 1563
Page 3 of 3

post–acute care industry”; strike in their entirety lines 19 through 23, inclusive; and in
lines 24 and 25, strike “, except as provided in Section 6 of this Act,”.
END OF PAGE 3