START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1548 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1548 
(Delegates Stinnett and Simmons) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Real Property - Residential Lease - Terminology 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes throughout statute to remove and replace the terms 
“landlord” with “rental property owner” and “tenant” with “resident”.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes the publisher of the Annotated Code of Maryland, in 
consultation with and subject to the approval of the Department of Legislative Services, to 
correct cross-references and terminology rendered incorrect by the bill. The publisher must 
adequately describe any correction in an editor’s note following the section affected.  
 
Current Law:  In general, the terms “landlord” and “tenant” are found throughout State 
law. The terms typically refer to the relationship between individuals/parties in connection 
with rental real property. State law generally governs the relationship between landlords 
and tenants, including establishing obligations, responsibilities, and protections of each 
party. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1548/ Page 2 
State Expenditures:  The Judiciary advises that the terms “landlord” and “tenant” are used 
extensively in court-provided materials and publications, and that conforming such items 
to the terminology in the bill requires the Judiciary to (1) revise affected media (including 
forms, notices, brochures, other informational publications, and websites); (2) perform 
public outreach; (3) update internal procedural guidance materials; and (4) print and 
distribute revised media, as necessary. The Judiciary reports that making these changes 
may result in a moderate fiscal and operational impact on the Judiciary. This analysis 
assumes, however, that as the bill makes no substantive changes, all items do not require 
immediate updates and the process can instead be accomplished in a manner that does not 
materially affect finances or operations (e.g., brochures/forms can be reprinted with the 
correct terminology only when necessary for routine replenishment). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2