START OF PAGE 1
HB1578/453722/1

BY: Government, Labor, and Elections Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1578
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 2, after line 17, insert:

“BY adding to
Article - State Government
Section 9-1A-10(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.

On page 2, in line 40, strike “and reenacting, with amendments,”.

On page 3, after line 4, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 641 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022, as amended by
Chapters 137 and 138 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023 and
Chapters 620 and 621 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2025
Section 2(c)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 6, in line 18, strike “INDIVIDUAL”; in line 23, strike “MINORITIES AND
NONMINORITY WOMEN” and substitute “MINORITY– AND WOMEN–OWNED FIRMS”;
and in line 32, strike “MINORITIES AND NONMINORITY WOMEN” and substitute
“MINORITY– AND WOMEN–OWNED BUSINESSES”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1578/453722/01 Government, Labor, and Elections Committee
Amendments to HB 1578
Page 2 of 4

On page 7, in line 32, strike “SUPPORT” and substitute “REDUCE
DISCRIMINATION SUPPORT”; and in line 34, strike “WILL HELP REDUCE
DISCRIMINATION, CREATE” and substitute “AND CREATE”.

On page 9, in line 21, strike “15TH” and substitute “5TH”.

On page 10, in lines 10 and 11, strike “BASED ON CRITERIA ESTABLISHED”;
and in line 12, strike “UNDER A CONTRACT” and substitute “RELATED TO
CONTRACTS”.

On page 14, in lines 9 and 10, strike “BASED ON CRITERIA ESTABLISHED”; in
line 11, strike “UNDER A DESIGNATED OR UNDESIGNATED CONTRACT AS” and
substitute “RELATED TO CONTRACTS”; and in lines 16 and 26, in each instance, strike
“15TH” and substitute “5TH”.

On page 15, after line 11, insert:

“(A) (1) THE FINDINGS AND EVIDENCE RELIED ON BY THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY FOR THE CONTINUATION OF THE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
PROGRAM UNDER TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE ARE INCORPORATED IN THIS SECTION.

(2) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND AUTHORIZED BY THE
UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION, A LICENSEE SHALL COMPLY WITH THE STATE’S
MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM.”;

in line 12, strike “(a)” and substitute “(B)”; in line 16, after the second “and” insert:

“2. any other corresponding provisions of law under Title
14, Subtitle 3 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB1578/453722/01 Government, Labor, and Elections Committee
Amendments to HB 1578
Page 3 of 4

(ii) The minority business participation goal shall apply to:

1. construction related to video lottery terminals; and

2. procurement related to the operation of video lottery
terminals, including procurement of equipment and ongoing services.

(2) If the county in which a video lottery facility will be located has
higher minority business participation requirements than the State as described in
paragraph (1) of this subsection, the applicant shall meet the county’s minority business
participation requirements to the extent possible.

(3) A county in which a video lottery facility will be located may impose
local business, local minority business participation, and local hiring requirements to
the extent authorized by local law and permitted by the United States Constitution.

(4) Any collective bargaining agreement or agreements, including a
project labor agreement or a neutrality agreement, entered into by an applicant or
licensee may not negate the requirements of this subsection.

(5) If an applicant for employment at a video lottery facility believes
that the applicant has been discriminated against in the employment process, the
applicant may appeal the employment decision to the local human relations board in
the county where the facility is located.

(6) Notwithstanding any collective bargaining agreement or
agreements, a licensee shall:

(i) provide health insurance coverage for its employees; and

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
HB1578/453722/01 Government, Labor, and Elections Committee
Amendments to HB 1578
Page 4 of 4

(ii) give a preference to hiring qualified employees from the
communities within 10 miles of the video lottery facility.

(7) A licensee shall:

(i) provide retirement benefits for its employees; and

(ii) if the licensee is a racetrack licensee, provide retirement
benefits to its video lottery operation employees that are equivalent to the level of
benefits provided to the racetrack employees who are eligible under the Maryland
Racetrack Employees Pension Fund.

(8) Notwithstanding any collective bargaining agreement or
agreements, if the licensee is a racetrack location, the licensee shall provide health
insurance coverage to all employees of the racetrack, including the employees of the
racetrack on the backstretch of the racetrack.”;

in lines 17 and 29, strike “(b)” and “(c)”, respectively, and substitute “(C)” and “(D)”,
respectively; in lines 18, 21, 24, 26, 29, and 30, in each instance, strike “(a)(1)” and
substitute “(B)(1)”; and in line 30, in each instance, strike “(b)” and substitute “(C)”.

On page 19, strike in their entirety lines 31 through 35, inclusive; after line 35,
insert:

“[(c)] (B) The State Retirement and Pension System shall provide to the
certification agency any information deemed necessary to assess the need for remedial
measures to assist minority and women–owned businesses in the brokerage and
investment management services industry and market.”.

On pages 19 and 20, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 36 on
page 19 through line 5 on page 20, inclusive.
END OF PAGE 4