START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1559 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1559 
(The Speaker) 
Appropriations and Health 
 
 
Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstay Patients - 
Placement 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Department of Human Services (DHS), in the administration of its 
out-of-home placement program, from allowing the placement of a child in an unlicensed 
setting. The bill alters the duties of the pediatric overstay coordinators and establishes a 
Child and Youth Placement Review Panel to be led by a Placement Manager in the 
Governor’s Office for Children (GOC). The Placement Manager must convene a Rapid 
Response Placement Team under specified circumstances. The bill also establishes the 
Advisory Council on Maryland’s System of Care for Children, Youth, and Families and 
the Interagency Council on Children, Youth and Families, both to be staffed by GOC. 
The bill generally takes effect June 30, 2026; provisions related to the interagency 
council take effect October 1, 2026, and terminate September 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No assumed effect in FY 2026. GOC special fund expenditures increase by 
$242,200 in FY 2027 for staff. Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund 
expenditures increase by $89,400 in FY 2027 for staff. Potential additional increase in 
DHS expenditures for placement costs, as discussed below. Future years reflect 
annualization and elimination of one-time costs. Revenues are likely not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
89,400 
95,400 
99,900 
104,400 
109,000 
SF Expenditure 
242,200 
262,300 
274,300 
286,600 
299,100 
Net Effect 
($331,600) 
($357,700) 
($374,200) 
($391,000) 
($408,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1559/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Out‐of‐home Placements – Prohibition on Unlicensed Settings 
 
The bill amends the Family Law Article to define an “unlicensed setting” as a setting for 
an out-of-home placement that is not licensed, and includes (1) a hotel, motel, or short-term 
rental; (2) a shelter designated to meet the needs of a child who has run away or who is 
homeless; and (3) an office building or other nonresidential environment. “Unlicensed 
setting” does not include the voluntary placement of a former child in need of assistance 
or the placement of a child with an individual who currently is (or is applying to be) a 
kinship caregiver or foster parent, or a parent, including in a family-based residential 
treatment setting. 
 
DHS’ Social Services Administration, in administering the out‐of‐home placement 
program, may not allow a child to be placed in an unlicensed setting. 
 
The bill amends the Human Services Article to define “child in an unlicensed setting” as 
an individual younger than age 22 (1) in an out-of-home placement who is residing in a 
hotel, office building, shelter, or any other unlicensed setting or (2) who is a pediatric 
overstay patient. “Child in an unlicensed setting” does not include an individual younger 
than age 22 who is receiving a self-independent living stipend, living with kin awaiting 
approval for placement, or on aftercare with a parent. 
 
Pediatric Overstay Coordinators 
 
The bill requires pediatric overstay coordinators to (1) report any instance of a pediatric 
hospital overstay patient to the Placement Manager in GOC as soon as the patient is known 
to the coordinator and (2) provide monthly reports on specified collected data to the 
Secretaries of Health and Human Services, and the Child and Youth Placement Review 
Panel in GOC. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1559/ Page 3 
Placement Manager 
 
The Placement Manager within GOC must be appointed by and serves at the pleasure of 
the Governor. The Placement Manager must: 
 
 
devote full-time to the duties of GOC; 
 
serve as the point of contact for the pediatric hospital overstay coordinators; 
 
oversee the work of the review panel to ensure the provision of adequate medical 
and behavioral health care for children in unlicensed settings in the State; and 
 
keep the official records of the review panel. 
 
The Placement Manager is entitled to compensation in accordance with the State budget 
and is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
Child and Youth Placement Review Panel 
 
The panel within GOC consists of the Secretaries of Health and Human Services (or their 
designees); the State Superintendent of Schools (or designee); the Placement Manager; and 
several members appointed by the Governor. To the extent practicable, the members 
appointed to the review panel must reflect the geographic, racial, ethnic, cultural, and 
gender diversity of the State. Members of the review panel may not receive compensation 
but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The Placement Manager must serve as the chair, and GOC must provide staff support for 
the review panel. The review panel must: 
 
 
analyze any instance involving a child in an unlicensed setting; and 
 
support placement efforts involving a child in an unlicensed setting by referring the 
child to (1) a local department of social services (LDSS); (2) public or private 
residential care programs; (3) a residential program operated by or under contract 
with the Department of Juvenile Service; (4) a foster care home approved by an 
LDSS; (5) a treatment foster care home; (6) the placement team; or (7) any other 
appropriate entity to support the placement of the child. 
 
Rapid Response Placement Team 
 
When a pediatric hospital overstay patient remains in the hospital for more than 72 hours, 
the Placement Manager must convene a Rapid Response Placement Team. The placement 
team must consist of the pediatric overstay coordinators and several additional members 
designated by the Placement Manager, including a representative of 211 Maryland; a 
representative of the LDSS; if applicable, a representative of an unlicensed setting where 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1559/ Page 4 
a child is residing; and a representative of the hospital where the child is considered a 
pediatric overstay patient. 
 
When a placement team is convened, the placement team must meet each day until a 
placement for the child is located. The placement team must develop a plan for the 
appropriate placement of a pediatric hospital overstay patient who has remained in a 
hospital for more than 72 hours and may (1) conduct immediate clinical and placement 
assessments; (2) override LDSS placement decisions, if necessary; and (3) secure 
immediate placement in available licensed settings. 
 
Advisory Council on Maryland’s System of Care for Children, Youth, and Families 
 
The Advisory Council on Maryland’s System of Care for Children, Youth, and Families 
must consist of individuals who have experience and knowledge of working with children 
with behavioral health challenges, adverse childhood experiences, and developmental 
disabilities, including the Special Secretary of GOC (or designee); the Placement Manger; 
the pediatric overstay coordinators; the Public Defender (or designee); the Foster Youth 
Ombudsman; and multiple representatives as appointed by the Governor. Members of the 
advisory council may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The Special Secretary of GOC (or the designee) must serve as chair, and GOC must provide 
staff for the advisory council. The advisory council must meet quarterly and hold joint 
meetings with the interagency council at least two times per year. 
 
The advisory council must: 
 
 
review existing laws and regulations to ensure that they facilitate the provision of 
adequate medical and behavioral health care in the State, including to youth in 
out-of-home placements in the State; 
 
recommend to the interagency council any additions or changes to existing laws or 
regulations designed to facilitate the provision of adequate medical and behavioral 
health care to children in need of medical and behavioral health care in the State, 
including youth in out-of-home placements in the State; 
 
identify any grant or money from the federal government, private foundations, or 
other sources that may be available for programs related to children in out-of-home 
placements; 
 
assist organizations in applying for such grants; 
 
examine the New Jersey Children’s System of Care model and provide 
recommendations on how the model can be replicated in the State; and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1559/ Page 5 
 
review existing laws and regulations, provide recommendations if gaps are 
identified, and make recommendations to ensure, if a parent or guardian is not 
available to make medical decisions or while in the process of obtaining a voluntary 
placement agreement, all pediatric hospital overstay patients have access to legal 
representation and education services. 
 
By October 1, 2027, and annually thereafter, the advisory council must report its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor, the Placement Manager, and the General Assembly. 
 
Interagency Council on Children, Youth, and Families 
 
The Interagency Council on Children, Youth, and Families must consist of representatives 
from each State agency responsible for providing medical or behavioral health care, 
services, or supervision to children, youth, and families, including the Secretaries of 
Health, Juvenile Services, Disabilities, and Human Services (or their designees); the 
Maryland Insurance Commissioner (or designee); the Public Defender (or designee); the 
State Superintendent of Schools (or designee); the Deputy Secretary of Medicaid (or 
designee); the Special Secretary of GOC (or designee); the Executive Director of the 
Maryland Health Care Commission (or designee); the Executive Director of the 
Chesapeake Regional Information System for Our Patients (or designee); the Director of 
the Office of Health Care Quality (or designee); the pediatric overstay coordinators; and a 
representative from the State-authorized administrator of 2-1-1 services in Maryland, 
appointed by the Governor. 
 
The Special Secretary of GOC (or the designee) must serve as chair, and GOC must provide 
staff. 
 
The interagency council must: 
 
 
complete an assessment of the current number of licensed beds, staffed beds, and 
physical beds intended to serve the needs of children and youth by agency, 
categorized by type of bed inclusive of age, gender, diagnosis, severity, and 
specialty accepted for specified bed types; 
 
develop an electronic process for tracking the real-time location, length of stay, and 
discharge plans for pediatric hospital overstay patients, including youth under or in 
the process of a voluntary placement agreement; 
 
develop a model for standardized data collection with mandated uniform metrics, 
including age, gender identity, race, ethnicity, county of origin, payer type, and 
length of stay for pediatric hospital overstay patients, including youth under or in 
the process of a voluntary placement agreement; 
 
designate an entity to serve as a central repository for data collected; and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1559/ Page 6 
 
develop a plan and identify resources needed to expand mobile response and 
stabilization services across the State to ensure statewide access and full 
implementation by 2030. 
 
By January 1, 2027, and January 1, 2028, the interagency council must report its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor, the Placement Manager, and the General Assembly. 
Provisions related to the interagency council terminate September 30, 2029. 
 
Current Law/Background:  DHS must establish a program of out-of-home placement for 
minor children (1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up 
to 180 days, by a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who 
are abused, abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that 
continued residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has 
committed the child to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with 
the approval of DHS, are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under 
a voluntary placement agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a 
mental illness, as specified. An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, 
group and residential care, kinship care, and a treatment foster care home. 
 
Pediatric Overstay Patients 
 
“Pediatric hospital overstay patient” means a patient younger than age 22 who remains in 
an inpatient unit or emergency department of a hospital for more than 48 hours after being 
medically cleared for discharge or transfer. Chapters 479 and 480 of 2025 require DHS, in 
coordination with MDH, to ensure that a pediatric hospital overstay patient who is a child 
committed to the care and custody of DHS is transferred to and treated in the least 
restrictive setting when clinically indicated and when possible. The Acts also require MDH 
and DHS to establish a pediatric hospital overstay coordinator in each department. 
 
If a pediatric hospital overstay patient remains in the hospital for more than 48 hours and 
the Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Registry and Referral System 
indicates that an appropriate inpatient bed is available, the hospital must seek the transfer 
to maintain the clinical stability of the patient. To ensure that a pediatric hospital overstay 
patient is treated in the least restrictive setting, a hospital may concurrently explore in-state 
and out-of-state placement options. 
 
The pediatric hospital overstay coordinators must act in the best interest of a pediatric 
hospital overstay patient by coordinating between hospitals, relevant State agencies and 
programs, and providers of mental health and substance use disorder (SUD) services. The 
coordinators must also: 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1559/ Page 7 
 
advocate on behalf of pediatric hospital overstay patients while maintaining 
appropriate patient confidentiality; 
 
review policies and procedures of relevant State agencies and make 
recommendations for necessary changes to better serve pediatric hospital overstay 
patients; 
 
maintain data on each pediatric hospital overstay patient, as specified; and 
 
report on the data collected to the Secretaries of Health and Human Services. 
 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays 
 
Chapters 479 and 480 also established the Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings 
and Pediatric Hospital Overstays to: 
 
 
complete an assessment of the number, type, and cost of the additional beds and 
supportive services needed to place all children in pediatric overstays and other 
unlicensed settings in the least restrictive settings; 
 
develop a comprehensive and sustainable resource development plan designed to 
increase the number of licensed settings and end the use of pediatric overstays and 
unlicensed settings; 
 
develop an implementation plan with comprehensive data to inform the plan; and 
 
determine the anticipated timeline for when the practice of placing children in 
unlicensed settings will cease. 
 
Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder and Registry and Referral System 
 
The Maryland Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Registry and Referral System 
provides a statewide system through which health care providers can identify and access 
available inpatient and outpatient mental health and substance use services for patients. 
Subject to the availability of funds, MDH must develop and implement the registry and 
referral system, in collaboration with the State-designated health information exchange. 
The registry and referral system must include (1) a searchable inventory of any provider of 
mental health and SUD services; (2) the capability to allow a provider to update registry 
information including the real-time availability of services; and (3) an electronic referral 
system that is available to any health care provider in the State to facilitate electronic 
referrals to mental health and SUD providers. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Department of Human Services 
 
Unlicensed Settings:  The bill prohibits placement of a child in an unlicensed setting. In 
response to a bill with similar provisions, DHS advised that existing practices are generally 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1559/ Page 8 
in compliance with the prohibition against youth being placed in unlicensed settings with 
fewer than 10 youth thought to be in an unlicensed setting (with reported plans for 
re-placement). 
 
However, while this number is assumed to reflect placements at unlicensed settings 
specifically mentioned in the bill (e.g., hotel, office building, etc.), DHS advised for a bill 
with similar provisions, that there are currently 108 youth in semi-independent living 
arrangements (SILAs); these are typically individuals who are still in the legal care and 
custody of DHS/a local department but are living on a college campus or in their own 
residences, fully independent with minimal supervision. According to DHS, these SILAs 
may not qualify as a licensed setting. (Although the bill’s definition of a “child in an 
unlicensed setting” under the Human Services Article explicitly exempts individuals 
receiving a self‐independent living stipend, the prohibition against placing a child in an 
unlicensed setting under the Family Law Article does not include this exemption.) 
Accordingly, to the extent that the bill prohibits the placement of youth in SILAs, State 
expenditures increase, perhaps significantly, to cover higher monthly care costs for these 
youth who need to be re‐placed in other settings under the bill. 
 
Pediatric Overstay Coordinators:  The bill requires the pediatric overstay coordinators to 
report any instance of a pediatric hospital overstay patient to the Placement Manager and 
provide specified monthly reports to the Secretaries of Health and Human Services and the 
Child and Youth Placement Review Panel. DHS advises that these requirements can be 
absorbed with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Secretary of Human Services Requirements:  DHS advises that the Secretary of Human 
Services can participate on the Child and Youth Placement Review Panel and the 
Interagency Council on Children, Youth and Families with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Governor’s Office for Children 
 
The bill establishes the position of Placement Manager in GOC to, among other things, 
lead the Child and Youth Placement Review Panel and convene a Rapid Response 
Placement Team when a pediatric overstay patient remains in the hospital for more than 
72 hours. GOC must staff the Advisory Council on Maryland’s System of Care for 
Children, Youth, and Families, hold quarterly meetings, and submit an annual report by 
October 1 each year beginning in 2027. The bill also requires GOC to staff the Interagency 
Council on Children, Youth and Families, hold monthly meetings, and submit a report by 
January 1, 2027, and January 1, 2028. 
 
GOC advises that additional staff are necessary to meet the requirements of the bill. 
Therefore, special fund expenditures increase by $242,171 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1559/ Page 9 
the cost of hiring (1) one Placement Manager to serve as the point of contact for the 
pediatric hospital overstay coordinators, and oversee the work of the review panel and 
(2) one policy advisor to support the review panel, advisory council, and interagency 
council, and to complete required reports. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Permanent Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$223,445 
Other Operating Expenses 
    18,726 
Total FY 2027 GOC Expenditures 
$242,171 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
To the extent the governor choses to transfer positions and associated funds from the 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays to GOC, 
special fund expenditures are reduced. However, this analysis assumes that special funds 
will be required to meet the bill’s requirements, as discussed below. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
Staffing Expenses:  As discussed above, the bill requires pediatric overstay coordinators to 
report any instance of a pediatric hospital overstay patient to the Placement Manager and 
provide specified monthly reports to the Secretaries of Health and Human Services and the 
Child and Youth Placement Review Panel. Additionally, the bill requires the Secretary of 
Health (or designee) to participate on the review panel and the Interagency Council on 
Children, Youth and Families. MDH advises that current staff are not sufficient to meet the 
requirements of the bill. 
 
Therefore, MDH expenditures increase by $89,439 in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 
90-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the 
cost of hiring one health policy analyst to participate on the review panel and interagency 
council, as well as assist the pediatric hospital overstay coordinator with monthly data 
reporting. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$80,076 
Operating Expenses 
    9,363 
Total MDH 2027 State Expenditures 
$89,439 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1559/ Page 10 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Data Collection:  The bill requires the development of a model for standardized data 
collection regarding pediatric overstay patients. Specified data metrics must be collected 
including age, gender identity, race, ethnicity, county of origin, payer type, and length of 
stay for pediatric hospital overstay patients. MDH advises that the data metrics required to 
be collected by the bill can be incorporated into the bed registry and referral system that is 
currently under development at no additional cost. 
 
Uncodified Language 
 
The bill authorizes the Governor to transfer positions and associated funds from the 
Workgroup on Children in Unlicensed Settings and Pediatric Hospital Overstays to GOC. 
However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that there are no positions (or 
associated funds) designated for the workgroup. 
 
Other State Agencies 
 
The Maryland State Department of Education, Maryland Insurance Administration, 
Department of Juvenile Services, and Office of the Public Defender advise that 
participation in the review panel, advisory council, or interagency council, as appropriate, 
can be completed with existing budgeted resources. This analysis assumes that any other 
State agency can also participate in the review panel, advisory council, or interagency 
council, as appropriate, with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1559/ Page 11 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 17, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11