START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1563 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1563 
(The Speaker and Delegate Bhandari) 
Health 
 
 
Emergency Room Services and Post-Acute Care - Coverage and Facility Studies 
 
 
This bill prohibits certain policies and contracts issued by an insurer, nonprofit health 
service plan, or health maintenance organization (collectively carriers) from denying a 
covered emergency room service solely on the basis that the insured or enrollee did not 
experience an “emergency medical condition.” The Insurance Commissioner must include 
specified data on post-acute services in the annual summary report on carrier appeals and 
grievances. By January 1, 2027, the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), in 
conjunction with the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), must conduct 
two studies to (1) quantify bed capacity in hospitals and post-acute settings and recommend 
a collection and auditing process for bed reporting and (2) analyze options to facilitate 
clinically appropriate transitions from acute to post-acute care settings. The bill generally 
takes effect June 1, 2026, while the insurance prohibition takes effect January 1, 2027, 
and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or 
renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any additional 
MIA workload can be handled with existing resources. MHCC and HSCRC can conduct 
the required studies using existing resources. Expenditures for the State Employee and 
Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program increase significantly beginning in FY 2027, 
as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill increases the cost of health insurance, expenditures for 
local governments that purchase fully insured plans increase. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1563/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Appeals and Grievance Summary Report 
 
In the annual summary report of carrier appeals and grievance reports, the Commissioner 
must include data on adverse decisions and grievances related to post-acute services, 
including adverse decisions and grievances relating to admissions to skilled nursing 
facilities and inpatient rehabilitation facilities. 
 
Study to Quantify Bed Capacity in Post-acute Care Settings 
 
MHCC, in conjunction with HSCRC, must conduct a study to quantify bed capacity in 
post-acute care settings and hospitals in the State and make recommendations regarding a 
collection and auditing process by which hospital and post-acute beds will be reported to 
MHCC or HSCRC each year. The study must include: 
 
 
 
a count of the number of physical beds within each post-acute care facility; 
 
the use of a standardized definition for each inpatient and outpatient bed type, as 
specified; 
 
a count of the number of physical beds, using the standardized definition, within 
each hospital, by bed type; 
 
a count of the number of staffed beds, using the standardized definition, within each 
post-acute care facility; 
 
a count of the number of staffed beds, using the standardized definition, within each 
hospital, by bed type; 
 
a count of the number of licensed beds within each post-acute care facility; 
 
a count of the number of licensed beds within each hospital, by bed type; 
 
a count of the number of other types of beds as determined appropriate; and 
 
any other information necessary for MHCC and HSCRC to quantify bed capacity. 
 
By January 1, 2027, MHCC, in conjunction with HSCRC, must report to the Governor, the 
Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health Committee on the findings of the study 
and its recommendation regarding a collection and auditing process. 
 
Study on Options to Facilitate Clinically Appropriate Transitions from Acute to Post-acute 
Care Settings 
 
MHCC, in consultation with HSCRC, must conduct a study analyzing options to facilitate 
clinically appropriate transitions from acute to post-acute care settings. The study must 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1563/ Page 3 
include (1) an analysis of the factors affecting efficiency of clinically appropriate 
transitions from acute to post-acute care settings; (2) identification of potential solutions 
that can address such factors; and (3) any other information necessary for MHCC and 
HSCRC to analyze options for clinically appropriate transitions from acute to post-acute 
care settings. 
 
By January 1, 2027, MHCC, in conjunction with HSCRC, must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor, the Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health 
Committee. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definition of Emergency Medical Condition 
 
“Emergency medical condition” means a medical condition, including a mental health 
condition or substance use disorder, that manifests itself by acute symptoms of such 
severity, including severe pain, that the absence of immediate medical attention could 
reasonably be expected by a prudent layperson, who possesses an average knowledge of 
health and medicine, to result in a condition described in § 1867(e)(1) of the Social Security 
Act, part of the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA).  
 
EMTALA specifies that an “emergency medical condition” means a condition for which 
the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in 
placing the health of the individual (or, with respect to a pregnant woman, the health of the 
woman or her unborn child) in serious jeopardy, serious impairment to bodily functions, 
or serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part. With respect to a pregnant woman who 
is having contractions, it means that either there is inadequate time to effect a safe transfer 
to another hospital before delivery or such a transfer may pose a threat to the health or 
safety of the woman or the unborn child. 
 
Federal No Surprises Act 
 
The federal No Surprises Act (NSA), enacted as part of the Consolidated Appropriations 
Act, 2021, requires health plans to cover surprise bills for emergency services, as well as 
out-of-network provider bills rendered at in-network hospitals and facilities. Balance 
billing is prohibited, with specified exceptions, and out-of-network providers may not send 
patients bills for excess charges. NSA permits access to an independent dispute resolution 
process for any surprise medical bill following a 30-day period when the plan and provider 
try to negotiate a payment amount. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1563/ Page 4 
Coverage of Emergency Services in Maryland 
 
Under Maryland law, if a carrier provides or covers any benefits for emergency services in 
an emergency department (ED) or freestanding medical facility, the carrier: 
 
 
may not require prior authorization for the emergency services;  
 
must provide coverage for the emergency services regardless of whether the health 
care provider providing the emergency services has a contractual relationship with 
the carrier to furnish emergency services;  
 
may not limit what constitutes an emergency medical condition solely on the basis 
of diagnosis codes; and  
 
may not impose any other term or condition on the coverage for emergency services, 
except for the exclusion or coordination of benefits, a waiting period, and applicable 
cost sharing. 
 
If a health care provider does not have a contractual relationship with the carrier to provide 
emergency services, the carrier: 
 
 
may not impose any administrative requirement or limitation on coverage that 
would be more restrictive than that imposed on coverage for emergency services 
furnished by a health care provider with a contractual relationship with the carrier;  
 
may not impose any cost-sharing amount greater than the amount imposed for 
emergency services furnished by a health care provider with a contractual 
relationship with the carrier;  
 
must calculate and apply the cost-sharing amounts in accordance with specified 
federal requirements; and  
 
with specified exception, must reimburse the health care provider in accordance 
with specified federal requirements. 
 
State Expenditures:  The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program is largely self-insured for its medical contracts, except for the one fully insured 
integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser).   
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that the program applies the 
definition of “emergency medical condition” to all ED claims. If an ED claim is received 
and the definition is not met, the program applies a “non-emergency use of the ED” penalty, 
which reduces reimbursement to 50% of the allowed benefit after any applicable 
copayment. This financial deterrent is designed to drive members toward more appropriate, 
lower-cost care settings for non-urgent issues. The plan’s carrier partners also share “site 
of care” information to encourage members to seek appropriate care. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1563/ Page 5 
DBM advises that the bill’s prohibition against denying a covered service if an enrollee did 
not experience an emergency medical condition could increase program costs by 
approximately $3.8 million annually. Accordingly, program expenditures (general, special, 
and federal funds) could increase by $1.9 million in fiscal 2027 (to reflect the bill’s 
January 1, 2027 effective date) and by $3.8 million annually thereafter. 
 
DBM further notes that mandating coverage regardless of the severity of the condition 
inadvertently encourages use of the ED for non-emergent issues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5