START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1568 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1568 
(Delegate Ross) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Local Government - Animal Control - Dogs At Large (Dog Leash Laws) 
 
 
This bill requires each county and municipality in the State to adopt local laws that:  
(1) prohibit the owner of a dog from allowing the dog to be at large; (2) establish 
procedures for the impoundment of a dog found at large by an animal control unit or other 
enforcement entity; and (3) establish civil and criminal penalties. The bill establishes that 
it is the intent of the General Assembly that the bill be applied and interpreted to recognize 
the definition of the term “running at large” as used by the Appellate Court of Maryland in 
Blitzer v. Breski, 259 Md. App. 257 (2023). The bill does not preempt a local government 
from enacting and enforcing more stringent measures than the requirements of the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may have a material operational impact on counties and 
municipalities, as discussed below. Local revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law does not define “running at large,” although the term is referenced 
throughout the local government article. However, the Appellate Court of Maryland, in 
Blitzer v. Breski, 259 Md. App. 257 (2023), determined that the term “running at large” is, 
“an idiom meaning free, unrestrained, or not under control.” 
 
Dangerous Dogs  
 
§ 10-619 of the Criminal Law Article defines “dangerous dog” as one that has killed or 
inflicted severe injury on a person without provocation or is determined to be potentially 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1568/ Page 2 
dangerous by a local government and, after that determination (1) bites a person; (2) kills 
or inflicts severe injury on a domestic animal when the dog is not on its owner’s real 
property; or (3) attacks without provocation. 
 
A local jurisdiction may determine that a dog is potentially dangerous if it finds that the 
dog has inflicted a bite on a person while on public or private real property; has killed or 
inflicted severe injury on a domestic animal when not on its owner’s real property; or has 
attacked without provocation. The jurisdiction must notify the dog owner in writing of the 
reasons for its determination. 
 
A dog owner may not leave a dangerous dog unattended on the owner’s real property unless 
the dog is confined indoors, is in a securely enclosed and locked pen, or is in another 
structure designed to restrain the dog. A dog owner may not allow a dangerous dog to leave 
the owner’s real property unless the dog is leashed and muzzled or is otherwise securely 
restrained and muzzled. 
 
An owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who sells or gives the dog to another 
must provide, in writing, specified information about the new owner to the local 
government unit that made the determination about the dog and notify the new owner about 
the dog’s dangerous or potentially dangerous behavior. A person who violates these 
provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $2,500. 
 
Liability for Damage and Death Caused by a Dog  
 
Chapters 48 and 49 of 2014 established that in an action for damages against an owner of 
a dog for personal injury or death caused by the dog, evidence that the dog caused the 
personal injury or death creates a rebuttable presumption that the owner knew or should 
have known that the dog had vicious or dangerous propensities. Notwithstanding any other 
law or rule, the judge in a jury trial may not rule as a matter of law that the presumption 
has been rebutted before the jury returns a verdict. 
 
However, the owner of a dog is strictly liable for any injury, death, or loss to person or 
property that is caused by the dog while the dog was running at large unless the injury, 
death, or loss was caused to the body or property of a person who was (1) committing or 
attempting to commit a trespass or other criminal offense on the property of the owner; 
(2) committing or attempting to commit a criminal offense against any person; or 
(3) teasing, tormenting, abusing, or provoking the dog. 
 
Local Regulation of Dogs 
 
Regulation of dogs as pets is a highly localized process, with many local governments 
having their own rules and regulations governing the licensure and care of dogs. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1568/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Association of Counties (MACo) advises that the 
provisions of the bill are likely to have a material operational effect on county governments. 
MACo points out that each county may have different laws regarding “dogs at large,” 
commonly referred to as “leash laws,” which may vary from the provisions required by the 
bill. Counties would be required to alter their laws to comply with the bill. 
 
The Maryland Municipal League advises that municipalities may incur costs related to the 
capture, impoundment, and holding of dogs. 
 
Most local governments that responded to the request for information for this fiscal and 
policy note did not indicate a fiscal or operational effect due to the bill, with several 
pointing to the fact that they already define “running at large”; however, the Department 
of Legislative Services notes that to the extent a local definition differs from the definition 
specified in the bill, local governments may experience an operational impact. Further, 
local government expenditures related to animal control enforcement may increase under 
the bill. 
 
While it is possible local revenues may increase under the bill from fines or fees, this 
analysis assumes that dog owners will generally comply with the provisions of the bill and 
that any impact on revenues will be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Harford, Montgomery, and 
Talbot counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3