START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1533 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1533 
(Delegate Alston, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Cosmetic Products - Enforcement and Penalties for Prohibited 
Ingredients (Crown and Care Act - Protecting Communities from Harmful Hair 
Chemicals) 
 
 
This bill specifies that, in addition to existing civil and criminal penalties, a person who 
violates the prohibition on knowingly manufacturing, selling, delivering, holding, or 
offering for sale in the State a cosmetic product that contains any of 24 listed intentionally 
added ingredients is liable for civil damages sustained by the individual resulting from the 
violation. In any action brought to enforce the bill, a court may award reasonable 
attorney’s fees to a prevailing plaintiff. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may 
investigate any complaint alleging that a person has violated the prohibition. On receipt of 
a complaint, a representative of MDH, at a reasonable time, may enter and inspect the 
premises of the person to determine compliance. The person may not refuse to grant access 
to the representative or interfere with an inspection. An investigation may include sampling 
of a cosmetic product to determine if the cosmetic product contains a technically 
unavoidable trace quantity of a prohibited ingredient. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can investigate complaints and conduct inspections using existing 
resources. Any impact on the operations of the Judiciary is assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1533/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 490 of 2021 prohibits a person from knowingly manufacturing, 
selling, delivering, holding, or offering for sale in the State, a cosmetic product that 
contains any of 24 listed intentionally added ingredients, which include formaldehyde, 
mercury, and several per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and their salts. The prohibition 
took effect on January 1, 2025. 
 
A person is not in violation of this prohibition if the person manufactures, sells, delivers, 
holds, or offers for sale in the State, a cosmetic product that (1) was manufactured through 
a process intended to comply with the prohibition and (2) contains a technically 
unavoidable trace quantity of a prohibited ingredient due to an impurity of an ingredient, 
the manufacturing process, storage, or packaging. 
 
A person who violates any of these prohibitions is subject to both criminal and 
civil penalties. More specifically, a violator is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon 
conviction, a fine of up to $10,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for the first 
conviction, and a fine of up to $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to three years for a 
second or subsequent conviction. In addition, a person who violates Title 21, Subtitle 2 of 
the Health-General Article is subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000 in any District Court 
and can be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each day on which a violation occurs 
is a separate violation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 656 (Senator Henson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2