START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1597 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1597 
(Delegate Hill) 
Health 
 
 
Health - Unregulated Space in Hospital Operating Suites - Pilot Project 
 
 
This bill establishes the Unregulated Space in Hospital Operating Suites Pilot Project, 
administered by the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC). Up to 
five hospitals may participate in the pilot project. HSCRC must report to specified 
committees of the General Assembly on (1) the types of procedures that have occurred in 
a participating hospital’s unregulated operating room space; (2) whether the outcome of 
those procedures indicates that they were appropriately performed in unregulated operating 
room space; (3) the costs associated with a hospital’s participation in the pilot project; and 
(4) the effects of the pilot project on the State’s Achieving Healthcare Efficiency through 
Accountable Design (AHEAD) Model. Each ambulatory surgical center associated with a 
participating hospital and freestanding surgical center in a participating hospital’s area 
must provide HSCRC with information deemed necessary to complete the required report. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by $400,000 in FY 2027, and 
$50,000 annually through FY 2029, for contractual costs, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
400,000 
50,000 
50,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($400,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1597/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A participating hospital may be subject to an alternate method of rate 
determination, including an exemption from rates that allows unregulated operating room 
space to be physically located within a regulated facility. In addition, a participating 
hospital may make available unregulated operating room space to all patients and all 
payers, with no duplication of services in regulated operating room space. 
 
HSCRC must develop criteria and standards for hospitals participating in the pilot project 
including that (1) a participating hospital must offer charity care consistent with regulated 
hospital services; (2) the billed charge for a service may not be higher than the participating 
hospital’s billed charge for a similar service; (3) the cost to Medicaid and Medicare must 
be lower than a similar regulated hospital service; and (4) a participating hospital must 
increase consumer awareness and education about regulated and nonregulated services, 
including the potential for additional billed charges from physicians. 
 
Current Law:  HSCRC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department 
of Health established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, 
provide access to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in 
the State. HSCRC was responsible for implementing the Total Cost of Care (TCOC) 
Model, the successor to the Maryland All-Payer Model Contract and will implement the 
AHEAD Model from 2026 to 2034 to continue statewide efforts to improve health care 
quality and control costs. 
 
The federal AHEAD Model is an option that allows Maryland to continue statewide efforts 
to improve health care quality and control costs under the TCOC Model. AHEAD seeks to 
drive state and regional health care transformation and multi-payer alignment, with the goal 
of improving the total health of a state population and lowering costs across all payers.  
 
HSCRC is funded through user fees assessed on hospitals and related institutions whose 
rates have been approved by the commission. User fees must be used exclusively to cover 
the actual documented direct costs of fulfilling the statutory and regulatory duties of 
HSCRC, including administrative costs incurred by MDH on behalf of the commission. 
HSCRC must assess each facility by June 30 each year.  
 
HSCRC must: 
 
 
require each facility to disclose publicly its financial position and the verified total 
costs incurred and revenue generated by the facility in providing health services; 
 
review for reasonableness and certify the rates and revenue of each facility;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1597/ Page 3 
 
keep informed as to whether a facility has enough resources to meet its financial 
requirements;  
 
concern itself with solutions if a facility does not have enough resources;  
 
assure each purchaser of health care facility services that:  (1) the total costs of all 
hospital services offered by or through a facility are reasonable; (2) the aggregate 
rates of the facility are related reasonably to the aggregate costs of the facility; and 
(3) rates are set equitably among all purchasers of services without undue 
discrimination;  
 
develop guidelines for the establishment of global budgets for each facility; 
 
receive confirmation that facility global budget agreements, as they are developed, 
are consistent with the guidelines; and  
 
after review by HSCRC for compliance with the guidelines, post each executed 
global budget agreement on the commission’s website.  
 
HSCRC may review the costs, and rates, quality, and efficiency of facility services, and 
make any investigation that the commission considers necessary to assure each purchaser 
of health care facility services that:  (1) the total costs of all hospital services offered by or 
through a facility are reasonable; (2) the aggregate rates of the facility are related 
reasonably to the aggregate costs of the facility; and (3) rates are set equitably among all 
purchasers or classes of purchasers without undue discrimination or preference, except 
under specified circumstances. HSCRC may review and approve or disapprove the 
reasonableness of any rate or amount of revenue that a facility sets or requests.  
 
A facility must charge for services only at a rate set in accordance with HSCRC 
requirements and comply with the applicable terms and conditions of the all-payer model 
contract. Consistent with the all-payer model contract, in determining the reasonableness 
of rates, HSCRC may consider objective standards of efficiency and effectiveness. 
 
State Expenditures:  HSCRC advises that contractual services are required to administer 
the pilot project and to develop criteria and standards for hospitals participating in the pilot 
project, as established by the bill. Therefore, HSCRC special fund expenditures increase 
by $400,000 in FY 2027 and $50,000 annually through fiscal 2029 for contractual services. 
Federally required changes to rate-setting processes under the AHEAD model beginning 
in calendar 2028 may also have an indeterminate impact on these estimates. 
 
Any decrease in Medicaid expenditures depends on several factors, including the 
methodology developed by HSCRC, utilization by Medicaid patients, and the substitution 
effect. Therefore, cost savings for Medicaid cannot be reliably quantified and have not been 
accounted for in this estimate. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1597/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  In March 2020, HSCRC reported on efforts to consider an option 
to, among other things, partially deregulate operating room space, which would likely 
require major statutory and regulatory changes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
caw/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4