START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1587 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1587 
(Delegate Patterson) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Gaming - Electronic Instant Bingo Machines - Operation and Maximum Number 
of Machines 
 
 
This bill doubles the maximum number of electronic instant bingo machines that an entity 
licensed to offer instant bingo under a commercial bingo license or a specified qualified 
organization may operate if the entity operated electronic machines on February 28, 2008. 
The bill alters the definition of a “slot machine”, thereby permitting a machine, apparatus, 
or device that allows a user to play more than 54 bingo cards at the same time. An electronic 
instant bingo machine is not required to print a paper ticket for each game of instant bingo 
played unless the player elects to print the ticket. The State Lottery and Gaming Control 
Commission (SLGCC) must adopt regulations to implement the bill. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, general fund revenues increase by  
$8.9 million annually and special fund revenues and expenditures increase by $2.2 million 
annually beginning in FY 2027 from admissions and amusement (A&A) tax and license 
fee revenues. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$8.9 
$8.9 
$8.9 
$8.9 
$8.9 
SF Revenue 
$2.2 
$2.2 
$2.2 
$2.2 
$2.2 
SF Expenditure 
$2.2 
$2.2 
$2.2 
$2.2 
$2.2 
Net Effect 
$8.9 
$8.9 
$8.9 
$8.9 
$8.9 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, Anne Arundel County revenues increase by 
$1.8 million annually and Calvert County revenues increase by $253,600 annually from 
local A&A tax revenues beginning in FY 2027. Additionally, local revenues increase from 
receiving a portion of State A&A tax revenues beginning in FY 2027. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1587/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals the prohibition that an organization not operate more than 
the number of electronic bingo machines in operation as of February 28, 2008. 
 
An electronic instant bingo machine authorized under the bill is exempt from a provision 
of statute stating an electronic gaming device that is not licensed or otherwise operated in 
compliance with the law as of January 1, 2013, is an illegal gaming device that may not 
legally operate in the State. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the maximum number of machines authorized under the bill and current 
law for the impacted entities. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Instant Bingo Machines 
 
County 
Location 
Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Anne Arundel 
Delta Bingo 
103 
206 
Delta Wayson’s Bingo 
100 
200 
Bingo World 
200 
400 
 
Mayo American Legion #226 
6 
12 
 
Laurel Elks #2283 
6 
12 
 
Annapolis Elks #622 
4 
8 
 
Annapolis Moose 
4 
8 
 
Severna Park American Legion #175 
4 
8 
 
American Legion Post #7 
4 
8 
Calvert  
Abner’s Crab House & Restaurant 
85 
170 
Trader’s Steak & Ale 
87 
174 
Rod-N-Reel Resort 
278 
556 
 
American Legion Post #206 
10 
20 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Current Law:  An entity licensed to offer instant bingo under a commercial bingo license 
on July 1, 2007, or a qualified nonprofit organization, may continue to operate a game of 
instant bingo in the same manner using electronic machines, provided that: 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1587/ Page 3 
 
the machines were in operation for a one-year period ending December 31, 2007, or 
under a commercial bingo license on December 31, 2007; 
 
the entity does not operate more than the number of machines in operation on 
February 28, 2008; and 
 
the conduct of the gaming and operation of the machines are consistent with all 
other provisions of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
A county may not issue a commercial bingo license under Title 13 of the Criminal Law 
Article or under any public local law to an entity that was not licensed to conduct 
commercial bingo on or before June 30, 2008. 
 
A “slot machine” does not include a machine, apparatus, or device that is a handheld device 
that displays only facsimiles of bingo cards that an individual uses to mark and monitor 
contemporaneously to a live call of bingo numbers called on the premises by an individual 
where the user is operating the machine, does not permit a user to play more than 54 bingo 
cards at the same time, does not randomly generate any numbers and is not part of an 
integrated system. 
 
Admissions and Amusement Tax 
 
A State A&A tax is imposed on the net proceeds derived from any charge for the operation 
of an electronic bingo machine permitted under a commercial bingo license or an electronic 
tip jar machine authorized under Title 13 of the Criminal Law Article that is operated for 
commercial purposes. The combined State and local tax rate may not exceed 35%. The tax 
is currently only imposed in Anne Arundel and Calvert counties.  
 
Revenues attributable to a State A&A tax rate of 20% imposed on electronic bingo and 
electronic tip jars are distributed to the general fund after a $8.5 million annual distribution 
to the Maryland E-Nnovation Initiative Fund (MEIF). Revenues attributable to a 5% tax 
rate are distributed to the Maryland State Arts Council ($1.0 million), the Town of 
Chesapeake Beach ($300,000), the Michael Erin Busch Sports Fund ($500,000), and the 
Special Fund for Preservation of Cultural Arts in Maryland (remaining revenues), of which 
the Arts Council of Anne Arundel County and the Maryland Historical Society each receive 
$250,000. 
 
The tax rate in Anne Arundel County is 25%, distributed as described above because 
Anne Arundel County has a 10% local A&A tax, and the combined State and local tax rate 
cannot exceed 35%. In Calvert County, the total State A&A tax rate on specified machines 
is 33%. Revenues attributable to the additional State A&A tax rate in Calvert County are 
distributed as follows: 
 
 
1.5% to the Boys and Girls Club of the Town of North Beach in the amount of 
$50,000, with the remainder to the Town of North Beach; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1587/ Page 4 
 
2.5% to the Town of Chesapeake Beach; and 
 
4.0% to the Calvert County Youth Recreational Opportunities Fund (CCYROF). 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Licensing 
 
The bill authorizes an additional 891 instant bingo machines (431 in Anne Arundel County 
and 460 in Calvert County). Application and license fees for instant bingo machines are 
established in regulations. The annual license fee paid by the facility is $150 per machine. 
There is also a manufacturer’s annual license fee of $150 per machine, but the State Lottery 
and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) does not currently collect that fee and has no plans 
to collect that fee in the future. Assuming an increase of 891 licensed machines, general 
fund license fee revenues for SLGCA increase by $133,650 annually. License fees may 
minimally increase further to the extent additional employees, such as instant bingo 
managers, at commercial instant bingo facilities are hired and required to be licensed. 
SLGCA licenses the bingo facilities and certain key employees, certifies the machines, and 
performs an annual compliance audit. SLGCA can certify additional machines and license 
any additional employees with existing resources. 
 
Admissions and Amusement Tax Revenues  
 
Of the 891 machines authorized under current law, 853 are held under a commercial bingo 
license and subject to the A&A tax. This analysis assumes that the number of machines 
subject to the tax doubles from 853 to 1,706, thereby increasing net proceeds by 70%.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, general fund revenues attributable to a State A&A tax rate of 
20% increase by $8.8 million annually; combined with the licensing fees discussed above, 
general fund revenues increase by $8.9 million annually. 
 
Special Fund for Preservation of Cultural Arts in Maryland revenues attributable to a tax 
rate of 5% increase by $2.2 million annually. This program is within the Department of 
Commerce, so special fund revenues and expenditures for Commerce increase. Commerce 
can administer the additional funds utilizing existing resources. 
 
Impact on Other Gaming Revenues 
 
While the bill may draw some gaming revenues away from the State lottery and casino 
facilities, the impact is likely small enough that overall gaming revenues are not materially 
affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1587/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Revenues for Anne Arundel and Calvert counties increase from local 
A&A tax revenues. Under the assumptions above, Anne Arundel County revenues increase 
by $1.8 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027. Calvert County revenues increase by 
$253,600 annually beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Additionally, of State A&A tax revenues, $380,500 is annually distributed to the Town of 
North Beach, $634,100 is annually distributed to the Town of Chesapeake Beach, and  
$1.0 million is annually distributed to CCYROF beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel and Calvert counties; Comptroller's Office; 
Department of Commerce; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5