START OF PAGE 1
HB1523/913926/1

BY: Health Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1523
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Ross” and substitute
“Delegates Ross, Alston, Bagnall, Cullison, Guzzone, Hill, Hutchinson, S.
Johnson, Kaufman, Kipke, Lopez, Martinez, M. Morgan, Reilly, Rosenberg,
Szeliga, Taveras, White Holland, and Woorman”; and in line 10, strike “repealing”
and substitute “altering”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 5, strike beginning with “KRATOM” in line 11 down through “(II)” in line
12; in line 12, after “7–HYDROXYMITRAGYNINE” insert “IN AN AMOUNT THAT:

1. FOR A KRATOM PRODUCT, IS GREATER THAN THE
AMOUNT PERMITTED UNDER § 21–2E–02(B)(1)(III) OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL
ARTICLE; OR

2. IS GREATER THAN 1 MILLIGRAM PER SERVING”;

strike line 13 in its entirety; in lines 14 and 15, strike “(IV)” and “(V)”, respectively, and
substitute “(II)” and “(III)”, respectively; in line 15, after “SULFATE;” insert “OR”; and
strike beginning with “(VI)” in line 16 down through “(VII)” in line 17 and substitute
“(IV)”.

On page 8, in line 31, strike the bracket; in the same line, after the third “a” insert
“REBUTTABLE”; and strike beginning with “of” in line 32 down through “of” in line 33
and substitute “ON THE MANUFACTURER’S LABEL ON”.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1523/913926/01 Health Committee
Amendments to HB 1523
Page 2 of 2

On page 9, in lines 1, 5, and 8, in each instance, strike the bracket; and in lines 5
and 8, strike “(E)” and “(F)”, respectively.

On page 11, in lines 27 and 30, in each instance, strike the bracket; in line 27,
after the third “a” insert “REBUTTABLE”; and strike beginning with “of” in line 28 down
through “of” in line 29 and substitute “ON THE MANUFACTURER’S LABEL ON”.

On page 12, in lines 1 and 4, in each instance, strike the brackets; and in the
same lines, strike “(E)” and “(F)”, respectively.

On page 13, in line 14, strike “KRATOM” and substitute “PHENIBUT”.
END OF PAGE 2