START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1581 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1581 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Stadium Authority) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Horse Racing - Facility Ownership, Development, Licensing, and Operations - 
Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters various provisions of law regarding the reconstruction of 
Pimlico Race Course and the administration and oversight of live horse racing in Maryland. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026 or 2027. A general fund appropriation to the Maryland 
Stadium Authority (MSA) may be required beginning in FY 2028 for the operation and 
maintenance of the Pimlico racing facility. The transfer of responsibilities from the 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) to MSA under the bill can be 
handled with existing agency resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.     
 
Small Business Effect:  MSA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals certain provisions of Chapter 604 of 2025 (Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act) and alters others as follows:  
 
 
repeals MEDCO’s involvement in the Pimlico Race Course reconstruction project 
by transferring all rights, responsibilities, powers, and privileges that were 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1581/ Page 2 
transferred from the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority 
(MTROA) to MEDCO through Chapter 604 to MSA; 
 
clarifies that the Maryland Jockey Club, Inc. (MJC) is the thoroughbred racetrack 
operator designated by MSA, and makes related clarifications required as a result 
of the termination of MTROA; 
 
clarifies that the new, nonprofit MJC is the thoroughbred racetrack licensee, unless 
MSA appoints a successor, nonprofit thoroughbred racetrack operator; 
 
repeals various obsolete and other references to MTROA and MEDCO and replaces 
them with MSA; 
 
repeals obsolete references to the obligations of MTROA to operate Pimlico and 
maintain it as a first-class racing facility and instead requires MJC to do so; 
 
clarifies the roles and obligations of MSA and MJC under a specified long-term 
operating agreement; and 
 
reinstates a 10% net profit-sharing provision with the Park Heights community as 
the provision previously existed but substitutes the net profits of MJC for the net 
profits of MTROA. This provision of law was unintentionally repealed by 
Chapter 604. 
 
The bill modifies the existing requirement that, after Pimlico is reconstructed, for any  
fiscal year in which MTROA reports an operating loss, the Purse Dedication Account must 
pay MTROA the amount of the operating loss. The bill applies this provision to the 
thoroughbred racetrack operator (MJC) instead of MTROA. 
 
The bill establishes that, if thoroughbred racing is no longer a lawful activity or is not 
commercially viable as a result of a change in law or regulation, the parties to the long‑term 
agreement are required to notify the Board of Public Works (BPW) before the expiration 
or termination of that agreement. Since current law requires the notice to include a 
termination plan, the bill also clarifies that the plan is for alternative uses for the Pimlico 
racing facility site. If there is a dispute regarding whether thoroughbred racing is no longer 
lawful or commercially viable, the bill authorizes MSA to adjudicate the dispute as a 
contested case under the Administrative Procedure Act.  
 
Current Law:     
 
Racing and Community Redevelopment Act of 2020 
 
Chapter 590 of 2020 provided for the redevelopment of Pimlico Race Course in 
Baltimore City and Laurel Park in Anne Arundel County, as well as for the conveyance of 
the Bowie Race Course Training Center. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1581/ Page 3 
Chapter 590 authorized MSA, subject to the approval of BPW, to issue up to $375 million 
in bonds to finance planning, design, and construction and related expenses for 
construction management, professional fees, and contingencies in connection with racing 
facilities. Chapter 590 also specified the requirements for and the contents of long-term 
agreements for management and operations at the Pimlico and Laurel Park racing facility 
sites. In addition, Chapter 590 provided for the financing of the racing facility 
redevelopment projects and for the payment of debt service on bonds issued by MSA.  
 
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority 
 
Chapter 111 of 2023 established MTROA as a body politic and corporate and an 
instrumentality of the State, with the stated purpose of maintaining the State as a 
best‑in‑class thoroughbred racing venue. To that end, the authority was authorized to:  
 
 
study and make any recommendations that the authority finds are in the best 
interests of thoroughbred racing in the State; 
 
in coordination with other State entities, develop new and existing horse racing and 
training facilities in the State; 
 
take specified actions, but only in accordance with an executive order or a 
determination of the Maryland Racing Commission, and subject to specified review 
and comment, that a thoroughbred racing licensee – for any reason other than 
weather, an act of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the licensee – 
is unable to support the minimum number of live racing days; 
 
enter into any agreements, leases, partnerships, or contracts necessary to support 
and sustain Maryland thoroughbred racing and pari-mutuel wagering activity and 
ensure compliance with Maryland Racing Commission rules and regulations; 
 
authorize or create a separate body, entity, or holding company to carry out any 
provisions of the Act; 
 
adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of the Act; and 
 
make any other recommendations the authority deems necessary. 
 
Chapter 111 allowed MTROA, under such an order or determination, to manage and 
oversee day-to-day thoroughbred horse racing operations, live racing days, and assets in 
the State and, in coordination with MEDCO, acquire property or contractual interests, as 
specified. Under such circumstances, the Maryland Racing Commission may issue a 
license and live racing days to the authority. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1581/ Page 4 
Chapter 410 of 2024 
 
Chapter 410 of 2024 provided for the transfer of ownership and operation of thoroughbred 
racing facilities in the State to MTROA. Chapter 410 also altered provisions of Chapter 590 
of 2020 and Chapter 111 of 2023 and made additional funding available to MTROA.   
 
Chapter 410 authorized MSA to issue up to $400 million in bonds to finance the 
construction of the facilities. At least $250 million of the bond revenues must be allocated 
for the renovation of the Pimlico Race Course, and at least $110 million must be allocated 
for a new training facility. At least $17 million of State Lottery Fund revenues must be 
transferred annually to provide debt service payments for the bonds.  
 
Chapter 604 of 2025 (Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act)   
 
Chapter 604 of 2025 terminated MTROA, effective June 30, 2025. Chapter 604 made MSA 
the successor entity for the planning, design, construction, and ownership of a racing and 
community development project and MEDCO the successor entity for the operation of a 
racing and community development project. Chapter 604 transferred all rights, 
responsibilities, personal property, etc. of MTROA, including those related to MJC, to 
MEDCO. 
 
Chapter 604 established that a nonprofit operator of a racing and community development 
project (1) may not be construed to be an agency or instrumentality of the State, or a unit 
of the Executive Branch, for any purpose; (2) may be replaced with another business entity 
with the concurrent approval of MSA and MEDCO; and (3) must reimburse MSA for the 
cost of a full-time auditor responsible for overseeing the financial transactions and records 
related to racing and community development project costs and ongoing operations. 
 
Background:  BPW approved the transfer of Pimlico Race Course to MTROA in 
May 2024. In addition, MJC was created in September 2024 as the nonprofit entity required 
to coordinate racing operations. All operational contracts and employee agreements for the 
prior Maryland Jockey Club were reviewed and assigned to the new MJC. The new MJC 
assumed day-to-day control of all horse racing operations in Maryland on January 1, 2025. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MSA is a nonbudgeted agency and does not receive State funds for 
operations. MSA advises that there is no expected increase in expenditures for fiscal 2027. 
However, the agency indicates that a general fund appropriation may be needed for the 
operation and maintenance of the Pimlico racing facility beginning in fiscal 2028. In 
addition, a general fund appropriation may be required to fund a capital improvement 
account for the racing facility. The amount of any future appropriation cannot be reliably 
estimated as MSA has not yet developed a plan for the operation and maintenance of the 
racing facility. MSA advises that planning will begin once the final design and construction 
of the facility have occurred.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1581/ Page 5 
Additional Comments:  The bill reinstates a net profit-sharing provision that was repealed 
in 2025. As that repeal was inadvertent and the associated fiscal impact was not accounted 
for, the impact of its reinstatement is also not accounted for in this fiscal and policy note. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Maryland Stadium Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1581/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Horse Racing – Facility Ownership, Development, Licensing, and  
Operations - Alterations  
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 1581  
 
PREPARED BY: Rachelina Bonacci, Gary McGuigan, Dawn Abshire  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING  
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:  
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL  
BUSINESS  
 
OR  
__ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL  
BUSINESSES  
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 6