START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1541 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1541 
(Delegate Bhandari) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Workgroup to Study Extreme Risk Protective Orders (Sagar Ghimire Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes a Workgroup to Study Extreme Risk Protective Orders. The 
workgroup must (1) study the use of extreme risk protective orders in the State and 
(2) develop policy recommendations for improving the use of extreme risk protective 
orders in the State. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must provide staff for the 
workgroup, and the Secretary of Health must serve as its chair. A member of the workgroup 
may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the 
Standard State Travel Regulations. The workgroup must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by May 1, 2027. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is anticipated that MDH can staff the workgroup using existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members are 
also assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances are not materially affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions set forth a process by which a petitioner may seek an 
extreme risk protective order to prevent a respondent from purchasing or possessing any 
firearm or ammunition for the duration of the order under specified circumstances. 
Individuals specifically authorized to petition for such an order include specified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1541/ Page 2 
health professionals, law enforcement officers, and individuals who meet specified 
relationship requirements. A petition must meet specified requirements, such as the 
inclusion of a description of the behavior and statements of the respondent or any other 
information that led the petitioner to believe that the respondent presents an immediate and 
present danger of causing personal injury to self or others. 
 
A petitioner initiates the process for an order during court operating hours by filing a 
petition for a temporary order in the District Court. If the court is not open, a petitioner 
initiates the process by filing a petition for an interim order with a District Court 
Commissioner. Generally, if an interim order is granted by a District Court Commissioner, 
a temporary order hearing is heard on the first or second day on which a District Court 
judge is sitting after issuance of the interim order. Generally, if a temporary order is 
granted, a final extreme risk protective order hearing occurs one week later. 
 
A judge may enter a final extreme risk protective order to prohibit the respondent from 
possessing a firearm if the judge finds by clear and convincing evidence that the respondent 
poses a danger of causing personal injury to the respondent, the petitioner, or another by 
possessing a firearm. The judge must consider all relevant evidence presented by the 
petitioner and the respondent and the amount of time that has elapsed since any of the 
events described in the petition. 
 
The final extreme risk protective order must order the respondent to surrender to law 
enforcement authorities any firearm and ammunition in the respondent’s possession and 
prohibit the respondent from purchasing or possessing any firearm (or ammunition) for the 
duration of the order, as specified. All relief granted in a final extreme risk protective order 
is effective for the period stated in the order, not to exceed one year. Final orders may also 
be modified, rescinded, and (for good cause shown) extended for an additional six months, 
as specified. A subsequent circuit court order pertaining to any of the provisions included 
in the final extreme risk protective order supersedes those provisions. Among other 
provisions, statute also addresses (1) referrals for emergency evaluations and 
(2) procedures regarding the surrender and storage of firearms and ammunition and the 
return of such items after the expiration or termination of an order. 
 
With specified exceptions, court records relating to a petition for an extreme risk protective 
order are confidential and the contents may not be divulged, by subpoena or otherwise, 
except by order of the court on good cause shown. Exceptions to the prohibition authorize 
the following to review the court record:  (1) personnel of the court; (2) the respondent or 
counsel for the respondent; (3) authorized personnel of MDH; (4) authorized personnel of 
a local core service agency or local behavioral health authority; (5) a law enforcement 
agency; or (6) a person authorized by a court order on good cause shown. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1541/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that it needs to hire a contractual program 
administrator at a cost of $94,335 in fiscal 2027 to staff the workgroup and prepare the 
final report; however, the Department of Legislative Services disagrees and advises that 
the limited work of the workgroup can likely be completed with existing staff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1458 of 2024 and HB 1116 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3