START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1530 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1530 
(Delegate Woorman, et al.) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Undocumented Students - Out-of-State Tuition Exemption 
Eligibility 
 
 
This bill removes the requirement for an individual or an individual’s parent or guardian 
to file a Maryland income tax return prior to the academic year in order to qualify for an 
exemption from paying the out-of-state tuition rate under the Maryland Dream Act. The 
bill also authorizes individuals to verify eligibility to retain a tuition exemption using 
documents other than Maryland income tax returns. Specifically, institutions of higher 
education may determine other official documentation that may be used for the purpose of 
retaining eligibility. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase to the extent the number of full‑time 
equivalent students (FTES) who qualify for in-state tuition, or who retain the tuition waiver 
in subsequent years, at a community college, including Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC) increases. Further, tuition revenues at public institutions of higher education, 
including BCCC, may be affected, as explained below. Finally, increasing the number of 
students who qualify for in-state tuition may likewise increase the number of students 
eligible for various State-funded scholarships. However, expanding eligibility generally 
does not require additional spending, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  Overall, any impact on local community colleges is likely minimal. 
However, State aid for local community colleges may increase, and local community 
college tuition revenues may be affected, as explained below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1530/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Dream Act Overview 
 
Chapter 191 of 2011, known as the Dream Act, was petitioned to referendum and approved 
by Maryland voters in November 2012. Under the Dream Act, an individual who attended 
a Maryland high school for at least three years and graduated from a Maryland high school 
or received the equivalent of a high school diploma in the State may pay the same tuition 
rates that resident students pay. Chapters 1 and 7 of 2020 expanded the circumstances under 
which an individual is exempt from paying the out-of-state rate. 
 
Dream Act – Out-of-state Tuition 
 
To qualify for the exemption from paying out-of-state tuition, a student must:   
 
 
have attended a public or nonpublic secondary (high) school in the State; 
 
have graduated from a public or nonpublic high school in the State or received the 
equivalent of a high school diploma (e.g., a GED) in the State; 
 
register as an entering student in a public institution of higher education in the State 
no later than six years after graduating from high school or receiving the equivalent 
qualification in the State; and 
 
provide to the public institution of higher education documentation that the 
individual or the individual’s parent or guardian has filed a Maryland income tax 
return annually for the three-year period before the academic year in which the 
tuition rate would apply. (Only this provision is changed under the bill.) 
 
The Dream Act also requires a student who qualifies for an exemption and is not a 
permanent resident to provide an affidavit stating that the student will file an application 
to become a permanent resident within 30 days after becoming eligible to do so. In addition, 
a student who qualifies for an exemption and is required to register with the 
Selective Service System must provide documentation of the required registration.  
 
Students qualifying under the Dream Act for tuition rates equivalent to the resident tuition 
rates at four-year institutions may not be counted as in-state students for the purposes of 
determining the number of Maryland undergraduates enrolled at the institutions. 
 
Dream Act – In-county Rate for Community Colleges 
 
An individual who qualifies for an out-of-state exemption under the Dream Act also 
qualifies for in-county tuition at a community college if the individual attends a community 
college supported by the county in which (1) an address in the county is used on the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1530/ Page 3 
Maryland income tax return of the individual’s or the individual’s parent or guardian of the 
calendar year prior to the academic year in which the rate would apply; (2) the high school 
from which the individual graduated is located; or (3) for an individual who received the 
equivalent of a high school diploma, the high school most recently attended by the 
individual is located. 
 
Dream Act – Retaining Eligibility 
 
To retain eligibility, an individual must use an address in the State on the Maryland income 
tax return of the individual or the individual’s parent or legal guardian annually until the 
individual is awarded a degree from the public institution of higher education. 
 
Senator John A. Cade and Baltimore City Community College Funding Formulas 
 
The formula used for the distribution of funds to community colleges is known as the 
Senator John A. Cade Funding Formula. The State’s annual contribution to the  
Cade funding formula is determined by enrollment at community colleges and a 
percentage, set in statute, of the level of funding received by selected public 
four‑year institutions. Specifically, the formula bases per student funding on a set statutory 
percentage of current year State appropriations per FTES at the selected 
four‑year institutions, including noncapital appropriations from the Higher Education 
Investment Fund. The resulting community college per student amount is multiplied by the 
number of FTES enrolled in the colleges in the second preceding fiscal year or the 
three‑year moving average number of FTES enrolled in community colleges in the  
second, third, and fourth prior year, whichever is greater, to identify a total formula amount. 
 
The BCCC funding formula operates in the same fashion, except that the per student 
amount is multiplied by the number of FTES enrolled in the colleges in the  
second preceding fiscal year without consideration of a three-year moving average. The 
BCCC percentage, which is also set in statute, is higher than that for the Cade funding 
formula, resulting in a higher per FTES amount. 
 
The BCCC funding formula has a hold harmless provision in current law that ensures 
BCCC receives at least as much State funding in total through the formula as in the prior 
fiscal year. The Cade and Sellinger formulas do not have a hold harmless provision. 
 
In-state Tuition 
 
Using the simple average, in-state tuition and fees proposed for fall 2025 are approximately 
$11,500. The difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition and fees for fall 2025 
ranges from about $29,800 for the University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP) 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1530/ Page 4 
to $5,100 at the University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC). The difference between 
the rates at each campus, using the simple average, is approximately $13,600. 
 
For fall 2025, in-county tuition and fees are approximately $4,900 at community colleges. 
As a State institution, BCCC has one in-state rate. Generally out-of-state rates at 
community colleges are two to three times the in-county rates. 
 
State‑supported Scholarships and In–state Tuition 
 
The Delegate Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards (EEA) program 
consists of two types of awards for full-time undergraduate students:  (1) Guaranteed 
Access (GA) Grants that are awarded to the neediest students to ensure that 100% of 
educational costs are paid; and (2) Educational Assistance (EA) Grants that are awarded to 
low- and moderate-income students to assist in paying educational costs. In addition to 
other qualifications, recipients of both grants under EEA must be a resident of the State or 
eligible for in-State tuition, which includes individuals eligible under the Maryland Dream 
Act.  
 
The Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship, Chapter 554 of 2018, created a 
scholarship program in Maryland to provide tuition assistance to students who attend a 
community college in the State and who meet specified eligibility criteria, including an 
income limitation and being eligible for in-state tuition, which includes individuals eligible 
under the Maryland Dream Act.  
 
The Part-time Grant Program provides grants to undergraduate students taking at least 
3 but no more than 11 hours of courses each semester or who are dually enrolled in a 
secondary school in the State and an institution of higher education. Recipients must be 
Maryland residents or eligible for in-state tuition, which includes individuals eligible under 
the Maryland Dream Act, in addition to other qualifications.  
 
Senatorial and Delegate Scholarships allow each senator and delegate to make scholarship 
awards during a term of office. Although exact qualifications and selection criteria differ 
across the Senatorial and Delegate Scholarship awards, both require a recipient to be 
eligible for in-state tuition.  
 
The Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship Program supports students who are 
pursuing an education in programs that are directly relevant to cybersecurity. An individual 
eligible for in-state tuition who is enrolled as a full-time student (or a part-time student 
enrolled in at least six semester hours of courses) in an eligible institution in an approved 
degree or certificate program directly relevant to cybersecurity may apply within 
three years of graduation.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1530/ Page 5 
The Richard W. Collins III Leadership with Honor Scholarship Program requires 
recipients to be eligible for in-state tuition and to be (1) a member of a Reserve Officer 
Training Corps (ROTC) program; (2) a minority student or a student who is a member of 
another group historically underrepresented in ROTC programs; and (3) a student at a 
historically Black college or university in the State.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Overall, any impact on State finances is indeterminate, but may 
minimal if the number of students who qualify under the bill does not significantly increase 
from current law. The bill removes the requirement to file a Maryland income tax return to 
qualify for (or renew) an exemption from paying the out‑of‑state tuition rate under the 
Maryland Dream Act. To qualify for an out-of-state tuition waiver, an individual must 
continue to meet all other current eligibility requirements, including graduating from a 
Maryland high school.  
 
General Fund Expenditures for Community College Funding Formulas 
 
General fund expenditures do not increase immediately for any new enrollments in 
community colleges. Instead, for each additional FTES who qualifies for and attends a 
local community college in the 2026-2027 academic year, general fund expenditures under 
the Cade funding formula increase by approximately $5,400 in fiscal 2029, assuming 
enrollment is not declining such that the three-year average FTES enrollment is used to 
determine funding instead of the second-prior year FTES enrollment. For each additional 
FTES who qualifies for and attends BCCC in the 2026-2027 academic year, general fund 
expenditures could increase by approximately $13,600 in fiscal 2029. Out‑year 
expenditures depend on the number of additional FTESs who qualify due to the bill and 
the actual per FTES amounts for the Cade and BCCC funding formulas.  
 
Baltimore City Community College 
 
As explained above, State aid for BCCC, through its funding formula, may increase 
minimally, due to additional FTESs qualifying as a result of the bill. However, as BCCC 
has been receiving hold harmless grants under its formula for several years, there is likely 
no impact on general fund expenditures until fiscal 2030 at the earliest. Also, tuition 
revenues may increase or decrease minimally beginning in fiscal 2027, depending on the 
balance of existing students who would qualify for an out-of-state tuition waiver and new 
students who would qualify for an out-of-state tuition waiver.   
 
Public Four-year Institutions 
 
Tuition revenues at public institutions of higher education are likely not materially affected. 
Public four-year institutions have considerable autonomy over admissions and generally 
maintain fairly stable proportions of in-state and out-of-state students. The bill does not 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1530/ Page 6 
affect that autonomy. Therefore, despite the differences in tuition levels for in-state and 
out‑of‑state students, tuition revenues at most institutions are not materially affected. As 
long as there are no major adjustments to the proportion of students who qualify for in‑state 
tuition, institutions can adjust admissions to avoid any significant loss of tuition revenue. 
The fiscal impact of this bill is a potential loss of tuition and fee revenues equal to the 
difference between in-state and out-of-state tuition and fees for each eligible student who 
enrolls at a University System of Maryland institution, Morgan State University (MSU), 
or St. Mary’s College of Maryland. In fiscal 2025, the public four-year institutions reported 
a loss of approximately $6.6 million in tuition revenues due to enrolling Dream Act 
students.  
 
At most public four-year institutions except UMGC, out-of-state students make up no more 
than 20% of undergraduates, so the impact of the bill is not significant. There may be a 
minimal impact at campuses with out-of-state enrollment of 20% or more – specifically, 
Coppin State University, Frostburg State University, UMCP, University of Maryland 
Eastern Shore, UMGC, and MSU. For these institutions, tuition revenues may decrease if 
the institutions choose to admit a significant number of eligible students who did not 
previously qualify for in-state tuition. However, to the extent these students would not have 
otherwise enrolled because they could not afford or would have chosen not to pay 
out‑of‑state tuition, or the institutions increase enrollment overall, the impact may be 
minimal.  
 
Public institutions of higher education can likely determine and accept appropriate 
documentation for verifying continued eligibility with existing resources. 
 
State-supported Scholarships and In-state Tuition 
 
The bill likely expands the number of individuals eligible to apply for some State-supported 
scholarships. An exact estimate of the number of additional individuals applying for 
in‑state tuition is not feasible at this time. Regardless, expanding eligibility likely does not 
necessitate additional expenditures since expanding eligibility does not alter the overall 
level of State funding for scholarship programs, which are generally set in the State 
operating budget and sometimes subject to mandated funding amounts. However, without 
additional spending more individuals may be added to the waiting list for scholarships with 
in-state tuition eligibility requirements or fewer such scholarships may be awarded. 
 
For the EEA program specifically, the GA and EA grant awards share one appropriation in 
the State operating budget. The GA Grant provides awards for any individuals who meet 
all eligibility criteria, while EA Grant awards are made from the funds remaining once all 
GA Grant awards have been made. Thus, if more GA Grant awards are made, there is less 
funding for EA Grant awards. When EA Grant funding for a fiscal year is exhausted, 
individuals eligible for the EA Grant are placed on the waiting list. Therefore, expanding 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1530/ Page 7 
GA Grant eligibility may increase State general fund expenditures to the extent existing 
appropriations to the Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA program are insufficient to cover 
awards for eligible GA Grant recipients. Alternatively, and because of the way the EEA 
program is structured, expanding eligibility for the GA Grant without increasing 
expenditures may necessitate reducing the number of EA Grant awards that could be made. 
Based on fiscal 2025 expenditures, expanding eligibility for the GA Grant without adding 
to the EA Grant waiting list may result in general fund expenditures of approximately 
$12,700 for each additional GA Grant award beginning in fiscal 2027. Finally, current law 
governing the EEA program provides that, should total calculated EEA awards exceed total 
appropriations, the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) may reduce all 
award amounts by a percentage to keep award dollars within total appropriated funds.  
 
MHEC advises that, at the end of fiscal 2024, approximately 1,100 students completed an 
application for a Delegate Howard P. Rawlings EEA using in-state tuition eligibility 
granted by the Maryland Dream Act. Of these 1,100 students, approximately 200 received 
an award. MHEC further advises that the increase in eligible applicants will lead to an 
increase in program expenditures as additional eligible students receive awards. MHEC 
estimates at least a 10% increase in the number of applicants resulting in an additional 
approximately $20,000 in awards for the first cohort, rising to $80,000 four years later as 
additional cohorts receive scholarships. The Department of Legislative Services, however, 
disagrees that the increase in eligibility will necessarily lead to an increase in State 
expenditures for the reasons outlined above.  
 
For context, the fiscal 2027 operating budget as introduced includes a:   
 
 
$138.7 million appropriation for EEA; 
 
$13.5 million appropriation for the Community College Promise Scholarship 
Program (the budget as introduced also includes a $1.0 million reduction contingent 
on legislation reducing the mandated appropriation for the program – the Budget 
Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2026 includes a provision reducing the 
mandate to $12.5 million beginning fiscal 2027); 
 
$7.6 million appropriation for Senatorial Scholarships; 
 
$7.7 million appropriation for Delegate Scholarships; 
 
$1.0 million appropriation for the Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship; and 
 
$1.0 million appropriation for the Richard W. Collins III Leadership with Honor 
Scholarship. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  State aid for local community colleges, through the Cade funding 
formula, may increase minimally due to additional FTESs qualifying under the bill, as 
explained above. Tuition revenues may increase or decrease minimally beginning in 
fiscal 2026, depending on the balance of existing students who would qualify for an 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1530/ Page 8 
out‑of‑state (or out-of-county) tuition waiver and new students who would qualify for such 
a tuition waiver. In total, community colleges reported a loss of approximately $2.4 million 
in tuition revenues during fiscal 2025 due to the students affected by Maryland’s 
Dream Act.  
 
Locally-funded community colleges can likely determine and accept appropriate 
documentation for verifying continued eligibility with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of Maryland; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8