START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1523 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1523 
(Delegate Ross, et al.) 
Health and Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission - Unauthorized Consumable 
Products - Enforcement and Seizure 
 
 
This bill authorizes (1) the Field Enforcement Division (FED) of the Alcohol, Tobacco, 
and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) to issue a citation or other charging document to a 
person who has committed a violation of Title 21, Subtitles 2D, 2E, and 2F of the Health 
– General Article; (2) the Executive Director of ATCC to seize, confiscate, or destroy an 
unauthorized consumable product that is offered, advertised, or displayed for sale to a 
consumer in the State, as specified; and (3) the District Court to impose additional 
sanctions. The bill prohibits a retailer from distributing, selling, exposing for sale, or 
advertising for sale an unauthorized consumable product, and imposes criminal and  
civil penalties on violators of specified provisions. The bill also expands the prohibitions 
against retailers advertising kratom and phenibut products to minors and requires the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to notify ATCC of changes in the regulatory status 
of unauthorized consumable products, including kratom, tianeptine, and phenibut. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  ATCC can implement the bill’s enforcement provisions with existing 
budgeted resources. MDH can implement the bill’s notification requirement with existing 
budgeted resources. The civil liability and criminal penalty provisions of the bill are not 
anticipated to have a material impact on State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The civil liability and criminal penalty provisions of the bill are not 
anticipated to have a material impact on local government operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1523/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Retailer Prohibition – Unauthorized Consumable Product 
 
The bill prohibits retailers from distributing, selling, exposing for sale, or advertising for 
sale an unauthorized consumable product.  
 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine up to $5,000.  
 
Definitions 
 
“Unauthorized consumable product” means specified tianeptine, kratom, and phenibut 
products marketed for human consumption as well as a consumable product that contains 
a poisonous or deleterious substance in violation of a rule or regulation adopted under 
specified provisions of the Health – General Article (§ 21-239(c)). 
 
“Advertise” includes packaging, labeling, or electronic communication.  
 
“Retailer” means a person that (1) sells, prepares, or maintains unauthorized consumable 
products or (2) advertises, represents, or holds itself out as selling, preparing, or 
maintaining unauthorized consumable products. A retailer can include a manufacturer, 
wholesaler, store, restaurant, hotel, catering facility, camp, bakery, delicatessen, 
supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, gas station, or food/drink company).  
 
Field Enforcement Division – Authorization to Issue Citations  
 
The bill authorizes FED within the Office of the Executive Director of ATCC to issue a 
citation or other charging document to a person who has committed a violation of Title 21, 
Subtitle 2D (tianeptine products), Subtitle 2E (kratom products), and Subtitle 2F (phenibut 
products) of the Health – General Article.  
 
Prosecution – Presumption of Evidence and Defense 
 
In a prosecution for a violation of the sale of an unauthorized consumable product, proof 
that the defendant displayed or offered for sale an unauthorized consumable product or 
kept a place of business where an unauthorized consumable product was displayed, 
advertised, or offered for sale, is prima facie evidence that the defendant sold an 
unauthorized consumable product.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1523/ Page 3 
The bill modifies provisions regarding the defense of violations related to the sale of 
kratom and phenibut products by specifying that it is a rebuttable defense that the defendant 
relied on the representations on the manufacturer’s label on a kratom or phenibut product.  
 
Seizure and Forfeiture 
 
The Executive Director of ATCC may seize, confiscate, or destroy (1) an unauthorized 
consumable product that is offered, advertised, or displayed for sale to a consumer in the 
State and (2) a product that is labeled, advertised, represented, or offered for sale as 
containing: 
 
 
7-hydroxymitragynine in an amount that (1) for a kratom product, is greater than 
the amount permitted under § 21-2E-02(b)(1)(iii) of the Health - General Article or 
(2) is greater than 1 milligram per serving;   
 
tianeptine sodium;  
 
tianeptine sulfate; or  
 
beta-phenyl-gamma-aminobutyric acid HCl. 
 
A product seized is presumed to be contraband and subject to summary forfeiture unless 
the person from whom the product was seized demonstrates the product was approved for 
sale and distribution for the purposes of human consumption by (1) MDH or (2) the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
 
The bill also adds unauthorized consumable products to alcoholic beverages and other 
contraband under Title 6 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article that is subject 
to seizure and forfeiture if it is kept, possessed, used, sold, manufactured, stored, or 
transported in violation of the Article. Accordingly, unauthorized consumable products 
seized in accordance with the bill’s provisions are considered forfeited property.  
 
Additional Sanctions 
 
Under the bill, the District Court may order the Executive Director, the Comptroller, or the 
applicable local licensing board or commission to suspend or revoke specified licenses and 
dispose of or destroy any unauthorized consumable product seized under the bill. 
Additionally, a retailer that violates the bill’s provisions is liable for civil damages 
sustained by an individual that result from the violation.  
 
Advertising Kratom or Phenibut Products to Minors 
 
The bill adds to the list of prohibitions against a retailer in the advertising, promotion, 
packaging, or labeling of a kratom or phenibut product to a minor, by including specified 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1523/ Page 4 
images, graphics, or features that are popularly used to advertise to children, including 
statements, artwork, or designs that could reasonably mislead an individual to believe that 
the package contains anything other than a kratom or phenibut product. 
 
The bill also expands a prohibition against a retailer advertising or promoting a kratom or 
phenibut product on an outdoor billboard within 500 feet of a school to include a 
prohibition against placing an advertisement on the side of a building or another publicly 
visible location of any form, including a sign, a poster, a placard, a device, a graphic 
display, an outdoor billboard, or a freestanding signboard. 
 
A retailer that violates the above provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a fine up to $5,000 and/or up to 90 days of imprisonment.  
 
Maryland Department of Health Notification 
 
The bill requires that MDH notify ATCC within 30 days after a change is made in the 
regulatory or approval status of kratom products, tianeptine products, phenibut products, 
or any other product designated by the Secretary of Health as an unauthorized consumable 
product.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Field Enforcement Division  
 
FED, within the Office of the Executive Director of ATCC, may employ officers and 
employees who (1) must be sworn police officers; (2) have the powers, duties, and 
responsibilities of peace officers to enforce the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverages and 
Cannabis Article, as specified; (3) may issue a citation or other charging document to a 
person who has committed a violation of § 10-108 of the Criminal Law Article; and (4) may 
make cooperative arrangements for and work and cooperate with the Office of the 
Comptroller, local State’s Attorneys, sheriffs, bailiffs, police, and other prosecuting and 
peace officers to enforce the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. 
 
FED is also responsible for seizure and forfeiture of alcoholic beverages, and other 
contraband kept, possessed, used, sold, manufactured, stored, or transported in violation of 
the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. Generally, property is forfeited if it (1) was 
seized as contraband in the possession or control of a defendant who is found guilty of 
violating the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article; (2) is otherwise found to be 
contraband or in violation of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article; (3) is seized 
as contraband and remains unclaimed for 30 days after seizure; and (4) has not been 
destroyed. Property seized by State officers and forfeited becomes State property and must 
be retained for official use, sold, or otherwise disposed of, as appropriate. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1523/ Page 5 
Tianeptine Products  
 
A retailer is prohibited from distributing, selling, exposing for sale, or advertising for sale 
a tianeptine product. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine up to 
$5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. In addition to these penalties, a retailer is 
also liable for any civil damages sustained by an individual resulting from the violation.  
 
Kratom and Phenibut Products 
 
 
Labeling Requirement  
 
A retailer that prepares, distributes, sells, or exposes for sale a kratom or phenibut product 
must disclose on the product label the factual basis on which that representation is made. 
A violator is subject to a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 for a first violation and 
$2,000 for each subsequent offense.  
 
 
Prohibitions  
 
A retailer may not prepare, distribute, sell, or expose for sale a kratom or phenibut product 
that (1) does not comply with the specified disclosure requirement or (2) has not been 
recognized by FDA as a dietary ingredient or approved drug. A retailer is also prohibited 
from preparing, distributing, selling, or exposing for sale a kratom or phenibut product that 
is adulterated or contaminated with a dangerous substance other than kratom or phenibut, 
as specified. A retailer may not distribute, sell, or expose for sale a kratom or phenibut 
product to an individual younger than 21. 
 
A violator of any of the specified provisions above is guilty of a misdemeanor and on 
conviction is subject to a fine up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days.  
 
In addition to any such penalty, a retailer is also liable for any civil damages sustained by 
an individual resulting from the violation. In a prosecution for a violation, it is a defense 
that the retailer relied in good faith on the representations of a manufacturer, processor, 
packer, or distributor of a kratom or phenibut product.  
 
 
Advertising Restrictions  
 
A retailer may not advertise (directly or indirectly) a therapeutic benefit of kratom or 
phenibut.  
 
A retailer may not advertise or market (directly or indirectly) kratom or phenibut products 
to minors. It is a violation of this prohibition for a retailer to use specified imagery or 
references in the advertising, promotion, packaging, or labeling of a kratom or phenibut 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1523/ Page 6 
product, including (1) a cartoon; (2) a superhero; (3) a video game reference; (4) an image 
of a food product primarily intended for minors; (5) a trademark that imitates or mimics 
the trademark of a product that has been advertised or marketed primarily to minors; (6) a 
symbol or celebrity that is primarily associated with minors or media primarily directed to 
minors; and (7) an image of an individual who appears to be younger than 27.  
 
It is also a violation of this prohibition for a retailer to advertise or promote a kratom or 
phenibut product on an outdoor billboard or signboard that is within 500 feet of a school 
or at specified locations or in certain media if individuals younger than 21 constitute 
15% or more of the total audience as measured by competent and reliable survey evidence, 
including (1) a newspaper, magazine, periodical, or other publication or (2) a concert, 
stadium, sporting event, or other public event. 
 
Maryland Department of Health – Report 
 
Chapter 748 of 2024 required MDH, in collaboration with the Maryland Hospital 
Association to report to the General Assembly by December 31, 2025, on the number of 
adverse health events observed in individuals after the use of opioid-like substances 
(including kratom and tianeptine). MDH’s report indicates that the number of reported 
incidents for fiscal 2025 involving kratom (59) was higher than tianeptine (12) and 
phenibut (7). However, the report also notes that, overall, kratom has been associated with 
a smaller number of complaints, incidents, and fatalities in Maryland when compared with 
other substances of concern, including opioids. Nevertheless, MDH advises that ongoing 
monitoring of kratom is warranted given its presence in fatal toxicology, particularly when 
combined with illicitly manufactured fentanyl.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business retailers that prepare, distribute, sell, or expose for 
sale tianeptine, kratom, or phenibut products must comply with the bill’s requirements. 
Violators are subject to civil and criminal penalty provisions, seizure and forfeiture of the 
products, and potential suspension or revocation of a license. 
 
Additional Comments:  Tianeptine is an antidepressant drug that is marketed as a 
supplement to treat anxiety, depression, pain, and opioid use disorder. It is a prescription 
drug in some countries, but it is not approved as a drug in the United States. Kratom is an 
herbal extract that comes from the leaves of an evergreen tree (Mitragyna speciosa) grown 
in Southeast Asia, that can be chewed, and dry kratom can be swallowed or brewed. Liquid 
kratom is marketed as a muscle pain reliever, appetite suppressor, and as a treatment for 
cramps and diarrhea. Phenibut is an anti-anxiety drug developed in Russia. It is considered 
a psychoactive substance and is often marketed as a supplement for relaxation, anxiety, 
and sleep, as well as to help with depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1523/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 820 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore, 
Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
Third Reader - March 27, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7