START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1562 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1562 
(Delegate Wu) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Telecommunications Service Outage - Automatic Credit 
(Automatic Telecommunications Service Outage Credit Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a commercial telecommunications service provider (i.e., a person who is 
a provider of telecommunications services to retail consumers in the State, as defined under 
specified provisions of federal law) that experiences a “material service outage” to 
automatically apply a “service disruption credit” to the account of each customer affected. 
The credit must be applied (1) without requiring any customer action and (2) to the 
customer’s next billing statement or, if not practicable, not later than the second billing 
cycle immediately following the restoration of service. The minimum service disruption 
credit required under the bill must be at least a prorated amount that is equivalent to  
one full day of the customer’s recurring monthly service charge. Violation of the bill is an 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
(MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. The Office of the Attorney General, Consumer 
Protection Division, can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1562/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Material service outage” means a disruption or unavailability of a 
commercial telecommunications service provider’s wireless voice, text, or data service that 
(1) lasts at least three consecutive hours and (2) affects a customer’s ability to access 
wireless service at the customer’s primary service location or within the provider’s covered 
service area.  
 
“Service disruption credit” means a billing adjustment or credit applied to a customer’s 
account to compensate for a material service outage.  
 
Nothing in the bill may be construed to (1) regulate telecommunications service rates or 
pricing structures or (2) prevent a commercial telecommunications service provider from 
providing a service disruption credit that is greater than the amount required under the bill. 
 
A commercial telecommunications service provider must provide reasonable notice to 
affected customers of (1) the occurrence of material service outage; (2) the estimated 
duration of the outage, if known; and (3) the automatic application of a service disruption 
credit. The notice may be provided by text message, e-mail, through an application on a 
mobile device, or by posting on the service provider’s website.  
 
Current Law:  Wireless or cellular telecommunications services, as well as 
Voice‑over‑Internet Protocol services and international and interstate telephone services, 
are not regulated by the Public Service Commission. Cellular telephone companies are 
specifically excluded from the definition of a “telephone company” under the  
Public 
Utilities 
Article. 
The 
Wireless 
Telecommunications 
Bureau 
of 
the  
Federal Communications Commission licenses cellular telephone companies, while the 
Federal Trade Commission handles actions for deceptive marketing or fraudulent 
investment schemes.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1562/ Page 3 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease-and-desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates 
MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each 
repetition of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any 
person who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3