START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1623 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1623 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Special Taxing Districts - Village of Drummond - Authority and Organization  
MC 20-26 
 
 
This bill updates the Public Local Laws of Montgomery County pertaining to the Village 
of Drummond. The bill requires the Village Council of Drummond, Montgomery County 
to constitute the governing body of the village. The bill also makes numerous conforming 
and technical changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the operations and finances of the 
Village of Drummond, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The Village of Drummond is a 41-home village located on 
Drummond Avenue in Montgomery County, Maryland. The village was created in 1903 
and became a special taxing district in 1916. The village is one of three State-created 
special taxing districts in the county. Under current law, the village is governed by a 
three-member citizens committee, composed of the mayor, secretary, and treasurer, who 
are elected annually by village residents. The bill requires the village council to be the 
governing body of the village and hold multiple public meetings during the year, as 
specified. The village council appoints the mayor, treasurer, secretary and other officers 
and employees holding terms and duties established by the village council. The other 
officers and employees must be bonded with the premiums paid by the village. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1623/ Page 2 
The bill clarifies that the village must operate on an annual budget for a fiscal year and the 
village council must hold a public hearing prior to adopting the budget. The village council 
may amend the budget from time to time during the fiscal year to meet unanticipated 
expenditures that may arise. The village council must serve without pay and a majority of 
the members constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  
 
The bill specifies the circumstances in which the village council may contract for material 
or work, as specified, without having invited bids, including if:  (1) the contract award 
serves a public purpose and there is only one source for the required material to meet the 
needs of the village; (2) the contract is in connection with potential or pending litigation, 
condemnation, or collective bargaining; or (3) there exists a threat to public health, safety, 
or welfare where delay would seriously injure the village financially or otherwise. 
 
The bill specifies that the enumeration of particular powers may not be held or deemed to 
be exclusive, and the village has other powers as are incident to the powers specifically 
enumerated in the bill including those granted by the State Constitution.  
 
If any section of the bill is held invalid for any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, 
the invalidity does not affect other provisions of the bill. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The village anticipates that two individuals will require a surety bond 
as specified by the bill. According to the village, the price for one bond is between 
$1,000 and $5,000. The village advises that the costs associated with purchasing the bonds 
are not anticipated to materially affect village finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Village of Drummond; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2