START OF PAGE 1
HB1612/103421/1

BY: Ways and Means Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1612
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 2, strike “Sports Wagering –” and substitute “Gaming –
Campaign Financing Contributions and Study on”; strike beginning with
“requiring” in line 3 down through “with” in line 4 and substitute “repealing the
prohibition on applicants for and holders of video lottery operation licenses and persons
who own an interest in video lottery facility operations in the State from directly or
indirectly making contributions to certain campaign finance entities; requiring the
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency to study and report to the Governor and the
General Assembly, on or before a certain date, on certain matters concerning”; in line 5,
strike “certain purposes” and substitute “sports wagering content”; strike beginning
with “the” in line 5 down through “content” in line 6 and substitute “gaming”; and strike
in their entirety lines 7 through 11, inclusive, and substitute:

“BY repealing
Article – Election Law
Section 13–237
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, strike in their entirety lines 14 through 22, inclusive, and substitute:

“Article – Election Law

[13–237.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1612/103421/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 1612
Page 2 of 3

(2) “Own” has the meaning stated in § 9–1A–01 of the State
Government Article.

(3) “Video lottery facility” has the meaning stated in § 9–1A–01 of the
State Government Article.

(4) “Video lottery operation license” has the meaning stated in § 9–1A–
01 of the State Government Article.

(b) This section applies to the following persons:

(1) an applicant for a video lottery operation license;

(2) a holder of a video lottery operation license; or

(3) a person who owns an interest in the operation of a video lottery
facility in this State.

(c) This section does not apply to gaming activity that an eligible organization
is authorized to conduct under the Criminal Law Article.

(d) A person subject to this section may not, directly or indirectly, make a
contribution to:

(1) the campaign finance entity of a candidate for any nonfederal public
office in the State; or

(2) any other campaign finance entity organized in support of a
candidate for any nonfederal public office in the State.]
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
HB1612/103421/01 Ways and Means Committee
Amendments to HB 1612
Page 3 of 3

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before January 1,
2027, the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency shall study and report to the
Governor and the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, on:

(1) the number of independent evaluators licensed by the State Lottery
and Gaming Control Commission under § 9–1E–17 of the State Government Article;

(2) the utilization of independent evaluators by sports wagering
licensees and sports wagering operators in the State to evaluate sports wagering content
in accordance with § 9–1E–17 of the State Government Article;

(3) the utilization of independent evaluators by sports wagering
licensees and sports wagering operators in other states to evaluate sports wagering
content; and

(4) whether any other states require sports wagering licensees or sports
wagering operators licensed in those states to contract with independent evaluators to
evaluate sports wagering content.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
take effect January 1, 2027.”.

On page 2, in line 1, strike “3.” and substitute “4.”; and in the same line, strike
“subject to Section 2” and substitute “except as provided in Section 3”.
END OF PAGE 3