START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1628 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1628 
(Delegate Wells) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Higher Education - Academic Program Approval - Objections 
 
 
This bill allows the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) or any institution 
of higher education in the State to file an objection against implementing any proposed 
new academic program at a public or private nonprofit institution of higher education that 
will be implemented using existing resources. Under current law, objections are limited to 
graduate programs to be implemented using existing resources. The objection process is 
the same as under current law for graduate programs. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Public four-year institutions of higher education and Baltimore City 
Community College (BCCC) revenues and expenditures may be affected by allowing 
objections to be filed against any proposed new academic program at a public or private 
nonprofit institution of higher education that will be implemented using existing resources. 
However, the direction or magnitude cannot be determined. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community college revenues and expenditures may be affected by 
allowing objections to be filed against any proposed new academic program at a public or 
private nonprofit institution of higher education that will be implemented using existing 
resources. However, the direction or magnitude cannot be determined. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  As under current law for graduate programs, any objection must be filed 
within 30 days of the notice of intent and based on at least one of four established criteria: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1628/ Page 2 
 
inconsistency with the institution’s approved mission; 
 
lack of need to meet a regional or statewide need; 
 
unreasonable program duplication that causes harm to the State or students; or 
 
unnecessary program duplication that violates equal educational opportunity 
obligations under State and federal law. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definitions Related to Institutions of Higher Education  
 
“Institution of higher education” is defined as an institution of postsecondary education 
that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools and awards degrees at 
either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level. It includes public, private nonprofit, 
and for-profit institutions. “Public institution of higher education” means a public senior 
higher education institution or community college. The public senior higher education 
institutions in Maryland are the constituent institutions of the University System of 
Maryland (USM) and the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science, 
Morgan State University, and St. Mary’s College of Maryland.  
 
Program Approval Process for Institutions of Higher Education 
 
There are two processes for implementing new academic programs at institutions of higher 
education:  one for new programs that can be implemented with existing resources and 
another for new programs that will require additional resources. The processes are overseen 
by MHEC, and MHEC’s determinations about program approval are not subject to judicial 
review or administrative appeal.  
 
Additional Resources:  Institutions of higher education seeking to implement new 
programs with new resources must submit proposals for the new programs to MHEC, and 
MHEC must approve or disapprove the programs or, in the case of private nonprofit and 
for-profit institutions of higher education, recommend that the programs be implemented 
or not implemented. If MHEC fails to act within 60 days of the date of submission of a 
completed proposal, the proposal is automatically deemed approved.  
 
Existing Resources:  When a public or private nonprofit institution of higher education 
determines that it can implement a new program with existing resources, the president of 
the institution must submit the proposal to the institution’s governing board (for public 
institutions) and to MHEC, and MHEC must distribute the proposal to other institutions.  
 
For public institutions, the governing board must review the proposal to ensure it meets 
quality criteria, meets a regional or statewide need, meets criteria for the quality of new 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1628/ Page 3 
programs, and can be verified as using existing resources. Then, the Board of Regents of 
USM must approve the proposed new program within 60 days if the program meets those 
criteria.  
 
Existing Resources Graduate Program Objection Process:  MHEC or another institution 
may file an objection to a proposed new graduate program that is to be implemented with 
existing resources based on (1) inconsistency with the mission of the proposing institution; 
(2) lack of need for the program; (3) unreasonable program duplication that could harm the 
State or students attending institutions in the State; or (4) violation of the State’s equal 
educational opportunity obligations (unnecessary program duplication). Based on those 
factors, MHEC must determine if an institution’s objection is justified. If MHEC 
determines that an objection is justified, it must negotiate with the institution’s governing 
board and president to modify the proposal. If the objection cannot be resolved within 
30 days of receipt of an objection, MHEC must make a final determination about the 
approval of the proposed graduate program for a public institution of higher education or 
a final recommendation on implementation for a private nonprofit institution of higher 
education. 
 
Graduate Programs Letters of Intent 
 
To foster collaboration, MHEC requires public four-year and private nonprofit institutions 
to submit a "letter of intent" every six months identifying each new graduate-level program 
they intend to propose within the upcoming six-month to two-year period. MHEC uses 
these letters to provide feedback and flag concerns about unreasonable duplication before 
a formal proposal is submitted. Generally, MHEC may only approve a graduate program 
if it was previously included in a letter of intent, barring specific exigent circumstances. 
 
Fully Online Programs  
 
MHEC is required to develop and implement a specific program review process for 
proposed programs that are offered exclusively online to a majority of out-of-state students. 
This process is designed to allow Maryland institutions to compete in the online 
marketplace while still permitting objections based on mission inconsistency, lack of need, 
or unreasonable/unnecessary program duplication. 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission Program Evaluation Unit 
 
To handle these reviews, MHEC is required by law to maintain a dedicated program 
evaluation unit consisting of at least 10 staff members whose specific purpose is to assist 
MHEC in reviewing and evaluating proposals for new programs and substantial 
modifications. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1628/ Page 4 
Unreasonable Program Duplication 
 
“Unreasonable program duplication” is defined as the duplication of an academic program 
(including a fully online program), which would cause harm to the State or students 
attending institutions of higher education in the State. This is distinct from “unnecessary 
program duplication,” which specifically refers to duplication that violates the State’s equal 
educational opportunity obligations under State and federal law. According to regulations, 
when analyzing and determining if unreasonable duplication exists, the proposing 
institution must submit for the Secretary of Higher Education to consider (1) the degree to 
be awarded and area of specialization; (2) the specific academic content, purposes, or 
objectives of the program; (3) evidence of equivalent competencies of the proposed 
program compared to existing programs; and (4) an analysis of the market demand for the 
program. The Secretary’s analysis must also include an examination of (1) institutional role 
and mission; (2) accessibility and alternative means of educational delivery (including 
distance education); (3) analysis of enrollment characteristics; (4) residency and admission 
requirements; and (5) the educational justification for the dual operation of programs that 
are broadly similar to unique or high-demand programs at Maryland’s historically 
Black colleges and universities. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Expanding the objection process to include proposed new 
academic programs at public or private nonprofit institutions of higher education that are 
implemented using existing resources may affect the number and types of programs 
approved or recommended by MHEC. Allowing objections for undergraduate, associate’s, 
or other nongraduate programs may result in additional review, negotiation, or 
modification of proposed programs and could delay or alter the implementation of certain 
programs. Public four-year institutions, and community colleges (including BCCC). Any 
resulting changes could affect institutional enrollment patterns, program offerings, and 
associated revenues and expenditures. However, the direction or magnitude of any such 
impact cannot be reliably estimated. For illustrative purposes, using the simple average, 
in-state tuition and fees proposed for fiscal 2027 are approximately $11,200; therefore, a 
change in enrollment at a particular institution of 30 full-time students could increase or 
decrease tuition and fees by approximately $336,000. 
 
The objection process itself can be implemented by institutions of higher education and 
MHEC using existing resources; however, the volume of objection cases and related 
administrative responsibilities may increase. Additional objections may require more 
review, analysis, and coordination among MHEC, institutional governing boards, and 
affected institutions. 
 
Additional Comments:  Nonprofit institutions of higher education are also impacted by 
the bill. However, in their case, MHEC can only recommend or not recommend a program. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1628/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 983 (Senator McCray) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5