START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1621 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1621 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Wastewater Treatment Plants - Discharges - Monitoring, Reporting, and 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill establishes monitoring, evaluation, reporting, and other requirements for the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and wastewater treatment plants 
(WWTPs) related to hormones, PFAS, and bacteria in effluent discharged from WWTPs. 
In addition, MDE must establish (1) bacterial action levels for WWTP effluent; (2) a 
process for the public to subscribe to receive real-time alerts when a bacterial action level 
is exceeded; and (3) a publicly available and searchable database that includes specified 
information about industrial users that hold a pretreatment permit. MDE must also adopt 
regulations to implement specified provisions of the bill. The bill establishes additional 
requirements for WWTPs that have a discharge permit to process at least 50.0 million 
gallons of effluent per day. A WWTP that fails to meet specified provisions of the bill or 
is found to have discharged effluent containing hormones, PFAS, or bacteria beyond the 
limits of its discharge permit, as specified, may not take part in the State’s Water Quality 
Trading (WQT) Program. Finally, the bill alters public notice procedures related to sewer 
overflows and treatment plant bypasses. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Based on preliminary information, State expenditures (multiple funds) – 
including general fund expenditures for MDE – increase, likely significantly, beginning in 
FY 2027. Maryland Department of Health (MDH) general fund revenues may also increase 
beginning in FY 2027 from reimbursements for water quality testing, as discussed below. 
Nonbudgeted expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2027; nonbudgeted revenues 
increase correspondingly. Other potential effects are discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase, likely significantly for at least 
some local jurisdictions (including Baltimore City), beginning in FY 2027, as discussed 
below. Other potential effects on local finances are discussed below. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1621/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Requirements for the Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
MDE must (1) monitor effluent discharged from WWTPs for hormones, PFAS, and 
bacteria and (2) evaluate whether the effluent discharged from WWTPs contains hormones, 
PFAS, or bacteria beyond the limits of the WWTP’s discharge permit.  
 
MDE must also establish (1) bacterial action levels for effluent from WWTPs and (2) a 
process for members of the public to subscribe to receive real-time alerts when a bacterial 
action level established under the bill is exceeded. 
 
In addition, MDE must establish a publicly available and searchable database that includes 
(1) a list of all industrial users that hold a pretreatment permit; (2) which pollutants are 
being discharged by each pretreatment permit holder; (3) whether each pretreatment permit 
holder is complying with their permit; and (4) which enforcement actions have been taken 
against a pretreatment permit holder that has violated their permit.  
 
Requirements and Restrictions for Wastewater Treatment Plants  
 
If a WWTP exceeds the bacterial action level established by MDE pursuant to the bill, the 
WWTP must immediately provide notice on its website.  
 
Wastewater Treatment Plants Permitted to Discharge Less than 50.0 Million Gallons 
per Day:  Each WWTP that has a discharge permit to process less than 50.0 million gallons 
of effluent per day must, by December 31, 2027, and each December 31 thereafter, report 
to the General Assembly on the WWTP’s staffing and management plan. 
 
Wastewater Treatment Plants Permitted to Discharge at Least 50.0 Million Gallons per 
Day:  Each WWTP that has a discharge permit to process at least 50.0 million gallons of 
effluent per day must (1) by June 30, 2027, and every six months thereafter, report to the 
General Assembly on the WWTP’s staffing and management plan; (2) keep any sewage 
sludge or dry solid holding area physically enclosed; and (3) capture or treat any vapors 
emitted from the plant that may affect the public. Additionally, each such WWTP must 
maintain a publicly accessible website and post the following on the website:  
 
 
a daily report on the total bacteria discharged from the WWTP; 
 
a plain language explanation of (1) any bypass, overflow, or treatment failure and 
(2) to the extent possible, the estimated duration, affected waterways, and potential 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1621/ Page 3 
public health and environmental impacts of the bypass, overflow, or treatment 
failure; 
 
within 24 hours of a bypass, overflow, or treatment failure that requires testing for 
specified contaminants, the test results; and 
 
within 14 days of any event or occurrence that results in the WWTP discharging 
effluent that contains hormones, PFAS, or bacteria beyond the limits of the 
WWTP’s discharge permit, (1) the cause of the event or occurrence; (2) corrective 
actions taken; and (3) measures implemented to prevent reoccurrence. 
 
Water Quality Trading Program Restrictions:  If a WWTP fails to meet the above 
requirements or is found to have discharged effluent containing hormones, PFAS, or 
bacteria beyond the WWTP’s discharge permit limits for two consecutive months, the 
WWTP may not take part in the WQT Program for the remaining period of the WWTP’s 
discharge permit. Additionally, MDE is authorized to deny, suspend, or revoke the 
approval or certification of WQT program credits if it finds that a WWTP has a history of 
discharging effluent containing hormones, PFAS, or bacteria beyond the limits of the 
WWTP’s discharge permit. 
 
Alterations to Required Notification of Sewer Overflows or Treatment Plant Bypasses  
 
Current law requires MDE, in cooperation with MDH, local health departments (LHDs), 
and local environmental health directors, to develop procedures for requiring the owner or 
operator of any sanitary sewer system, combined sewer system, or WWTP to provide 
public notification of a sewer overflow or treatment plant bypass. The bill requires these 
procedures to be automated. 
 
Under current law, among other requirements, the above procedures must require 
notification within a reasonable time of a sewer overflow or treatment plant bypass to 
appropriate downstream jurisdictions, appropriate county governments, State parks 
affected by the event, the Department of Natural Resources (DNR), and any other local, 
State, or federal land manager impacted by the event. Under the bill, this notification must 
be immediate (rather than within a reasonable time). 
 
Current Law: 
 
Federal Clean Water Act 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. CWA requires the  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to establish technology-based effluent  
(i.e., discharge) limits for industrial dischargers, known as effluent limitation guidelines. 
The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1621/ Page 4 
a permit program that addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge 
pollutants to U.S. waters. In Maryland, EPA delegates authority to issue NPDES permits 
to MDE. 
 
State Permitting for Wastewater Discharges  
 
In General:  MDE issues discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by 
controlling industrial and municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are 
regulated through combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater 
discharges are regulated through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
“Discharge permit” is defined in statute as a permit issued by MDE for the discharge of 
any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the waters of the State. 
 
Applicability:  A person must generally hold an MDE discharge permit before constructing, 
installing, modifying, extending, altering, or operating a system, facility, outlet, or 
establishment if its operation could cause or increase the discharge of pollutants into the 
waters of the State. This permitting requirement applies to (1) an industrial, commercial, 
or recreation facility or disposal system; (2) a State-owned treatment facility; or (3) any 
other outlet or establishment. 
 
National Pretreatment Program and State Implementation 
 
Under CWA, EPA established the National Pretreatment Program to control pollutants 
discharged by industrial and commercial facilities into municipal WWTPs or publicly 
owned treatment works (POTWs). These discharges, if not properly managed, can interfere 
with treatment processes, contaminate biosolids, or pass through untreated into receiving 
waters. 
 
In Maryland, EPA delegates pretreatment authority to MDE. In turn, MDE requires certain 
local jurisdictions and/or POTWs to develop, implement, and enforce local pretreatment 
programs whenever they receive wastewater from Significant Industrial Users (SIUs). 
SIUs are industries that discharge large volumes of wastewater or release significant 
amounts of toxic pollutants into a municipal wastewater treatment system. These local 
programs issue permits to SIUs, set discharge limits, conduct inspections and sampling, 
and take enforcement action as necessary. 
 
Federal Regulation and Recommendations Regarding PFAS Contamination 
 
As part of its comprehensive national strategy to combat PFAS pollution, called the 
“Strategic Roadmap,” EPA has taken steps to restrict, remediate, and research PFAS 
contamination and impacts. To that end, EPA has taken several actions under numerous 
federal laws designed to protect human health and the environment, including under CWA.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1621/ Page 5 
On January 14, 2025, EPA issued a draft risk assessment of the potential human health 
risks associated with the presence of PFAS chemicals in biosolids. Once finalized, EPA 
will use the risk assessment to help inform future risk management actions for 
perfluorooctanoic acid and perfluorooctane sulfonic acid in sewage sludge. The 
preliminary findings of the draft risk assessment indicate that there may be human health 
risks associated with exposure to PFAS with all three methods of using or disposing of 
sewage sludge – land application of biosolids, surface disposal in landfills, and 
incineration. 
 
Additionally, pursuant to a December 2022 memo, EPA currently recommends 
pretreatment best practices to reduce PFAS from sources and quarterly monitoring of 
influent, effluent, and sewage sludge using EPA Method 1633, a CWA analytical method 
to test for PFAS compounds in wastewater and other environmental media. 
 
Notification of Sewer Overflows and Treatment Plant Bypasses  
 
The owner or operator of any sanitary sewer system, combined sewer system, or WWTP 
must report to MDE any sewer overflow or treatment bypass that results in the direct or 
potential discharge of raw or diluted sewage into the surface waters or groundwaters of the 
State. This report must be made as soon as practicable but no later than 24 hours after the 
time that the owner or operator became aware of the event. Within five calendar days after 
notification of the event, the owner or operator must submit a written report of the incident 
to MDE. 
 
MDE, in coordination with MDH, LHDs, and local environmental health directors, must 
develop procedures for requiring the owner or operator of any sanitary sewer system, 
combined sewer system, or WWTP to provide public notification of a sewer overflow or 
treatment plant bypass. These procedures must require that the notification: 
 
 
be posted on the MDE, MDH, and LHD websites; 
 
be posted at the location of the overflow or bypass in Spanish and English; 
 
be posted on any social media websites on which an LHD regularly posts 
information; and 
 
be provided within a reasonable time to the appropriate downstream jurisdictions 
and county governments, affected State parks, DNR, and any other affected local, 
State, or federal land manager. 
 
Maryland’s Water Quality Trading Program  
 
Maryland’s WQT Program creates a public market for nitrogen, phosphorus, and sediment 
reductions. This voluntary program is a collaborative effort between MDE and the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture to enhance the restoration and protection of the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1621/ Page 6 
Chesapeake Bay and local waters by accelerating the pace and reducing the cost of 
implementation efforts. 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect: 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
MDE was unable to provide a specific estimate of its costs to implement the bill but 
anticipates that its general fund expenditures increase significantly beginning in 
fiscal 2027. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs and advises that MDE 
general fund expenditures increase, likely significantly, beginning in fiscal 2027 for staff, 
equipment, and potentially programming/contractual costs to (1) monitor and evaluate 
WWTP effluent for hormones, PFAS, and bacteria (discussed in more detail below);  
(2) establish bacterial action levels for WWTP effluent and a process for the public to 
subscribe to receive related real-time alerts; (3) coordinate with specified State and local 
entities to update the procedures for owners or operators of sanitary sewer systems, 
combined sewer systems, and WWTPs to provide public notification regarding sewer 
overflows or treatment lant bypasses; (4) establish a publicly available and searchable 
database with required information about industrial users that hold pretreatment permits; 
(5) adopt regulations; and (6) generally implement the bill.  
 
Water Quality Testing Costs  
 
MDH’s Laboratories Administration provides analytical support services for State 
agencies and program offices throughout the State and is the primary laboratory in the State 
that conducts water testing for MDE and LHDs. The Laboratories Administration has a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) in place with MDE to recoup related water testing 
costs. Under the bill, MDE must monitor and evaluate whether effluent discharged from 
WWTPs contains hormones, PFAs, or bacteria beyond their respective discharge permits. 
According to MDE, there are 532 WWTPs in the State that must be monitored under these 
requirements. In order to fulfill these requirements, MDE needs to sample and test WWTP 
effluent. 
 
MDH did not respond to requests for information regarding the fiscal effect of the bill in 
time for inclusion in this fiscal and policy note. Even so, MDE anticipates, and DLS 
concurs, that MDE likely incurs significant costs related to water quality testing under the 
bill. As a result, there may be significant fiscal and operational impacts on MDH’s 
Laboratories Administration if MDH conducts the additional water quality testing resulting 
from the bill (for MDE). Thus, general fund expenditures for MDE, and general fund 
expenditures and revenues (from reimbursement under the MOU) for MDH’s Laboratories 
Administration may increase, potentially significantly, beginning as early as fiscal 2027 to 
conduct additional water quality testing under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1621/ Page 7 
Impacts on the Regulated Community 
 
Impacts on Wastewater Treatment Plants Authorized to Discharge at Least 50.0 Million 
Gallons of Effluent per Day:  There are two WWTPs in the State that have discharge 
permits to process at least 50.0 million gallons of effluent per day (Back River WWTP and 
Patapsco WWTP, both of which are owned and operated by Baltimore City). Compliance 
costs for Baltimore City related to these WWTPs are anticipated to be significant. 
According to the Maryland Association of Municipal Wastewater Agencies (MAMWA), 
compliance costs for the State’s largest WWTPs – in particular, the costs to physically 
enclose sewage sludge and dry solid holding areas – are significant. MAMWA also notes 
there may be significant costs to capture or treat vapors emitted from these WWTPs that 
may affect the public. 
 
Impacts on Wastewater Treatment Plants – In General:  Affected owners/operators of 
WWTPs could include State agencies, local governments, and potentially small businesses. 
The bill likely results in increased costs for at least some WWTPs in the State, but the 
magnitude of any such impacts (other than for WWTPs authorized to discharge at least 
50.0 million gallons of effluent per day, as discussed above) cannot be reliably estimated 
absent actual experience under the bill. 
 
In particular, the bill requires MDE to monitor WWTP effluent for hormones, PFAS, and 
bacteria, and evaluate whether the effluent contains hormones, PFAS, and bacteria beyond 
the limits of the WWTP’s discharge permit. According to MDE, not all WWTPs in the 
State have PFAS limits in their discharge permits, and no WWTPs have hormone limits in 
their discharge permits. It is unclear if the bill itself requires MDE to include those 
substances in all discharge permits. If so, compliance costs to address those substances in 
effluent could be substantial.  
 
There may also be fiscal and/or operational effects on WWTPs related to the establishment 
of bacterial action levels for WWTP effluent discharge and the requirement to post 
“immediate” notice on the WWTP’s website when that level is exceeded. Also, to the 
extent a WWTP is restricted from participating in the State’s WQT Program due to 
noncompliance with the bill’s requirements, WWTP finances are likely further affected.  
 
The Maryland Environmental Service (MES) operates approximately 90 WWTPs on 
behalf of State and local entities throughout the State. As MES is a fee-for-service entity, 
any costs incurred by MES resulting from the bill are ultimately borne by the entities that 
contract for MES services through an increase in fees. As a result, MES nonbudgeted 
expenditures and revenues may increase correspondingly beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1621/ Page 8 
Other Impacts on the Regulated Community:  There may also be fiscal and/or operational 
effects on owners or operators of any sanitary sewer system, combined sewer system, or 
WWTP to provide public notification of a sewer overflow or treatment plant bypass 
immediately to appropriate downstream jurisdictions and county governments, affected 
State parks, DNR, and any other affected local, State, or federal land manager. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Association of Municipal Wastewater Agencies; Maryland Environmental Service; 
Prince George’s County; City of Annapolis; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8