START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1619 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1619 
(Delegate Wells) 
Economic Matters and Appropriations 
 
 
State Center – Development – Contract, Plan Requirements, and Advisory 
Group 
 
 
This bill requires the State or its reporting agency to convene an advisory group to  
(1) provide community input on the development of State Center; (2) leverage benefits 
from the development of State Center for neighborhoods and residents in the surrounding 
area; and (3) facilitate transparency and information-sharing between the developer, the 
State or its reporting agency, and the community surrounding State Center. The bill 
specifies membership of the advisory group and establishes requirements that any 
development contract or plan for State Center must meet. The bill also requires a developer 
who is a party to a new contract or plan for the development of State Center to use its best 
practical efforts to begin construction within 24, rather than 18, months after execution of 
the new contract and any associated plans. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The creation of a State Center advisory group does not materially 
affect governmental operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. The creation of a State Center advisory group does not materially 
affect local governmental operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The members of the advisory group must elect one member to serve as 
chair of the advisory group by majority vote of the members present at the meeting when 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1619/ Page 2 
the election is held. The chair serves for a term designated by the advisory group, and 
continues to serve beyond the term of office until a successor is elected. The chair of the 
advisory group must provide the members of the advisory group with all notices received 
by the chair.  
 
If an individual who serves on the advisory board as a representative of a neighborhood 
association is employed by an anchor institution, the individual must represent only the 
interests of the neighborhood association and may not represent the interests of the anchor 
institution. The advisory group must adopt a policy on conflicts of interest for members as 
part of the governance procedures of the advisory group and develop a conflict-of-interest 
disclosure document. The advisory group may address any conflicts of interest as set forth 
in the governance procedures, including by requiring a neighborhood association to appoint 
a designee to the advisory group who is not employed by an anchor institution if deemed 
necessary to resolve the conflict. 
 
Any new or modified development contract or plan must, to the extent possible, include 
anchor institutions that provide public or community services, which may include units of 
the State or Baltimore city, as the major tenants; the bill repeals a requirement that it include 
parking facilities but retains other features required under current law.  
 
The State or its reporting agency and any developer who is party to a contract or plan for 
the development of State Center must engage with the advisory group throughout the 
planning and development process, including by providing updates on any public approval 
proceeding.  
 
The bill repeals a requirement that the State include the State Center Neighborhood 
Alliance, Inc. in any selection process for a new development contractor and the 
development of any new plans or proposed modifications and instead requires that the State 
or its reporting agency engage in community consultation during the development of 
State Center through communication with the advisory group. 
 
Current Law:  State law specifies that the State or its reporting agency may not enter into 
a new or modified contract or plan for the development of State Center unless it includes: 
 
 
an enforceable community benefits agreement between the developer and the 
State Center Neighborhood Alliance, Inc., to provide for a concerted and 
coordinated effort by the developer and the community throughout the entire 
planning, development, and construction phases of the project (the bill retains this 
requirement, but specifies that the agreement be between the developer and the 
advisory group instead of the Alliance); 
 
a comprehensive local hiring plan for the project that includes goals for short-term 
construction jobs, long-term employment opportunities, and job training; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1619/ Page 3 
 
an economic improvement plan for the project that includes goals for the use of 
minority- and women-owned and locally owned businesses. 
 
Any new or modified contract or plan for State Center must include, to the extent possible, 
(1) State agencies as the major anchor tenant; (2) space for retail, housing, offices, 
restaurants, and other private businesses; (3) a high-quality and full-service grocery store; 
(4) parking facilities designed to reduce parking impacts on the surrounding communities; 
(5) elements designed to increase the connection of State Center to the surrounding 
communities; and (6) green space. 
 
The State or its reporting agency must include the State Center Neighborhood Alliance, 
Inc., and any other interested community association in the selection for a new 
development contract and the development of any plans for State Center or the 
modification of existing plans. 
 
A developer who is a party to a new contract or plan for the development of State Center 
must use best practical efforts to begin construction within 18 months after execution of 
the new contract and any associated plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 818 (Senator Hayes) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of General 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3