START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1609 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1609 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Frederick County - Gaming - Acceptance of Credit as Payment 
 
 
This bill authorizes volunteer fire, rescue, and ambulance companies and their auxiliary 
organizations that are conducting gaming events in Frederick County for their own benefit 
to accept credit from a person as payment to play a gaming device at the gaming event. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not affect Frederick County’s finances, and local impact 
grants from gaming revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An organization that operates a gaming event authorized under current law 
may not accept credit from a person to play a gaming device at a gaming event. An 
organization that violates this is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a 
fine of up to $1,000 and/or loss of privileges to conduct a gaming event for up to 60 days. 
An organization is not prohibited from accepting a token instead of money from a person 
who has paid the organization money for the use of the token. 
 
Frederick County Gaming Events 
 
In Frederick County, an eligible organization must obtain a permit before conducting a 
gaming event including a bazaar, carnival, raffle, tip jar, punchboard, chance book, 
paddle wheel, wheel of fortune, and any other gaming device. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1609/ Page 2 
Eligible organizations include bona fide religious, fraternal, civic, war veterans’, hospital, 
amateur athletic, patriotic, charitable, and educational organizations as well as volunteer 
fire, rescue, and ambulance companies and their auxiliary organizations in 
Frederick County. 
 
Eligible organizations may hold in a year (1) four gaming events in which the major prize 
has a value greater than $5,000 and (2) raffles in which the major prize is $5,000 or less as 
many times as allowed by the county. Except as specified for tip jars and punchboards, an 
individual may not benefit financially from a gaming event. A gaming permit is valid for 
one year after the date that it is issued, and the permit is not transferable. 
 
Frederick County may charge a fee for each permit and adopt regulations governing 
gaming event permit applications and the issuance of permits. 
 
A person may not knowingly violate specified Frederick County local gaming laws, and a 
person who does so is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction, subject to imprisonment 
of up to one year and/or a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 510 of 2025 and HB 1015 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Lottery 
and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2