START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1634 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1634 
(Delegate Roberts) 
Government, Labor, and Elections and 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Cannabis Licensure - Labor Peace Agreements and Collective Bargaining 
 
 
This bill requires that, to be issued a cannabis license, an applicant for a cannabis license 
or a licensee that does not have a collective bargaining agreement produce information, 
documentation, and assurances to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, that the 
applicant or licensee has entered into a labor peace agreement with each labor organization 
that represents or is attempting to represent cannabis industry workers in the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) can likely implement the 
bill with existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Labor peace agreement” means an agreement between an entity seeking 
a cannabis license or a cannabis licensee and a labor organization that, at a minimum, 
protects the State’s interests by prohibiting the labor organization from engaging in 
picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, or any other economic interference with the operation 
of the entity seeking a cannabis license or the cannabis licensee within the first five years 
of the license. The agreement must apply to all operations conducted by the applicant or 
licensee at a facility or location where the applicant or licensee conducts business under 
the license, and it must be valid and enforceable under federal law. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1634/ Page 2 
Current Law:  For an overview of the cannabis industry and licensing requirements in the 
State, please see the Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis. 
 
In general, a licensee must comply with all subregulatory guidance issued by MCA, 
including but not limited to bulletins, notices, resolutions, seed-to-sale tracking system 
guidance, and technical authorities posted on MCA’s website. 
 
State Expenditures:  MCA advises that it requires one additional compliance staff to 
monitor a licensee’s continued maintenance and compliance with each labor peace 
agreement and to take actions against a licensee if it falls out of compliance, but the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees. The bill does not assign MCA any 
enforcement authority or responsibilities with respect to labor peace agreements other than 
confirming that the information and documentation provided by the applicant provides 
clear and convincing evidence of an agreement. DLS believes that MCA can incorporate a 
determination of whether the application includes clear and convincing evidence of a labor 
peace agreement into its existing application review process with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Many cannabis licensees (and applicants for licenses) are small 
businesses. The bill requires each of them to either enter into collective bargaining 
agreements with their employees or sign labor peace agreements with each labor 
organization in the industry. Although DLS cannot predict the specific provisions of each 
collective bargaining agreement or labor peace agreement, they likely will require licensees 
to abide by labor standards and practices with respect to wages, benefits, and working 
conditions that could involve financial costs for the licensees. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill specifies that the requirement to enter into a labor peace 
agreement is a condition of being issued a license. However, the bill includes several 
references to existing licensees producing evidence of a labor peace agreement. Therefore, 
it is unclear if the bill’s requirement applies to existing licensees or only to future applicants 
(including license renewal applications). In either case, MCA can implement the bill with 
existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 995 (Senator Jackson) - Rules. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1634/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Cannabis Administration; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1634/ Page 4 
Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State by, 
among other things, (1) attributing cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission and renaming it the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) 
and (2) establishing the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) as an independent unit 
of State government responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis. 
MCA’s responsibilities generally include promulgating cannabis industry regulations, 
licensing and registering cannabis businesses in the State, and enforcing the statutes and 
regulations related to the cannabis industry. As required under Chapters 254 and 255, in 
June 2023, ATCC and MCA entered into a memorandum of understanding providing that 
both parties agree to collaborate on enforcing provisions regarding unlicensed cannabis 
operations in the State. 
 
Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The sale of adult-use cannabis began on July 1, 2023. A person at least age 21 may use and 
possess the personal use amount of cannabis, while the possession of the personal use 
amount of cannabis by a person younger than age 21, as well as the possession of the civil 
use amount of cannabis, are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use 
amount of cannabis by anyone is subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
MCA is responsible for the State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make 
medical cannabis available to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. There is a 
framework to certify health care providers, qualifying patients, and their caregivers to 
provide qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via written 
certification. 
 
Social Equity in the Cannabis Industry 
 
The Office of Social Equity (OSE), originally an independent office functioning within 
MCA, was redesignated as a unit within the Department of Social and Economic Mobility 
(DoSEM), which was established by Chapter 605 of 2025. OSE is responsible for 
promoting and encouraging full participation in the regulated cannabis industry by people 
from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the war on drugs in order 
to positively impact those communities. In this role, OSE is responsible for consulting with 
other agencies, providing recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting 
businesses to obtain financing through the Capital Access Program, and managing the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1634/ Page 5 
Social Equity Partnership Grant Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships 
between operational licensees and social equity licensees). OSE is also required to (1) with 
the assistance of the Comptroller, oversee the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund 
(CRRF); (2) oversee the appropriation of funds and the training of recipients of funds from 
CRRF; and (3) by October 1, 2025, adopt regulations to carry out the statutory provisions 
related to CRRF as modified by Chapter 195 of 2025; OSE has not yet promulgated the 
regulations. 
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
MCA. A license is valid for five years on initial licensure and five years upon renewal. 
MCA must issue licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, and incubator spaces. 
Additional licenses include micro licenses for growers, processors, and dispensaries, and 
on-site consumption licenses. Licensing and renewal fees are established by MCA and 
range from $5,000 for social equity applicants for certain licenses to $50,000 for standard 
grower licenses. Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, medical licensees (growers, processors, 
and dispensaries) were required to pay a conversion fee based on the licensee’s gross 
revenues for calendar 2022 to convert to medical and adult-use cannabis business licensees 
of the same type. Essentially all medical licensees (18 grower, 23 processor, and 
96 dispensary licensees) converted to cannabis business licensees. 
 
First- and Second-round Social Equity Licenses:  Social equity applicants are those with 
at least 65% ownership and control held by one or more individuals who meet certain 
criteria, such as living in or attending a public school in a disproportionately impacted area 
(i.e., determined to have had above 150% of the State’s 10-year average for cannabis 
possession charges). MCA conducted its first-round lottery on March 14, 2024, and a 
second-round lottery on June 28, 2024, awarding a total of 205 (174 in round one and  
31 in round two) social equity cannabis business licenses across the micro and standard 
grower, processor, and dispensary categories. 
 
Subsequent Licenses:  MCA may issue additional cannabis licenses up to the maximum 
limit authorized per statute based on the results of a market demand study. Future 
applications for licenses may be limited to social equity applicants and employ remedial 
measures based on the results of the disparity study. 
 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 also established the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-Use 
Cannabis. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by OSE, the 
Governor, MCA, or the General Assembly and (2) study and make recommendations on a 
number of issues related to the medical and adult-use cannabis industry in the State. The 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1634/ Page 6 
advisory board began meeting in May 2024, and has established three subcommittees:  
Federal, Medical Cannabis, and Adult-use Cannabis. 
 
Local Authority to Regulate Cannabis 
 
A “political subdivision,” defined as a county or municipality, is authorized to establish 
zoning requirements for cannabis businesses, allocate cannabis tax revenues, and adopt 
ordinances that reduce statutory requirements related to specified location restrictions for 
cannabis businesses. However, a political subdivision is prohibited from taking certain 
actions specific to cannabis businesses, including imposing a tax on cannabis and 
establishing restrictions related to transporting cannabis within the political subdivision or 
fees or requirements on cannabis businesses that are more burdensome than for other 
businesses. Statute also includes conditions for the operation of on-site consumption 
establishments; however, to date, MCA has not issued any on-site consumption licenses. 
 
Public Health Actions Related to Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council was established to study and report its 
findings and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public health impacts 
of cannabis legalization. The Cannabis Public Health Fund (CPHF) was also established to 
generally support the council’s work. The fund receives 5% of the sales and use tax 
revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis, which is discussed in more detail below. 
 
Cannabis Sales and Use Tax Revenues 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 established a 9% sales and use tax on the retail sale of adult-use 
cannabis, and the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act (BRFA) of 2025 (Chapter 604) 
increased the tax rate to 12% beginning in fiscal 2026. In the second year of adult-use 
cannabis sales (July 1, 2024, through June 30, 2025), retail sales generated approximately 
$71.8 million in sales and use tax revenues. Adult-use cannabis sales and use tax 
collections for the first quarter of fiscal 2026, when the 12% sales and use tax rate went 
into effect, totaled $26.9 million. 
 
Distribution of Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
Per statute, as amended by the BRFA of 2025, the Comptroller must distribute the first 
25% of sales and use tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis to the general fund. 
Of the remaining 75% of the sales and use tax revenues, the Comptroller must first 
distribute to the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) and the DoSEM Fund 
an amount sufficient to defray the operating and administrative costs of MCA and OSE, 
respectively. Revenues remaining after those distributions to CREF and DoSEM are then 
distributed as follows:  50% to the State’s general fund (through fiscal 2028, after which 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1634/ Page 7 
the general fund distribution increases to 55%); 35% to CRRF (through fiscal 2033 only), 
which is administered by the Comptroller with oversight assistance from OSE; 5% to 
CPHF, which is administered by the Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis 
Business Assistance Fund (through fiscal 2028 only), which is administered by the 
Department of Commerce; and 5% as a separate direct allocation to counties. 
 

END OF PAGE 7