START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1604 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1604 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Ways and Means 
 
 
Public School System Contracts - Prohibited Provisions 
 
 
This bill prohibits specified provisions from being included in a public school system 
contract, except as required by State or federal law. If a public school system contract 
contains one of the specified provisions, the provision is void and the contract is 
enforceable as if it did not contain the provision. A public school system contract that 
contains one of the specified provisions must be governed by and construed in accordance 
with State law, notwithstanding any term or condition to the contrary in the contract. The 
bill applies only prospectively and does not apply to a public school system contract 
executed before the effective date of the bill (or to renewals or extensions of such 
contracts). The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill applies only to public school system contracts. 
 
Local Effect:  Expenditures increase beginning in FY 2027 to the extent that contractors 
decline to submit bids in response to the prohibited provisions. Conversely, the bill may 
positively impact school system operations and finances through reduced risk and fewer 
unanticipated costs. However, a reliable estimate for either of these effects is not feasible 
without experience under the bill. Local school systems can generally implement the bill 
with existing resources. No effect on revenues.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1604/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Public school system contract” means any agreement entered into by a 
public school system. This bill prohibits public school system contracts from including a 
provision that:   
 
 
requires the public school system to indemnify, defend, or hold harmless another 
person without an appropriation of funds for that purpose; 
 
requires the public school system to agree to binding arbitration or any other binding 
extrajudicial dispute resolution process; 
 
names a jurisdiction or venue for any action or dispute against the public school 
system other than a court of proper jurisdiction in the State; 
 
requires the public school system to agree to limit the liability for any direct loss to 
the public school system, as specified, or that would otherwise impose an 
indemnification obligation on the public school system; 
 
requires the public school system to be bound by a term or condition that (1) is 
unknown to the public school system at the time of signing a contract; (2) may be 
unilaterally changed by the other party; or (3) is electronically accepted by a public 
school system without authority; 
 
restricts a public school system’s discretion to select the appropriate legal counsel 
to represent its interests; 
 
is inconsistent with the public school system’s obligations under the Open Meetings 
Act or the Public Information Act; 
 
that binds a public school system to pay unappropriated amounts or otherwise 
causes a public school system to incur unfunded liabilities, as specified under State 
law; 
 
requires automatic renewal of the contract and obligates the public school system to 
allocate funding in subsequent fiscal years; or 
 
limits the public school system’s ability to recover the cost of a replacement 
contractor. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 433 of 2024 prohibited the same provisions as listed in the bill 
from being included in State contracts. If a State contract contains any of the prohibited 
provisions, the provision is void and the contract containing that provision is enforceable 
as if it did not contain the provision. The prohibitions do not apply to a State contract 
relating to the purchase, redevelopment, or operation of a racing facility or training facility 
site. 
 
Local Expenditures:  In general, local school systems can implement the bill with existing 
resources, although Prince George’s County anticipates needing additional legal staff to 
review contracts. The bill may have a generally positive effect on local school system 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1604/ Page 3 
operations and finances, as prohibiting the specified contract provisions could reduce 
exposure to risk and unanticipated costs (e.g., costs to hire additional contractors for 
incomplete or unsatisfactory work by initial contractor). However, the inability to include 
certain provisions in contracts executed on or after the bill’s effective date may lead some 
contractors to decline to submit bids or offers altogether. To the extent that occurs, local 
school system contract expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2027. However, a reliable 
estimate of any such impact is not feasible without experience under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s prohibited contract provisions could meaningfully affect 
small businesses to the extent that businesses must alter standard terms previously used in 
contracts with public school systems. For example, the bill would prohibit a provision 
requiring arbitration to resolve disputes between a local school system and a contractor, 
because it bars any requirement that a dispute be resolved in a jurisdiction or venue other 
than a court of proper jurisdiction. As a result, contractors that would otherwise have 
resolved disputes through arbitration may face higher litigation costs by having to proceed 
through the courts. To the extent these changes are viewed as too burdensome, some small 
businesses may choose not to submit bids or offers for procurements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 646 (Senator King) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Department of Education; Interagency Commission on School Construction; Department 
of General Services; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Charles County Public Schools; Frederick County 
Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3