START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1617 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1617 
(Delegate Alston, et al.) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Health Innovation Zones - Establishment 
 
This bill authorizes the local zoning authority of a county to designate a “health innovation 
zone”; however, Prince George’s County must designate a health innovation zone in (1) the 
Blue Line Corridor and (2) the area located within two miles of the border between the 
county and the District of Columbia. When a health innovation zone is designated, the 
county must establish by law incentives that will be provided to specified businesses that 
locate in the health innovation zone. A grocery store, pharmacy, primary care provider, and 
specialty care provider located in a health innovation zone are not subject to local zoning 
or land use laws. Beginning in fiscal 2028, the Governor must appropriate at least 
$5.0 million to the Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) to provide 
funding for the establishment of specified businesses in a health innovation zone but only 
for those established in Prince George’s County. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2028 to reflect the bill’s mandated appropriation. Potential increase in nonbudgeted 
expenditures for MEDCO to administer such funding (not shown). Revenues are not 
affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
5,000,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($5,000,000) 
($5,000,000) 
($5,000,000) 
($5,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase beginning as early as 
FY 2027 to provide local incentives. Any impact on revenues cannot be reliably estimated. 
Expenditures for other counties increase to the extent they choose to designate health 
innovation zones. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1617/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Health Innovation Zone 
 
“Health innovation zone” means a contiguous geographic area that (1) demonstrates 
measurable and documented health disparities and poor health outcomes, including high 
rates of maternal health complications, newborn health complications, and chronic and 
infectious diseases; (2) is populated by communities of color, communities with 
low‑income households, communities with a high immigrant population, or economically 
disadvantaged communities; and (3) is small enough to allow for specified incentives to 
have a significant impact on improving health outcomes and reducing health disparities, 
including racial, ethnic, geographic, and disability‑related health disparities in rural 
communities.  
 
The local zoning authority of a county may designate a health innovation zone if the area 
to be designated (1) is a food or health care desert; (2) has a high concentration of cancer, 
diabetes, heart disease, or hypertension; and (3) has a low prevalence of grocery stores, 
pharmacies, primary care providers, and specialty care providers. 
 
The Prince George’s County Council may designate additional health innovation zones 
(beyond the two required under the bill) if the area to be designated (1) is a food or health 
care desert; (2) has a high concentration of cancer, diabetes, heart disease, or hypertension; 
and (3) has a low prevalence of grocery stores, pharmacies, primary care providers, and 
specialty care providers.  
 
Mandated Appropriation and Funding 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2028, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of at least $5.0 million to MEDCO to encourage grocery stores, pharmacies, 
primary care providers, and specialty care providers to locate in a health innovation zone 
within Prince George’s County. Likewise, the requirement for MEDCO to look for 
additional funding sources to encourage health innovation business growth in a health 
innovation zone applies only to Prince George’s County.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation  
 
MEDCO is a nonbudgeted entity created in 1984 by the General Assembly to assist 
business and governmental entities through ownership, financing, and development of real 
and personal property projects. MEDCO purchases or develops property that is leased to 
others and makes loans to companies throughout the State to maintain or develop facilities. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1617/ Page 3 
MEDCO has broad powers to finance projects and most often is a conduit issuer of 
tax‑exempt revenue bonds to an eligible tax-exempt borrower. MEDCO has also issued 
bonds to finance projects that it owns and operates; MEDCO‑owned projects consist 
mostly of student housing projects. Generally, MEDCO debt is not debt of the State, and 
there is no implied State guaranty or State obligation to protect bondholders from losses. 
 
Prince George’s County Blue Line Corridor 
 
The Prince George’s County Blue Line Corridor is an area in central Prince George’s 
County, the specific boundaries of which are designated by public local law, near the 
intersections of I-495 and Landover Road, Arena Drive, and Central Avenue.  
 
Health Enterprise Zones  
 
Chapter 3 of 2012 established a process for the designation of “health enterprise zones” 
(HEZs) to target State resources to specific areas of the State to reduce health disparities, 
improve health outcomes and access to primary care, promote prevention services, and 
reduce health care costs and hospital admissions and readmissions. The Act authorized 
specified incentives for HEZ practitioners who practice in an HEZ, including tax credits 
against the State income tax.  
 
Over four years, the State funded five HEZs:  Annapolis/Morris Blum; Capitol Heights in 
Prince George’s County; Caroline and Dorchester Counties; Greater Lexington Park in 
St. Mary’s County; and West Baltimore in Baltimore City. All HEZs sought to reduce 
diabetes and cardiovascular disease related illnesses and associated risk factors. In addition, 
two addressed asthma (Capitol Heights and Greater Lexington Park), two addressed 
behavioral/mental health (Caroline-Dorchester and Greater Lexington Park), and 
two addressed obesity (Caroline‑Dorchester and West Baltimore). Each utilized financial 
incentives to expand availability of primary care in their communities and employ 
community health workers to address clinical and social risk factors of vulnerable patients. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2028, which reflects the bill’s mandated appropriation to MEDCO to 
encourage grocery stores, pharmacies, primary care providers, and specialty care providers 
to locate in a health innovation zone in Prince George’s County. Beginning July 1, 2028 
(fiscal 2029), MEDCO must provide such funding. MEDCO must look for additional 
funding sources to encourage health innovation business growth in a health innovation 
zone in Prince George’s County. This analysis assumes that funding appropriated in 
fiscal 2028 would be provided in fiscal 2028, although the bill specifies that it must be 
provided beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1617/ Page 4 
To the extent funding from the mandated appropriation cannot be used to cover any 
administrative costs for MEDCO, nonbudgeted expenditures for MEDCO may increase by 
an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2028. This analysis assumes MEDCO does 
not assist with funding for health innovation zones established elsewhere in the State, as 
the bill neither authorizes nor require such assistance. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires Prince George’s County to designate two health 
innovation zones. The Prince George’s County Council must establish by law incentives 
that will be provided to grocery stores, pharmacies, primary care providers, and specialty 
care providers that locate in the health innovation zones. While $5.0 million in annual 
funding will be provided through MEDCO as discussed above, Prince George’s County 
expenditures increase by an additional amount beginning as early as fiscal 2027 to provide 
local incentives, to be determined by the Prince George’s County Council. To the extent 
that local incentives include property tax incentives, local revenues potentially decrease. 
Any impact on revenues cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business grocery stores, pharmacies, primary care 
providers, and specialty care providers may receive incentives to locate in a health 
innovation zone in Prince George’s County (and elsewhere in the State if any are others 
are designated). Such businesses located in a health innovation zone are exempt from local 
zoning or land use laws.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of 
County Health Officers; Maryland Economic Development Corporation; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4