START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1630 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1630 
(Delegate Arentz) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Queen Anne's County - Speed Monitoring System - U.S. Route 301 
 
 
This bill authorizes the placement and use of speed monitoring systems (i.e., speed 
cameras) on U.S. Route 301 at the intersections of (or between) Maryland Route 405 and 
Maryland Route 19 in Queen Anne’s County. Existing requirements and specifications that 
apply to other speed monitoring systems generally apply to the speed monitoring systems 
authorized by the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues from contested cases in the District Court may 
increase minimally as early as FY 2027 to the extent that additional speed cameras are 
installed, as discussed below. General fund expenditures increase by $16,300 in FY 2027 
only for one-time programming costs for the Judiciary. The bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect District Court caseloads. 
 
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for Queen Anne’s County increase to the extent 
that any speed cameras are installed pursuant to the bill’s authority, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, 
including traffic control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed systems. 
Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives 
a citation, may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1630/ Page 2 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
In general, citation revenues from speed monitoring systems used by a local jurisdiction 
(subject to limited exception) may be used to recover the costs of implementing and 
administering the program and any remaining balance may be used solely for public safety 
purposes, including pedestrian or highway safety programs. However, for any fiscal year 
in which the balance remaining after the costs of implementing and administering the 
systems is greater than 10% of the total revenues of the county for the fiscal year, the 
county must remit any funds that exceed 10% of the total revenues to the Comptroller. 
 
For additional information, please see the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Assuming that speed cameras are installed by Queen Anne’s County 
pursuant to the bill’s authority, the total number of speed camera citations issued may 
increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027. As a result of this potential increase in citations, 
the number of individuals opting for a trial in District Court may increase.  
 
Accordingly, general fund revenues may increase minimally as fine revenues paid by 
individuals convicted in District Court are paid into the general fund. For context, the 
Judiciary advises that there were 6,479 requests for trial based on citations issued from 
speed monitoring systems in fiscal 2025. 
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by approximately $16,333 in  
fiscal 2027 for one-time programming costs. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
District Court caseloads. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that Queen Anne’s County chooses to implement a 
speed camera program pursuant to the authority granted by the bill: 
 
 
expenditures increase to install the speed cameras and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the speed camera 
program (e.g., mailing or contractual costs); 
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the county; 
and 
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1630/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 19, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1630/ Page 4 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County. 
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. 
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system; 
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program; 
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1630/ Page 5 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5