START OF PAGE 1
HB1614/303822/1

BY: Environment and Transportation Committee

AMENDMENTS TO HOUSE BILL 1614
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Delegate Arentz” and substitute
“Delegates Arentz, Boyce, Foley, Guyton, Healey, Lewis, and Ziegler”; in line 2,
strike “Use of Lane Direction” and substitute “Lane Use”; in line 4, strike “Police
Force”; in lines 5, 7, 9, and 12, in each instance, strike “direction” and substitute “use”;
in line 5, strike “the Chesapeake Bay Bridge” and substitute “a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Maryland Transportation Authority”; and strike beginning with
“requiring” in line 10 down through “processes;” in line 11.

On page 2, in line 8, after “12–113.1(b),” insert “21–204.1,”; in line 13, strike “,
21–204.1,”; in the same line, strike the second “and” and substitute a comma; and in the
same line, after “(b)” insert “, and (c)”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 3 in lines 16 and 19, on page 4 in line 24, on page 5 in line 20, on page 7
in lines 2 and 28, on page 8 in lines 3, 5, and 15, on page 9 in lines 2, 6, 9, 13, 14, 16, 19,
20, 23, 25, 26, and 29, on page 10 in lines 1, 2, 5, and 27, on page 13 in lines 13, 17, and
20, and on page 15 in lines 27 and 31, in each instance, strike “DIRECTION” and
substitute “USE”.

On page 7, in line 14, strike “direction” and substitute “USE”; after line 21, insert:

“(c) “Authority highway” means:

(1) Each highway, tunnel, and bridge within the jurisdiction of the
Maryland Transportation Authority; and
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
HB1614/303822/01 Environment and Transportation Committee
Amendments to HB 1614
Page 2 of 2

(2) Each approach to these highways, tunnels, and bridges.”;

and strike beginning with “(2)” in line 25 down through “(3)” in line 28 and substitute
“(2)”.

On page 8, in lines 3, 6, and 14, strike “(4)”, “(5)”, and “(6)”, respectively, and
substitute “(3)”, “(4)”, and “(5)”, respectively.

On page 9 in line 5, on page 11 in line 13, on page 12 in lines 17, 21, and 29, on
page 14 in lines 21 and 25, and on page 15 in lines 16, 23, and 28, in each instance,
strike “POLICE FORCE”.

On page 9, in line 1, strike “(7)” and substitute “(6)”; in lines 4, 15, and 22, in
each instance, strike “THE CHESAPEAKE BAY BRIDGE” and substitute “AN
AUTHORITY HIGHWAY”.

On page 10, strike beginning with “STATES” in line 6 down through “(III)” in line
10; in line 11, strike “(IV)” and substitute “(III)”; and strike in their entirety lines 13
through 21, inclusive.

On page 12 in line 2, and on page 13 in line 12, in each instance, strike “POLICE
OFFICER” and substitute “REPRESENTATIVE OR CONTRACTOR”.

On page 13, strike beginning with “POLICE” in line 22 down through “FORCE”
in line 23.

On page 14, in line 19, strike “DRIVING” and substitute “OPERATING”.

On pages 16 and 17, strike beginning with “AND” in line 33 on page 16 down
through “3.” in line 3 on page 17.
END OF PAGE 2