START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1614 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1614 
(Delegate Arentz) 
Environment and Transportation 
 
 
Maryland Transportation Authority - Use of Lane Direction Control Signal 
Monitoring Systems 
 
   
This bill authorizes the use of lane direction control signal monitoring systems by the 
Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) on the Chesapeake Bay Bridge to record and 
cite instances of motor vehicles, in violation of State law, entering or traveling in a lane 
over which a red lane direction control signal is shown. MDTA must adopt regulations 
establishing standards and procedures for the lane direction control signal motoring 
systems. The State Highway Administration (SHA) must provide MDTA with access to 
SHA’s existing vendor contracts and processes to assist MDTA in the planning and 
implementing of the use of lane direction control signal monitoring systems under the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted expenditures and revenues for MDTA increase, potentially 
significantly, beginning as early as FY 2027 to the extent that MDTA chooses to implement 
a lane direction control signal monitoring system program under the bill’s authority, as 
discussed below. General fund expenditures increase by $22,900 in FY 2027 only for 
one-time programming costs for the Judiciary. The bill is not anticipated to materially 
affect District Court caseloads. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1614/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Citations and Penalties  
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject to the following civil 
penalties if the motor vehicle is recorded by a lane direction control monitoring system 
during the commission of a violation:  
 
 
for a first violation occurring on a single trip traveling in one direction, the civil 
penalty is $90; 
 
for a second violation occurring on the same trip while traveling in the same 
direction as the first violation, the civil penalty is $180; and  
 
for a third or subsequent violation occurring on the same trip while traveling in the 
same direction as the second, third, or subsequent violation, the civil penalty is $270.  
 
The District Court must prescribe a uniform citation form and civil penalty to be paid by a 
person who chooses to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in the District Court. A 
person who receives a citation may:  
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
In an uncontested or a contested case, the civil penalty must be paid directly to the 
District Court, and the District Court must remit the penalty revenues to MDTA.  
 
Additional Specifications and Requirements 
 
The bill includes additional specifications and requirements that apply for lane direction 
control signal monitoring systems, which are generally similar or identical to the 
specifications and requirements that apply to most other automated enforcement systems, 
including those related to: 
 
 
public notice that must be given before a system is fully implemented;  
 
signage that must be placed to alert drivers that a system is in use;  
 
required trainings for and administrative procedures that must be followed by 
system operators; 
 
ongoing system calibration checks;  
 
the mailing of warning notices, instead of citations;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1614/ Page 3 
 
processes for determining liability under extenuating circumstances (e.g., for rental 
vehicles, for stolen vehicles, when registration plates are stolen, etc.);  
 
processes for adjudication and administration of violations and citations by the 
District Court;  
 
the authority of the Motor Vehicle Administration to refuse to register or transfer 
the registration of a vehicle with outstanding fines; and  
 
the payment of contractors who administer or process citations. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Transportation Authority  
 
Since 1971, MDTA has been responsible for constructing, managing, operating, and 
improving the State’s toll facilities (for example, the Chesapeake Bay Bridge, the former 
Francis Scott Key Bridge, and the Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial/ Senator Thomas 
“Mac” Middleton (Nice/Middleton) Bridge) and for financing new revenue-producing 
transportation projects. MDTA is a nonbudgeted State agency, meaning that its budget is 
not subject to the General Assembly’s appropriation process. 
 
Automated Enforcement Systems  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed systems. Generally, 
pursuant to §21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who receives a citation, 
may:  
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
Lane Direction Control Signals   
 
Where lane direction control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a highway, 
vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown but may not 
enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1614/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:     
 
Maryland Transportation Authority 
 
Revenues and expenditures for MDTA are affected as follows beginning as early as 
fiscal 2027 to the extent that MDTA chooses to implement a lane direction control signal 
monitoring system program pursuant to the bill’s authorization:  
 
 
expenditures increase to install the devices and required signs and for other 
administrative expense that may be incurred for the operation of the program  
(e.g., mailing or contractual costs); and 
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are remitted to 
MDTA by the District Court.  
 
A preliminary analysis by MDTA estimates that the total cost of the program could exceed 
$2.3 million annually if it contracts with a private vendor to establish four fixed systems 
on the Chesapeake Bay Bridge. Based on this estimate, it is unclear whether citations 
revenues would fully offset MDTA’s administrative costs for the program.  
 
District Court 
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by approximately $22,885 in 
fiscal 2027 for one-time programming costs. Because the bill requires the Judiciary to 
collect and remit to MDTA any penalty revenues collected from citations issued by lane 
direction control signal monitoring systems, the bill does not affect general fund revenues.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4