START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1605 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1605 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Compensation for Individuals Erroneously Convicted - County Cost-Sharing - 
Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement that the county government in which the conviction of an 
individual occurred pay the State 50% of the amount of compensation awarded to an 
individual under § 10-501(a)(1) of the State Finance and Procurement Article for being 
convicted, sentenced, and confined under State law for a crime the individual did not 
commit. This cost‐sharing requirement, which applies to new awards beginning in 
fiscal 2026, was enacted pursuant to the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025 
(Chapter 604). The bill repeals corresponding provisions that were also enacted under that 
legislation.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues likely decrease by at least $1.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2027 due to foregone revenues from local cost‐sharing reimbursements, 
as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected.  
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures likely decrease by at least $1.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2027 once locals are no longer responsible for cost‐sharing 
reimbursements, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.    
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The corresponding provisions repealed under the bill include (1) the 
requirement that a county pay 100% of its share of the costs for the fiscal year to the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1605/ Page 2 
Comptroller by June 30; (2) the requirement that the Board of Public Works (BPW) notify 
the Comptroller and each county of the county’s share of each erroneous conviction award 
on October 1, December 1, March 1, and June 1 of each fiscal year; and (3) authorization 
for the Comptroller to withhold a portion of the local income tax distribution of a county 
that fails to make a timely payment. 
 
Current Law:  On receipt of a petition or request filed within designated timelines and 
after following certain procedures, an administrative law judge (ALJ) must issue an order 
that an individual is eligible for compensation and benefits from the State/BPW for being 
erroneously convicted, sentenced, and confined if the individual meets specified criteria 
and if the ALJ makes certain findings.  
 
If an ALJ issues an order of eligibility, the order must include (1) the monetary award 
owed the individual; (2) reasonable attorney’s fees and expenses associated with the 
eligibility determination action; (3) depending on the ALJ’s determination, additional 
benefits for which the individual is eligible and must receive free of charge (e.g., housing 
accommodations for up to five years, higher education tuition, and fees for up to 
eight years); and (4) if the ALJ determines that it is in the interests of the individual, a 
recommendation for an expedited payment schedule. A copy of the order must be delivered 
to BPW and any State agency or service provider ordered to provide benefits. The decision 
to grant or deny an order of eligibility may be appealed by either party.    
 
With respect to the monetary award, BPW must compensate an individual found to be 
eligible in an amount equal to the total number of days of wrongful confinement after the 
erroneous conviction multiplied by a daily rate based on the State’s most recent median 
household income in the year the order of eligibility is issued, as published in the American 
Community Survey of the U.S. Census Bureau, as specified. As noted above, Chapter 604 
requires the county government in which the conviction of an individual occurred to 
reimburse the State for 50% of the monetary award. Subject to specified procedural 
requirements, the individual may not receive compensation for any period of confinement 
during which the individual was serving a concurrent sentence for another conviction for 
which the individual was lawfully convicted and confined. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues are assumed to decrease by at least 
$1.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027 once local jurisdictions are no longer 
required to reimburse the State for payments associated with erroneous convictions. Local 
expenditures correspondingly decrease.  
 
The estimate prepared for Chapter 640 reflected a general fund revenue decrease of 
$1.5 million in fiscal 2027 and $2.3 million annually thereafter. Among other assumptions, 
these amounts were based on the average payment per person per year between fiscal 2022 
and 2024 (approximately $380,000), assumed four new grantees each year (with payments 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1605/ Page 3 
over multiple years), and assumed stabilized awards payments subject to reimbursement 
beginning in fiscal 2028. The Department of Legislative Services notes, however, that the 
number and monetary value of awards vary by year; furthermore, according to data 
provided by BPW, payments to individuals do not appear to always be made on a 
consecutive, annual schedule.  
 
For additional context, BPW advises that ALJs issued five orders for compensation in 
fiscal 2024; the compensation associated with those petitions is approximately 
$8.8 million, and the average projected time to complete payments for these awards is 
1.8 years. There was also a related settlement of an appeal for approximately $226,700. In 
fiscal 2023, ALJs issued four new orders with compensation of $5.7 million, including 
attorney’s fees (which are not subject to local reimbursement).  
 
As of December 1, 2025, BPW indicates that Wicomico County’s share of fiscal 2026 
payments is $286,706, with no other counties required to make payments.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Board of Public Works; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3