START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1625 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1625 
(Delegate Hill) 
Health 
 
 
Public Health - Newborn Screening Program - Fees and Core Conditions 
 
   
This bill increases the limit on fees for which the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
must set for newborn screening. The bill also (1) alters responsibilities for the 
State Advisory Council on Hereditary and Congenital Disorders regarding newborn 
screening; (2) authorizes MDH to delay or not implement screenings for certain conditions 
after advice from the advisory council; and (3) alters reporting requirements for MDH 
related to delays or lack of implementation of certain tests. The bill takes effect  
June 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can implement the bill’s changes using existing budgeted resources. 
To the extent that MDH opts to raise fees for newborn screening, MDH special fund 
revenues increase, and Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) 
increase beginning as early as FY 2027, to pay its share of fees. Federal fund revenues 
increase accordingly.  
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  MDH’s Newborn Screening Program is a statewide system 
for screening all newborn infants in Maryland for certain hereditary and congenital 
disorders associated with severe problems of health or development (except when the 
parent or guardian of the newborn objects).  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1625/ Page 2 
The program was codified and centralized by Chapter 256 of 2008, which established the 
MDH public health laboratory as the sole laboratory in Maryland allowed to perform the 
screening tests. The system for newborn screening includes laboratory testing, reporting of 
test results, and follow-up activities to facilitate the rapid identification and treatment of an 
affected child. The laboratory is required to screen for 61 first-tier metabolic hereditary 
disorders on all screening specimens collected. These conditions are listed in Maryland 
regulations (COMAR 10.10.13.12). Second-tier tests can only be performed when 
requested by an individual authorized to request a medical laboratory test.  
 
Fees 
 
Under current law, MDH is required, in consultation with the State Advisory Council on 
Hereditary and Congenital Disorders, to establish fees for newborn screening that do not 
exceed an amount sufficient to cover the administrative, laboratory, and follow-up costs 
associated with the performance of screening tests. Fees are deposited into the Newborn 
Screening Program Fund, a special fund that is administered by the Secretary of Health to 
cover costs associated with performing newborn screening tests.  
 
The bill alters that provision, instead requiring MDH to establish fees that are no less than 
the amount that is sufficient to cover the administrative, laboratory, and follow-up costs 
associated with the performance of screening tests. 
 
Testing and Reporting 
 
Under current law, MDH must implement testing for a core condition listed in the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Recommended Uniform Screening Panel 
(RUSP) within 18 months of its addition to RUSP.  
 
The bill requires MDH to screen for each core condition listed in RUSP as of May 31, 2026.  
The bill also repeals the requirement to implement testing within 18 months of a core 
condition being added to RUSP. Instead, if a core condition is added to RUSP, the State 
Advisory Council on Hereditary and Congenital Disorders must (1) advise MDH on the 
risks, harms, accessibility, and costs of implementing testing for the condition and 
(2) provide recommendations on whether MDH should implement testing for the 
condition. After considering the advice and recommendations of the advisory council, 
MDH may either (1) implement testing; (2) delay the implementation of testing; or 
(3) decide not to implement testing for the core condition.  
 
Under current law, if MDH is unable to implement testing within the 18-month timeframe 
due to a delay in the procurement of necessary equipment or supplies, MDH must report 
to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee (now the House Health Committee) on the delay. Specifically, MDH must 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1625/ Page 3 
report on the reason for the delay and the anticipated timeline for implementation within 
15 months of the core condition being added to RUSP and every 3 months thereafter until 
testing is implemented.  
 
The bill alters this provision such that if MDH decides to implement testing for a core 
condition but cannot do so within two years of the condition being added to RUSP due to 
a delay in the procurement of necessary equipment or supplies, MDH must report to the 
Senate Finance Committee and the House Health Committee within 15 months of the 
condition being added to RUSP and every 3 months thereafter until testing is implemented. 
Additionally, if MDH decides not to implement testing or decides to delay implementation 
for a period of more than two years, MDH must report to the Senate Finance Committee 
and the House Health Committee within 15 months after the addition of the condition to 
RUSP.  
 
The bill also repeals the requirement that these reports include the reason for the delay. 
Instead, the reports must include justification for the decision not to implement testing or 
for delaying implementation of testing (in addition to the anticipated timeline for 
implementation as required under current law). 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH is currently required to establish fees that do not exceed an 
amount sufficient to cover the administrative, laboratory, and follow-up costs associated 
with newborn screening in the State. The bill authorizes MDH to set fees in an amount that 
is not less than an amount sufficient to cover these costs. Thus, to the extent that MDH 
increases fees for newborn screening, special fund revenues increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2027. The timing and magnitude of any such potential fee increase cannot be reliably 
estimated.  
 
Medicaid covers approximately half of all births in Maryland. Thus, with the 
implementation of any increase in the newborn screening fee, Medicaid expenditures (50% 
general funds, 50% federal funds) increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1625/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4