START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1616 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Bill 1616 
(Delegate Rogers) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Mutual Insurance Holding Companies - Conversion to Mutual Insurers 
 
 
This bill authorizes a “mutual insurance holding company” that, directly or indirectly, owns 
100% of the capital stock of a reorganized stock insurer to convert its mutual insurance 
holding company system into a mutual insurer in accordance with a plan of conversion 
adopted and approved under the provisions set forth in the bill. The Insurance 
Commissioner may adopt regulations to implement the bill.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures and revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) increase correspondingly, resulting in no net impact to MIA 
finances, to the extent that MIA retains an expert to assist in reviewing any plan of 
conversion under the bill and is subsequently reimbursed, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
A “mutual insurance holding company” means a nonstock corporation that is incorporated 
in the State in accordance with a plan of reorganization, as specified, and is the parent of a 
reorganized stock insurer. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1616/ Page 2 
A “reorganized stock insurer” means the stock corporation into which a mutual insurer is 
reorganized in accordance with a plan of reorganization, as specified in current law. 
 
Plan of Conversion 
 
A plan of conversion must be submitted to the Commissioner for approval at least 60 days 
prior to the effective date of the conversion. A plan of conversion must provide that: 
 
 
on the effective date of the conversion, the membership interests in the mutual 
insurance holding company must become nontransferable membership interests in 
the converted mutual insurer; 
 
future policy holders of the converted mutual insurer will become members of the 
converted mutual insurer;  
 
on the effective date of the conversion, each policy of the reorganized stock insurer 
must remain in effect and may be endorsed; 
 
the shares of the reorganized stock insurer and any intermediate stock holding 
company must be retired; 
 
the mutual insurance holding company and any intermediate stock holding company 
will be dissolved by filing article of dissolution with the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; and 
 
the converted mutual insurer must have surplus funds that are reasonably adequate 
for the security of its policyholders. 
 
The plan of conversion must be submitted to a meeting of members of the mutual insurance 
holding company and subject to review and approval by:  (1) a majority of the board of 
directors and any intermediate stock holding company; (2) three-fourths of the members of 
the mutual insurer voting on the reorganization; and (3) the Commissioner. Notice of the 
time, place and purpose of the meeting of members required to approve a plan of 
conversion must be provided in the manner approved by the Commissioner. 
 
In addition to a plan of conversion, a mutual insurance holding company must submit the 
following to MIA: 
 
 
amendments to the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the reorganized stock 
insurer necessary to convert the mutual insurer; 
 
a five year plan of operation for the converted mutual insurer, as specified; 
 
a list of the officers and directors of the converted mutual insurer; 
 
a biographical affidavit of each officer and director of the converted mutual insurer; 
and  
 
any other documents or information requested by MIA. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1616/ Page 3 
The Commissioner may retain, at the expense of the company, an expert to review the 
reorganization plan. The Commissioner may also hold a hearing on whether the plan 
complies with the provisions of the bill and is equitable to the mutual insurer’s members. 
 
Approval of a Plan of Conversion  
 
Unless disapproved by the Commissioner, a plan of conversion is approved upon written 
notice from the Commissioner or 60 days after the date that the plan and all information 
required by the bill, or additional regulations, has been submitted. The Commissioner must 
approve the plan of conversion if it complies with the provisions of the bill and is equitable 
to the mutual insurer’s members. In approving a reorganization plan, the Commissioner 
may impose additional requirements and conditions.  
 
Current Law:  A mutual insurer in the State is authorized to reorganize as a stock insurer 
and establish a mutual insurance holding company to hold the capital stock of the 
reorganized stock insurer. Any such reorganization must be completed in accordance with 
a plan of reorganization approved by the Commissioner.  
 
More specifically, the reorganization is subject to review and approval by a majority of the 
board of directors, three-fourths of the members of the mutual insurer voting on the 
reorganization, and the Commissioner. The Commissioner may retain, at the expense of 
the insurer, an expert to review the reorganization plan. The Commissioner may also hold 
a hearing on whether the plan complies with the provisions of the bill and is equitable to 
the mutual insurer’s members. 
 
The Commissioner must approve the reorganization plan if it complies with the provisions 
of the bill and is equitable to the mutual insurer’s members. In approving a reorganization 
plan, the Commissioner may impose additional requirements and conditions. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes MIA to retain, at the expense of the mutual 
insurance holding company, a qualified expert to assist in reviewing the company’s plan 
of conversion. This analysis assumes that any such expert contracts with MIA and that 
MIA is reimbursed for its expenses by the company. Accordingly, special fund 
expenditures and revenues may increase correspondingly in any fiscal year in which MIA 
chooses to retain such an expert; however, any such impact cannot be reliably estimated at 
this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1616/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 982 (Senator McCray) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 17, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4