START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1612 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1612 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Gaming - Campaign Financing Contributions and Study on Independent 
Evaluation of Sports Wagering 
 
 
This bill repeals, beginning January 1, 2027, the prohibition against an applicant for, or a 
holder of, a video lottery operation license, or a person who owns an interest in the 
operation of a video lottery facility in the State, making a contribution, directly or 
indirectly, to (1) the campaign finance entity of a candidate for any nonfederal public office 
in the State or (2) any other campaign finance entity organized in support of a candidate 
for any nonfederal public office in the State. In addition, by January 1, 2027, the  
State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency (SLGCA) must study and report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly on independent evaluators that evaluate sports wagering content 
as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, though a provision of the bill takes effect 
January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. SLGCA can study and 
report on independent evaluators of sports wagering content with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1612/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Campaign Finance Entities and Contributions 
 
Unless otherwise expressly authorized by law, all campaign finance activity for an election 
under the Election Law Article must be conducted through a campaign finance entity 
(defined as a political committee established under Title 13 of the Election Law Article). 
An individual may not file a certificate of candidacy or a declaration of intent until the 
individual establishes, or causes to be established, an authorized candidate campaign 
committee (a campaign finance entity authorized by the candidate to promote the 
candidate’s candidacy). 
 
Generally, a person may not make, either directly or indirectly, aggregate contributions of 
more than $6,000 to any one campaign finance entity in a four-year election cycle. 
Contributions by two or more business entities are considered as being made by 
one contributor if (1) one business entity is a wholly owned subsidiary of another or (2) the 
business entities are owned or controlled by at least 80% of the same individuals or 
business entities. “Business entity” includes a corporation, a sole proprietorship, a general 
partnership, a limited partnership, a limited liability company, a real estate investment trust, 
or other entity. 
 
The contribution limit does not apply to contributions to ballot issue committees (campaign 
finance entities formed to promote the success or defeat of a ballot question or prospective 
ballot question). 
 
Video Lottery Contribution Prohibition 
 
Under State campaign finance law, an applicant for, or holder of, a video lottery operation 
license under Title 9, Subtitle 1A (“Video Lottery Terminals”) of the State Government 
Article, or a person who owns an interest in the operation of a video lottery facility (under 
Subtitle 1A) in this State, may not, directly or indirectly, make a contribution to (1) the 
campaign finance entity of a candidate for any nonfederal public office in the State or 
(2) any other campaign finance entity organized in support of a candidate for any 
nonfederal public office in the State. “Own” means having a beneficial or proprietary 
interest of at least 5% in the property or business of an applicant or licensee. This 
prohibition was enacted under Chapter 1 of the second special session of 2012, which 
expanded commercial gaming in the State. 
 
State Board of Elections regulations establish that a person may not make any contributions 
to a political committee organized in support of a nonfederal candidate for the rest of the 
election cycle once that person holds or controls at least a 5% interest in a property or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1612/ Page 3 
business that is an applicant for, or holder of, a video lottery operation license. If the person 
is a corporation, any wholly owned direct or indirect subsidiary or any other entity owned 
or controlled by persons owning at least 80% of the ownership interests in the corporation, 
at any time during the election cycle, may not make any contributions to a political 
committee organized in support of a nonfederal candidate for the rest of the election cycle. 
If the person is an individual, the prohibition does not apply to any legal entity owned or 
controlled by that individual if the legal entity (1) is organized for legitimate business 
purposes unrelated to gaming and (2) does not have a direct interest or ownership in the 
property or business of an applicant or holder of a video lottery operation license. 
 
Independent Evaluators 
 
Chapter 638 of 2023 requires the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission to license 
independent evaluators to evaluate and rate sports wagering content provided by sports 
wagering experts, sports wagering influencers, and content partners. In order to be licensed, 
an independent evaluator must meet specified criteria. A sports wagering licensee or sports 
wagering operator that advertises in the State may contract with a licensed independent 
evaluator. An independent evaluator and its principals and employees may not wager on a 
sporting event. An independent evaluator may not be compensated by a sports wagering 
licensee or sports wagering operator that uses the evaluator’s evaluation services solely for 
marketing materials but may be compensated for its evaluation and rating of sports 
wagering content. 
 
Under COMAR 36.10.06.04, SLGCA may issue a license for a Tier 1 contractor that is an 
independent evaluator. For a Tier 1 sports wagering contractor, the application fee is 
$1,500, the license fee is $2,500, and the background investigation deposit is $2,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 160 of 2025; HB 132 of 2024; and HB 54 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 970 (Senators Zucker and Ferguson) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1612/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
jg/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4