START OF PAGE 1
 
  HJ 8 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Joint Resolution 8 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
 
 
Apology and Acknowledgement of the State's Responsibility in Racial Terror 
Lynchings 
 
   
This joint resolution issues an apology for and acknowledgement of the State's complicity 
and negligence in allowing the perpetration of acts of racial terror lynchings and related 
acts. The resolution further commits the State to taking reparative actions as recommended 
by the Maryland Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission, including the prevention 
of the recurrence of racially motivated harms.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The joint resolution does not directly affect State finances.   
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Lynching Truth and Reconciliation Commission was 
originally established by Chapter 41 of 2019 to: 
 
 
hold public regional hearings in areas where a lynching of an African American by 
a White mob has been documented; 
 
receive recommendations from the public, including from families and communities 
affected by racially motivated lynchings, for addressing, engaging, and reconciling 
affected communities, including the erection of memorial plaques or signage at or 
near sites of racially motivated lynchings; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HJ 8/ Page 2 
 
make recommendations for addressing the legacy of lynching that are rooted in the 
spirit of restorative justice. 
 
The commission was also authorized to research (1) cases of racially motivated lynchings 
that are not documented but which are brought to the commission’s attention and (2) the 
involvement of government entities and news media in cases of racially motivated 
lynching. 
 
The commission’s mandate was later extended by Chapter 92 in 2021, and Chapters 11 and 
12 of 2023. The termination date of the commission is June 30, 2026.   
 
Additional Comments:  A required final report of the commission’s findings and 
recommendations was submitted to the Governor and the General Assembly in 
December 2025. In the report, the commission makes extensive recommendations for 
supportive remedies in numerous categories. Although the resolution does not directly 
affect State (or local) finances or operations, the implementation of the commission’s 
recommendations would likely have a significant impact. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SJ 3 (Senators Sydnor and Augustine) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2