START OF PAGE 1
 
  HJ 7 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
House Joint Resolution 7 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
 
 
Anti-Nuclear Proliferation Resolution (Back From the Brink Act) 
 
 
This joint resolution states that the General Assembly joins the seven state  
legislative bodies and over 75 municipalities and counties, including Baltimore,  
Frederick, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties, and Washington, DC, in  
passing a Back from the Brink resolution. The joint resolution urges members of the 
Maryland Congressional Delegation to cosponsor a new resolution that embraces the goals 
and provisions of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons and the Back from the 
Brink resolution. The joint resolution further urges the U.S. President and the U.S. Senate 
to endorse the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The joint resolution does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The United States Constitution divides war powers between the 
U.S. Congress and the U.S. President. Pursuant to Article I, Section 8 of the 
U.S. Constitution, Congress has power to declare war. In turn, Article II, Section 2 
establishes the President as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HJ 7/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SJ 4 and HJ 6 of 2025 and SJ 2 and HJ 3 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SJ 4 (Senator A. Washington, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2