START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 57 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 57 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Primary and Secondary Educators - Licenses and Public Profiles - Notation of 
Veteran Status 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to establish a 
process to include a notation of veteran status on the licenses and public profiles of primary 
and secondary educators. If MSDE establishes the process, applicants may submit 
documentation of veteran status and consent to the notation and to contact from appropriate 
Executive Branch agencies regarding eligibility for State or federal veterans benefits. If an 
applicant submits the required documentation and provides the necessary consent, MSDE 
must include a notation of veteran status on the applicant’s license or public profile and, 
upon request and in accordance with applicable law, electronically transmit appropriate 
information to an Executive Branch agency. MSDE may adopt regulations to implement 
the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is anticipated that MSDE can implement the process authorized by the bill 
without incurring additional costs, as discussed below. The bill is not anticipated to 
otherwise materially impact State operations or finances, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government operations 
or finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 57/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Notation of Veteran Status 
 
Generally, the Maryland Department of the Environment, the Department of General 
Services, each unit in the Maryland Department of Labor, and each health occupations 
board are authorized to establish a process to include a notation indicating veteran status 
on a license, certificate, or registration under the entity’s purview. Health occupations 
boards are also authorized to include veteran status on public profiles. 
 
Department of Veterans and Military Families 
 
The Department of Veterans and Military Families exists as a principal department of 
State government and is responsible for, among other duties, delivering services and 
programs to assist the State’s veterans, their families, and survivors in obtaining State, 
federal, and local benefits provided by law in recognition for their service. 
 
Certification/ Licensure 
 
An individual generally may not be employed as a teacher, principal, supervisor, assistant 
superintendent, or county superintendent unless they are eligible to be issued a certificate 
(licensure) by the State Superintendent. 
 
According to regulations, an applicant (or a local school system on the applicant’s behalf) 
must submit an application, required documentation, and applicable fees to MSDE. Official 
transcripts and required test scores must be verified directly by the issuing institution or 
testing entity to MSDE’s satisfaction. MSDE reviews submitted materials to determine 
eligibility for licensure, and license holders are responsible for maintaining current contact 
information and renewing the license as required. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes, rather than requires, MSDE to 
establish a specified process related to veteran status. MSDE advises that, if it elects to 
implement the process, it would incorporate the changes during a scheduled licensure 
system upgrade to avoid additional costs, as implementing the changes outside of a planned 
upgrade could result in a fiscal impact. 
 
Based on MSDE data, there are approximately 63,700 teachers in Maryland. According to 
the U.S. Department of Education, 1.2% of teachers in the Northeast region are veterans, 
suggesting that approximately 764 Maryland teachers may be veterans. Although the bill 
may facilitate additional veterans applying for and being deemed eligible for certain 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 57/ Page 3 
benefits, any associated impact is not anticipated to materially affect State or local finances 
or operations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Veterans and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3