START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 73 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 73 
(Senator Ellis) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Election Law - Polling Place Procedures - Voting by Elderly Voters and Voters 
With Disabilities (Accessible and Expedited Voting Act of Maryland) 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE) to establish guidelines for, 
and the local boards of elections to implement, a process to accommodate and expedite 
voting for elderly voters and voters with disabilities at early voting centers and polling 
places. The existing election judge training program also must include instruction on best 
practices for assisting elderly voters and voters with disabilities. SBE must monitor the 
implementation of the guidelines and submit an annual report to the General Assembly by 
January 15 of each year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase in FY 2026 by $40,000 for contractual 
services, plus an additional, indeterminate amount ($66,000, under one illustrative 
scenario) for election judge compensation. Ongoing election judge compensation costs are 
incurred in future years. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount for 
election judge compensation ($819,000, under one illustrative scenario) and signs. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 73/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Accommodation and Expedited Voting for Elderly Voters and Voters with Disabilities 
 
The bill requires SBE to establish guidelines for the local boards of elections to implement 
a process to accommodate and expedite voting for elderly (age 65 or older) voters and 
voters with disabilities, as defined in the federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 
at each early voting center and polling place in the State. 
 
The guidelines established by SBE must include (1) dedicated expedited lines for elderly 
voters and voters with disabilities; (2) clearly marked signage indicating the availability of 
expedited services; (3) priority seating in waiting areas for elderly voters and voters with 
disabilities; and (4) specific provisions for high-traffic early voting centers and polling 
places. 
 
The local boards must implement the guidelines established by SBE and collect feedback 
from elderly voters and voters with disabilities on the accommodations and expedited 
voting process while voting at early voting centers and polling places is in progress and 
make immediate adjustments to the process as necessary. 
 
Election Judge Training Program 
 
The bill requires that the existing election judge training program developed by SBE, in 
consultation with the local boards, include instruction on best practices for assisting elderly 
voters and voters with disabilities, as defined in ADA. 
 
Monitoring and Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill requires SBE to monitor the implementation of the guidelines by the local boards 
and submit a report to the General Assembly by January 15 of each year. The report must 
include (1) any challenges to implementing the guidelines; (2) an analysis of the 
effectiveness of the accommodations and expedited voting process; (3) a summary of 
feedback on the accommodations and expedited voting process from elderly voters and 
voters with disabilities; and (4) any recommendations to improve the guidelines. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 73/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Assistance and Access for Elderly Voters and Voters with Disabilities 
 
SBE, in consultation with the election directors of the local boards of elections, must 
specify and produce certain informational materials to be posted in each early voting center 
and polling place, including instructions relating to the availability of assistance to elderly 
and disabled voters. 
 
Each early voting center and polling place must, whenever practicable, be selected and 
arranged to avoid architectural and other barriers that impede access or voting by elderly 
and physically disabled voters. If the polling place assigned to an elderly or disabled voter 
is not structurally barrier free, the voter may request a reassignment by the local board. 
 
A voting system selected, certified, and implemented by SBE, in consultation with the local 
boards, must (1) provide access to voters with disabilities that is equivalent to access 
afforded voters without disabilities without creating a segregated ballot for voters with 
disabilities; (2) ensure the independent, private casting, inspection, verification, and 
correction of secret ballots by voters with disabilities in an accessible media by both visual 
and nonvisual means, including synchronized audio output and enhanced visual display; 
and (3) comply with both ADA and the federal Help America Vote Act (HAVA), including 
accessibility standards adopted as part of the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines pursuant 
to HAVA. 
 
Election Judge Training Program 
 
SBE is required to develop (and oversee the implementation of), in consultation with the 
local boards of elections, a program of instruction of election judges. The training materials 
used by the program may include (1) an instruction manual and other written directives; 
(2) curriculum for training sessions; and (3) audiovisuals. SBE must provide election 
judges with uniform statewide training on the voting system, including (1) all features of 
the voting system that provide access to voters with disabilities and (2) the rights of voters 
with disabilities, including those rights guaranteed by State and federal law. Each local 
board must conduct election judge training based on the program developed by SBE, and 
each election judge, unless appointed under emergency circumstances, must participate in 
the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase in fiscal 2026 (due to the bill’s 
emergency status) by $40,000 for contractual services, plus an additional, indeterminate 
amount ($66,000, under one illustrative scenario) for election judge compensation (in 
fiscal 2026 and future years): 
 
 
Contractual services are needed in fiscal 2026 only – due to the limited timeframe 
in which the bill needs to be implemented for the 2026 primary election – for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 73/ Page 4 
temporary trainers to (1) educate local election directors on the guidelines 
established by SBE under the bill; (2) support revision of election judge training; 
and (3) carry out a compressed schedule of trainings (or retrainings if election judge 
training has already occurred in a given jurisdiction) ($40,000). 
 
As discussed below (under Local Fiscal Effect), additional election judges are 
expected to be needed to implement the bill, in fiscal 2026 and future years. SBE is 
required (pursuant to § 10-205 of the Election Law Article) to reimburse each local 
board for $50 of the minimum $100 extra compensation paid to each returning 
election judge that is hired to implement the bill. The extent of any increase cannot 
be reliably estimated; however, for illustrative purposes, if two additional election 
judges are needed at 25% of the Election Day polling places and at each early voting 
center, and one additional election judge is needed at an additional 25% of 
Election Day polling places, SBE costs increase by approximately $66,000. This 
estimate assumes that, on average, half of the election judges who provide 
accommodation and expedited voting for elderly voters and voters with disabilities 
are returning election judges. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures are expected to increase for election 
judge compensation (in fiscal 2026 and future years) and signs (in fiscal 2026 only) needed 
to implement the bill. For illustrative purposes, regarding the more significant cost of 
additional election judges, if two additional election judges are needed at 25% of the 
Election Day polling places and at each early voting center, and one additional election 
judge is needed at an additional 25% of Election Day polling places, local government 
expenditures collectively increase by $819,000 for regular election judge compensation 
($753,000) and the local boards’ $50 share of the minimum $100 extra compensation 
provided to returning election judges ($66,000). This illustrative estimate assumes that: 
 
 
on average, half of the election judges who provide accommodation and expedited 
voting for elderly voters and voters with disabilities are returning election judges; 
and 
 
the election judges are paid the base regular compensation rate of $250 per day and 
$50 for training. 
 
Montgomery County estimates its costs for signs to be $2,500 in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 73/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 66 and HB 781 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery and Worcester counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5