START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 13 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 13 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Finance 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - License Fee Refund Requirements - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires that a refund for the unearned portion of a State or locally issued alcoholic 
beverages license fee be issued to a license holder upon surrender of the license if the 
license holder volunteers for or has been called into the uniformed services, rather than the 
armed forces of the United States. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an alcoholic beverages license holder is not entitled to a refund 
of the unearned portion of a State or locally issued license fee. However, a refund must be 
issued to a license holder on surrender of the license under specified circumstances, 
including bankruptcy, death, or the license holder volunteering for or being called into the 
armed forces of the United States or the organized State militia. 
 
Under the General Provisions Article, “uniformed services” (by applicable definitions in 
the State Government Article and federal code) includes the armed forces (Army, Navy, 
Air Force, Marine Corps, Space Force, and Coast Guard), as well as the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration and the Public Health Service.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 13/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of 
Veterans and Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
Third Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2