START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 144 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 144 
(Senator Folden) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Public Information Act - Personnel Records of Elected Officials and Joint Ethics 
Committee Records 
 
 
This bill establishes that a record relating to specified investigations of misconduct by an 
elected official, or a person appointed to fill an elected office, is not a personnel record for 
the purposes of the Maryland Public Information Act (PIA), potentially making such 
records available for public inspection. The bill establishes that specified records of the 
State Ethics Commission (SEC) and the Joint Committee on Legislative Ethics (JCLE) are 
available for public inspection under the Public Ethics Law.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $50,000 in FY 2027 for one-time 
programming costs. The bill otherwise has no effect on State government finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Any impact on PIA-related activities is not expected to materially affect 
local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Personnel Records 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, a custodian must deny inspection 
of personnel records of an individual, including an application, a performance rating, or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 144/ Page 2 
scholastic achievement information. However, a record relating to an administrative or 
criminal investigation of misconduct by a police officer, including an internal affairs 
investigatory record, a hearing record, and records relating to a disciplinary decision, is not 
a personnel record. 
 
Under the bill, a record relating to an administrative or criminal investigation of 
misconduct by an elected official, or a person appointed to fill an elected office is not a 
personnel record and, therefore, is subject to inspection. 
 
Confidentiality of State Ethics Committee Activities 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, after SEC receives a complaint filed 
against a public official (1) the proceedings, meetings, and activities of SEC and its 
employees relating to the complaint are confidential and (2) information relating to the 
complaint, including the identity of the complainant and respondent, may not be disclosed 
by specified entities. The specified restrictions apply unless the matter is referred for 
prosecution or SEC finds a violation of the Public Ethics Law. 
 
Under the bill, the specified restrictions do not apply when SEC has closed the complaint 
or investigation. 
 
Confidentiality of Joint Ethics Committee Records 
 
Under current law and subject to specified exceptions, any matter before JCLE, including 
information relating to any complaint proceeding, or record of JCLE, must remain 
confidential. Public access and inspection of an activity or a record of JCLE must be 
available for, among other disclosures, information relating to a complaint, proceeding, or 
record of JCLE involving a member of the General Assembly if consent to public access 
and inspection is granted by (1) the member involved in the matter or (2) a  
three-fourths vote of the full membership of JCLE, based on criteria established by rule. 
 
Under the bill, public access and inspection of an activity or record of JCLE must be 
available for, among other things, the information relating to a complaint, proceeding, or 
record of JCLE involving a member of the General Assembly if JCLE has closed the 
complaint or investigation that is the subject of record. 
 
Maryland Public Ethics Law, Generally 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law sets out requirements, prohibitions, and procedures that 
affect officials in the Legislative, Executive, and Judicial branches of government for the 
purpose of maintaining people’s trust in government and protecting against the improper 
influence and the appearance of improper influence of government. The Ethics Law is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 144/ Page 3 
generally administered by SEC; JCLE and the Commission on Judicial Disabilities 
administer specified provisions of the Ethics Law as they apply to members of the 
General Assembly and State officials of the Judicial Branch, respectively. 
 
Maryland Public Information Act  
 
Maryland’s PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about 
the affairs of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each 
governmental unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a 
member of the public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney 
General (OAG) must post all such contact information on its website and in any  
Public Information Act Manual published by OAG. 
 
Duties of Custodians  
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
Denials  
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the 
Maryland Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for 
specified personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, 
personnel and student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial 
information, and shielded criminal and police records. Chapter 62 of 2021 specifies that a 
record relating to an administrative or criminal investigation of misconduct by a police 
officer is not a protected personnel record under PIA and requires a custodian to allow 
access to such records by federal and State prosecutors. Chapters 548 and 549 of 2024 
further specify that a record of positive community feedback that was not solicited by the 
police officer who is the subject of the feedback is not a protected personnel record under 
PIA. 
 
Discretionary Denials:  Unless otherwise specified, if a custodian believes that inspection 
of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to the public interest, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 144/ Page 4 
custodian may deny inspection to the applicant of that part of the record. PIA specifies the 
types of records and information that are eligible for discretionary denials, including 
documents that would not be available through discovery in a lawsuit. 
 
Procedure for Denial:  A custodian who denies inspection of a public record must, within 
10 working days, provide a written statement to the applicant that gives (1) the reason for 
denial; (2) if denying a part of a record on a discretionary basis, a brief explanation of why 
the denial is necessary and why redacting information would not address the reasons for 
the denial; (3) the legal authority for the denial; (4) a brief description of the undisclosed 
record (without disclosing the protected information); and (5) notice of the available 
statutory remedies. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for SEC increase by $50,000 only in 
fiscal 2027 for SEC to update its electronic training programs for State employees, 
officials, and lobbyists. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 145 of 2025; SB 312 of 2024; and SB 753 and HB 1010 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Ethics Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4