START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 154 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 154 
(Senator Watson) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Commercial Law - Uniform Commercial Code - Controllable Electronic Records 
 
 
This bill establishes a new Title within the Maryland Uniform Commercial Code 
(“Maryland Uniform Commercial Code – Controllable Electronic Records”) to broadly 
establish provisions governing private commercial transactions related to controllable 
electronic records (CER), controllable accounts, and controllable payment intangibles 
(CPI). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If there is a conflict between the bill’s provisions and Title 9 of the 
Commercial Law Article, Title 9 of the Commercial Law Article governs. A transaction 
subject to the bill’s provisions is also subject to any other applicable State law. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Account debtor” means a person obligated on an account, a chattel paper, or a general 
intangible, and does not include a person obligated to pay a negotiable instrument, even if 
the negotiable instrument evidences chattel paper. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 154/ Page 2 
“Controllable electronic record” means a record stored in an electronic medium that can be 
subjected to control as specified under the bill; it does not include a controllable account, 
a CPI, a deposit account, an electronic copy of a record evidencing chattel paper, an 
electronic document of title, electronic money, investment property, or a transferable 
record. 
 
“Controllable account” means an account evidenced by a CER that provides that the 
account debtor undertakes to pay the person that has control of the CER as specified under 
the bill. 
 
“Controllable payment intangible” means a payment intangible evidenced by a CER that 
provides that the account debtor undertakes to pay the person that has control of the CER 
as specified under the bill. 
 
“Qualifying Purchaser” means a purchaser of a CER or an interest in a CER that obtains 
control of the CER for value, in good faith, and without notice of a claim of property right 
in the CER. 
 
Control of a Controllable Electronic Record 
 
The bill sets forth how a person obtains control of a CER (e.g., bitcoin, non‐fungible tokens, 
etc.). 
 
Generally, a person has control of a CER if the CER, a record attached to or logically 
associated with the CER, or a system in which the CER is recorded, meets the following 
requirements: 
 
 
Substantially All the Benefit – The CER gives the person the authority to make use 
of substantially all the benefit from the CER; 
 
Exclusive Power – Subject to certain exceptions, the CER gives the person exclusive 
power (1) to prevent others from making use of substantially all of the benefit from 
the CER and (2) to transfer control of the CER to another person or cause another 
person to obtain control of another CER as a result of the transfer (these powers are 
presumptively exclusive under the bill); and 
 
Identification of the Person – The CER enables the person readily to identify the 
person in any way, including by name, identifying number, cryptographic key, 
office, or account number as having the powers specified immediately above. 
 
The bill specifies circumstances under which power remains exclusive, including if the 
power is shared with another person; the bill also specifies circumstances under which 
power is not considered to be shared or exclusive. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 154/ Page 3 
 
Control May be Exercised by Another 
 
A person has control of a CER if another person (other than a transferor, as specified) has 
or obtains control of the CER on behalf of the person. Other provisions specify 
requirements related to acknowledgment by the person who has, or will obtain, control on 
behalf of another person. 
 
Rights of a Qualifying Purchaser 
 
The bill sets forth various guidelines regarding the acquisition of rights. For instance, the 
determination of whether a purchaser of a controllable account or CPI is a qualifying 
purchaser is based on if the purchaser obtains control of the CER that evidences the account 
or CPI. Except as otherwise provided, a determination about whether a person acquires a 
right in a CER and the type of right the person acquires can be made using applicable State 
or federal law. 
 
A qualifying purchaser acquires rights in the CER free of a claim of a property right in the 
CER. Except as otherwise provided with respect to a controllable account and a CPI, a 
qualifying purchaser takes a right to payment, right to performance, or other interest in 
property demonstrated by the CER subject to a claim of a property right in the right to 
payment, performance, or other interest. 
 
Filing of a financing statement under Title 9 of the Commercial Law Article is not notice 
of a claim of a property right in a CER. 
 
Discharge of Account Debtor 
 
The following provisions (as well as others included within the applicable section) are 
subject to any other law that establishes a different rule for an account debtor who is an 
individual and who incurred the obligation primarily for personal, family, or household 
purposes. 
 
An account debtor on a controllable account or CPI may discharge the account debtor’s 
obligation by paying the person having control of the CER associated with the controllable 
account or CPI. The obligation may also be discharged by paying a person that formerly 
had control of the CER; however, an account debtor may not discharge its obligation in 
this way if the account debtor receives a notification that: 
 
 
is signed by a person that formerly had control or the person to whom control was 
transferred; 
 
reasonably identifies the controllable account or CPI; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 154/ Page 4 
 
notifies the account debtor that control of the CER that evidences the controllable 
account or CPI was transferred; 
 
identifies the transferee in any reasonable way, as specified; and 
 
provides a commercially reasonable method for the account debtor to pay the 
transferee. 
 
After receipt of a notification, as specified above, the account debtor (1) may discharge the 
account debtor’s obligation by paying according to instructions in the notification and 
(2) may not discharge the obligation by paying a person that formerly had control. 
 
However, the bill also specifies conditions that render the notification ineffective. 
 
The bill also sets forth requirements regarding the provision of reasonable proof that 
control of the CER has been transferred, as well as a prohibition on the waiver of 
modification of an account debtor’s rights. 
 
Choice of Law 
 
Subject to limited exception, as specified, the local law of the CER’s jurisdiction governs 
a matter covered under the bill’s provisions; additional rules regarding CER jurisdiction 
are specified in the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Title 9 of the Commercial Law Article governs secured transactions, 
including those involving electronic chattel paper – chattel paper evidenced by a record or 
records consisting of information stored in an electronic medium. Section 9‐105 of the 
Commercial Law Article specifies that a secured party has control of electronic chattel 
paper if the record or records comprising the chattel paper are created, stored, and assigned 
in a specified manner. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small businesses that 
use CERs by providing legal certainty for commercial activity, and reducing the costs of 
credit and transactions. 
 
Additional Comments:  The drafters of Article 12 of the Uniform Commercial Code 
(UCC) establishing a CER, controllable account, and CPI generally applied the provisions 
of Article 9 of the UCC related to secured transactions of traditional personal property 
(goods, chattel paper). 
 
The bill is a modified version of portions of the Uniform Commercial Code Amendments 
(2022) drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws and 
the American Law Institute. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 154/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1353 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
sj/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5