START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 150 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 150 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Finance 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
Notation of Veteran Status - Public Profiles 
 
 
This bill generally expands existing authority related to the indication of veteran status on 
licenses, certificates, or registrations under the purview of the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE), the Department of General Services (DGS), and each unit in the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) by authorizing these entities to also include a 
notation indicating veteran status on a person’s public profile. The bill also makes a 
technical correction in statutory provisions that similarly authorize health occupations 
boards to include veteran status on a public profile. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented with existing budgeted resources. No impact 
on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material effect on local government 
operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, MDE, DGS, each unit in MD Labor, and each health 
occupations board are authorized to establish a process to include a notation indicating 
veteran status on a license, certificate, or registration under the entity’s purview. Health 
occupations boards are also authorized to include veteran status on public profiles. If such 
a process is established, an application for a license, certificate, or registration must allow 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 150/ Page 2 
an applicant to (1) request that a notation of the applicant’s veteran status be included on 
the applicant’s credential and (2) consent to being contacted by appropriate Executive 
Branch agencies about eligibility for State or federal veterans’ benefits. If an applicant 
submits the appropriate documentation, the State entity must include the notation on the 
applicant’s license, certificate, registration, or public profile (as applicable). Subject to 
specified provisions of the Maryland Public Information Act and on request by an 
Executive Branch agency, the State entity must transmit to the agency appropriate 
information about each applicant who has given consent for contact.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2