START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 116 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 116 
(Senator Hettleman) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Board of Public Works – Contract Review – Climate and Sustainability 
Information 
 
 
This bill requires agencies, when submitting specified contract award recommendations to 
the Board of Public Works (BPW) for approval, to provide climate and sustainability 
information for each applicable contract. The information provided must appear on BPW’s 
agenda when the contract is considered. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and special fund expenditures each increase by at least $94,700 
in FY 2027 for staffing. Out-year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. The bill 
likely has additional operational and fiscal effects that may delay procurement timelines 
and require additional staff; any such additional effects cannot be reliably estimated and 
therefore are not included in this analysis, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
94,700 
111,900 
117,100 
122,300 
127,700 
SF Expenditure 
94,700 
111,900 
117,100 
122,300 
127,700 
Net Effect 
($189,400) 
($223,800) 
($234,100) 
($244,700) 
($255,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 116/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s requirement applies to contracts submitted to BPW for:   
 
 
architectural and engineering services; 
 
construction; 
 
energy performance; general miscellaneous; 
 
landlord leases; 
 
and tenant leases. 
 
To the extent applicable, agencies must provide information on (1) whether a contract 
contributes to the State’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction or net-zero carbon 
goals and how those benefits are attained; (2) how the contract provides for resilience 
adaptation to projected climate change and extreme weather events over the term of the 
contract or the useful life of the supplies or services; (3) how the contract advances the 
State’s goals and leadership on climate mitigation, adaptation, resiliency, or innovation for 
sustainably sourced supplies or services; (4) how the contract includes supplies or services 
that are environmentally preferable; (5) how the contract incorporates aspects of design or 
construction that are consistent with the standards adopted by the Maryland Green Building 
Council; and (6) how the contract incorporates aspects of design or construction that are 
consistent with the intent of the high performance building requirements.  
 
The liaisons to BPW from the offices of the Governor, Comptroller, and State Treasurer 
are responsible for ensuring compliance with the bill’s requirements.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
 
By June 30, 2023, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) was required to 
submit a proposed plan to the Governor and the General Assembly that reduces statewide 
GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031. By December 31, 2023, MDE was 
required to adopt a final plan to meet the 2031 goal and that set the State on a path toward 
achieving net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. By December 31, 2030, MDE must 
adopt a final plan that achieves net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045;  
by December 31, 2035, MDE must review and, as necessary, revise that plan. 
 
Environmentally Preferable Purchasing 
 
“Environmentally preferable product or service” means a product or service that 
throughout the full cycle of the product or service (1) is energy efficient, water efficient, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 116/ Page 3 
biobased, nonozone depleting, made with recycled content or nontoxic or (2) has other 
attributes recognized as environmentally preferable by the Maryland Green Purchasing 
Committee (MGPC). 
 
To encourage the maximum purchase of environmentally preferable products and services, 
MGPC must establish environmentally preferable specifications to be adopted by all State 
agencies.  
 
High Performance Buildings 
 
“High performance building” means a building that (1) meets or exceeds the current 
version of the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental 
Design Green Building Silver rating; (2) achieves at least a comparable numeric rating 
according to nationally recognized, accepted, and appropriate numeric sustainable 
development rating system, guideline, or standard approved by the Secretaries of Budget 
and Management and General Services; or (3) complies with a nationally recognized and 
accepted green building code, guideline, or standard reviewed and recommended by the 
Maryland Green Building Council and approved by the Secretaries of Budget and 
Management and General Services. 
 
In general, the construction or major renovation of State buildings, community college 
buildings, and public school buildings that are at least 7,500 square feet must meet the  
high performance building standards. 
 
Board of Public Works Contract Submissions 
 
Current State laws and regulations do not specify what information agencies must provide 
to BPW for its review and approval of procurement contracts. The Code of Maryland 
Regulations (COMAR) only requires departments to prepare a separate item for each 
procurement contract. Agencies must also submit as an appendix to the applicable agency’s 
action agenda, any expedited procurement or emergency procurement contract or 
emergency contract modification that, with prior modifications, aggregates to more than 
$50,000. Additionally, agencies must submit for the Board’s review and approval any 
award of a procurement contract containing a clause that allows the laws of a jurisdiction 
other than Maryland to prevail. 
 
BPW also publishes a policy advisory on its website that outlines information that agencies 
should submit to the Board to facilitate its review of contract award recommendations. The 
required information includes:   
 
 
an item identifier indicating what type of award it is; 
 
the procurement method used to make the award; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 116/ Page 4 
 
the bids or offers on a procurement, if applicable; 
 
the amount of the award; 
 
the term of the award, including start and end date; 
 
minority business enterprise and veteran small business enterprise participation, 
compliance, and waivers; 
 
whether the contract requires a performance bond (or other security); 
 
if a contract has been designated an eligible contract for hiring agreements; 
 
for capital construction projects to which it applies, whether a project conforms to 
Coast Smart Siting and Design Criteria established by the Maryland Coast Smart 
Council or has received a waiver; 
 
the source of funds for any expenditure; and 
 
any other remarks the agency wants to include.  
 
BPW notes that this list is not exhaustive, and agencies may need to provide additional 
information as appropriate. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill’s requirements for agencies to provide detailed and technical 
information relating to environmental and efficiency goals and standards increases the need 
for contract analysis by the agencies and likely requires specialized knowledge. Given the 
technical and broad nature of the required information, agencies may need additional 
resources and staff familiar with the State’s climate goals and sustainability initiatives. This 
increased workload will likely be most significant for the State’s control and primary 
procurement units – especially the Department of General Services (DGS) and the 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) – which work on procurements both for 
themselves and, in the case of DGS, the agencies they oversee. As a result, these agencies 
face workload demands under the bill that cannot be absorbed with existing staffing 
resources.  
 
Department of General Services  
 
DGS needs at least one full-time employee to assist with meeting the bill’s requirements. 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $94,709 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring a Climate Policy Analyst to report on and provide analysis for each DGS 
submission to BPW that must include the detailed environmental and sustainability 
information required under the bill. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 116/ Page 5 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$85,568 
Operating Expenses 
9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$94,709 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
Similar to DGS, MDOT cannot absorb the additional workload required to prepare 
contracts for BPW review and approval with existing resources. Therefore, special fund 
(Transportation Trust Fund) expenditures increase by $94,709 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring a BPW Climate Liaison to report on and provide analysis 
for each MDOT submission to BPW that must include the detailed environmental and 
sustainability information required under the bill. It includes a salary, fringe benefits,  
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$85,568 
Operating Expenses 
9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$94,709 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Other fiscal and operational impacts 
 
Even with additional staff capacity, the bill is expected to lengthen procurement timelines 
as agencies prepare the required responses for applicable contracts. This may include the 
need to gather additional information from bidders or offerors, allow time for review by a 
primary procurement unit for completeness and accuracy, and, if necessary, extend the time 
needed for BPW to evaluate and approve each contract. However, BPW is expected to be 
able to handle any increased workload with existing resources.  
 
To the extent that agencies process a high volume of procurements affected by the bill  
(e.g., the Department of Natural Resources and MDE), there may be a further need for 
those agencies to hire additional staff to prepare BPW submissions. However, an accurate 
estimate of the staffing needs for each agency is not feasible without experience under the 
bill. Regardless, agencies are likely to experience some operational impact in the form of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 116/ Page 6 
increased staff workload and delayed procurements. To the extent additional agencies 
require more staff once they become more aware of their workloads, they can request staff 
through the annual budget process.  
 
Additional Comments:  The inclusion of architecture and engineering services contracts 
in the bill may present a challenge to agencies. These contracts can involve indefinite 
quantities and evolving scopes that are not determined until after an award is made, and it 
may be difficult for agencies to adequately address the questions of climate and 
sustainability for these contracts. Furthermore, it is standard practice for architecture and 
engineering contractors to determine how a project will comply with existing law during 
the design process, which begins only after an award is made. Requiring information on 
how the contract will comply with current law before that design process has been 
completed may not be feasible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Department of 
Commerce; Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; University System 
of Maryland; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Board of Public Works; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Andrew Stover 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6