START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 159 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 159 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Emergency Medical Services - Vehicles and Ambulances - Required Supplies, 
Reviews, and Complaints 
 
 
This bill requires the Executive Director of the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services Systems (MIEMSS) to coordinate the minimum equipment, supplies, and 
medications (including those needed for neonatal care) to be available on emergency 
medical services (EMS) vehicles with the federal, State, and county governments. Each 
county and municipality that operates or contracts EMS must (1) conduct quarterly reviews 
of “ambulance” performance data; (2) certify completion of each review; and (3) submit a 
summary to MIEMSS. Each county must establish and maintain a formal complaint system 
to receive, investigate, and resolve complaints regarding ambulance quality, conduct, or 
compliance. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MIEMSS special fund expenditures increase by $105,100 in FY 2027 for 
staff, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
105,100 
124,900 
130,600 
136,500 
142,500 
Net Effect 
($105,100) 
($124,900) 
($130,600) 
($136,500) 
($142,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Potential significant increase in expenditures for local governments that 
operate or contract EMS, as discussed below. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit 
of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 159/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Ambulance” means any conveyance designed and constructed or 
modified and equipped to be used, maintained, or operated to transport sick, injured, 
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated individuals. “Ambulance” includes a conveyance 
designed and constructed or modified and equipped for aeromedical transport.  
 
An ambulance performance review must (1) assess response times, service quality, and 
compliance with MIEMSS standards; (2) identify trends and deficiencies in services; and 
(3) allow a county or municipality to adopt corrective measures and make operational 
adjustments.  
 
The formal complaint filing system must (1) be accessible online and in person; (2) include 
tracking, investigation, timelines, and notifications; and (3) report complaint data and 
resolutions quarterly to MIEMSS. 
 
Current Law:  MIEMSS is the administrative agency responsible for the coordination of 
all EMS in the State, which is overseen by the State Emergency Medical Services Board 
(EMS Board). The EMS Board must develop and adopt an Emergency Medical System 
plan to ensure effective coordination and evaluation of EMS delivered in the State. In 
accordance with the Emergency Medical System plan and other relevant policies adopted 
by the EMS Board, the Executive Director of MIEMSS must, among other things:   
 
 
coordinate a statewide system of EMS; 
 
coordinate the five emergency medical service regions in this State; 
 
coordinate the planning and operation of EMS with the federal, State, and county 
governments; 
 
coordinate the training of all personnel in the EMS System and develop the 
necessary standards for their certification or licensure; 
 
coordinate programs of research and education that relate to EMS; 
 
coordinate the development of centers for treating emergency injuries and illnesses; 
 
coordinate the development of specialty referral centers; 
 
administer State and federal funds for EMS in the State; 
 
assure continued improvement of transportation for emergency, critically ill, and 
injured patients; and 
 
implement all programmatic, operational, and administrative components of the 
MIEMSS.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 159/ Page 3 
Emergency Medical Services Operational Programs 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.01.01.02), an EMS operational program means 
(1) a jurisdictional EMS operational program (JEMSOP) or (2) an institution, agency, 
corporation, or other entity that is licensed by MIEMSS as a commercial service. 
 
Each EMS operational program must have a medical director responsible for providing 
medical oversight of patient care, including emergency medical dispatch. The medical 
director must, among other things:   
 
 
approve, participate in, and provide medical expertise for the program in:  (1) a 
comprehensive quality assurance plan; (2) standard operating procedures for the 
program; (3) appropriate EMS provider remedial and continuing education 
programs; (4) credentialing of EMS providers; (5) timely review and approval of 
medical equipment used by the program; and (6) all aspects of the EMS operational 
program that impact patient care, including planning, development, and operations; 
 
provide timely approval of new and renewal applications to MIEMSS for licensure 
and certification for all EMS providers affiliated with the program; 
 
review patient care disciplinary matters; and 
 
provide a liaison to the medical community as well as regional and State EMS 
medical directors.  
 
Each EMS operational program must have a written quality assurance plan approved by its 
medical director that must include provisions for:  (1) reviewing data concerning patient 
care; (2) identifying and analyzing trends in EMS care; (3) annually reporting to MIEMSS 
on quality assurance issues; (4) providing remedial action to resolve any patient care issues 
involving EMS providers or the EMS system that should be addressed at the jurisdictional 
level; (5) identifying violations of the Maryland Medical Protocols for Emergency Medical 
Services Providers; (6) notifying MIEMSS within 30 days of discovery of any incidents, 
protocol variations, or trends, as specified; and (7) reviewing oral or written allegations 
that an EMS provider failed to act in accordance with applicable law or protocols, or 
prehospital patient care was below the applicable standard of care.  
 
Voluntary Ambulance Inspection Program 
 
The MIEMSS Voluntary Ambulance Inspection Program (VAIP) aims to formally 
recognize emergency response vehicles that meet a specified standard for equipment on 
ambulances and EMS chase vehicles, with a goal to assure appropriate quantities of 
medications and supplies are available.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 159/ Page 4 
Neonatal Ambulance Service 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.09.12.02), a commercial ambulance service 
wishing to provide neonatal ambulance services must obtain a neonatal commercial 
ambulance service license. If providing neonatal transport services in partnership with a 
hospital-based neonatal intensive care unit, the commercial ambulance service must have 
a written memorandum of understanding stating that all equipment and medications 
required to transport a neonate will be readily available. The commercial ambulance 
service must work with the neonatal or perinatal center that agrees to:  (1) serve as medical 
director for the neonatal service; (2) provide medical direction to personnel-related 
neonatal care; (3) provide training as required in neonatal care; and (4) participate in a 
quality assurance program. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, MIEMSS must coordinate the minimum equipment, 
supplies, and medications needed to be available on EMS vehicles with the federal, State, 
and county governments. MIEMSS must also receive summaries of quarterly reviews 
performed by county and municipal EMS and quarterly ambulance complaint data from 
each county. MIEMSS advises that current staff cannot absorb this additional workload.  
 
Thus, MIEMSS special fund expenditures increase by $105,121 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one administrator to coordinate with specified entities 
regarding EMS vehicle requirements and collect quarterly reviews and complaint data. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$95,980 
Operating Expenses 
      9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$105,121 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires (1) each county and municipality that operates or 
contracts EMS to conduct quarterly reviews of ambulance performance data and submit a 
summary to MIEMSS and (2) each county to establish and maintain a formal complaint 
filing system to receive, investigate, and resolve complaints regarding ambulance quality, 
conduct, or compliance. 
 
MIEMSS has designated 28 JEMSOPs in the State, including in each county, 
Baltimore City, and Annapolis. The extent to which each JEMSOP is impacted by the bill 
cannot be determined, as it is unclear which local governments currently review ambulance 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 159/ Page 5 
performance data or have a system to receive complaints. Some JEMSOPs are already in 
compliance with the bill. Prince George’s County, for example, advises that the county 
participates in VAIP and anticipates no immediate fiscal impact as a result of the bill.  
 
However, to the extent that JEMSOPs must establish an ambulance performance data 
review process and/or a complaint management system, there may be a potentially 
significant increase in expenditures for some local jurisdictions.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2026 
 
sj/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5