START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 215 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 215 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Judicial Proceedings 
Government, Labor, and Elections and 
Judiciary 
 
Veterans and Uniformed Services - Maryland Veterans Trust Fund and 
Application of Laws 
 
 
This bill generally extends applicability of certain provisions related to local government 
personnel, trout stamps, and landlord remedies (under tenant holding over actions) to 
definitively include all members of the uniformed services. In addition to other clarifying 
and conforming changes, the bill also relocates the existing definition of a “military 
protection order” to the State Government Article. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues may decrease minimally (likely by less than 
$5,000 annually) due to additional individuals qualifying for an exemption from trout 
stamps, as discussed below. The bill is otherwise not anticipated to materially impact State 
finances or operations.  
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill alters several provisions of State law that generally 
reference military service. In some instances, the bill’s changes are clarifying or 
conforming changes only; in other instances, provisions are expanded to apply more 
broadly. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 215/ Page 2 
Trout Stamps:  For example, any person age 16 or older must generally secure an angler’s 
license to fish in the nontidal waters of the State, as specified in statute. The Department 
of Natural Resources (DNR) must adopt regulations to establish fishing areas where a trout 
stamp is required in addition to an angler’s license. However, certain individuals are 
exempt from requiring a trout stamp, including any resident serving in the armed forces of 
the United States while on leave in the State, during the resident’s leave period, if, while 
angling, the resident possesses a copy of the resident’s official leave order. The bill repeals 
the reference to armed forces and replaces it with uniformed services, thereby extending 
applicability to members of the Public Health Service (PHS) and the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).   
 
Expedited Process in Tenant Holding Over Actions:  Similarly, certain provisions in the 
Real Property Article establish specific requirements in tenant holding over actions if the 
landlord or the landlord’s spouse (1) is on active duty with the United States military; 
(2) has relocated to the State as a direct result of being on active duty; (3) intends to occupy 
the property that is the subject of the complaint following the entry of the judgment; and 
(4) submits supporting documentation. In applicable actions, the District Court must order 
in the summons for the tenant (or assignee or subtenant) to appear before the court no later 
than 45 days after the landlord makes a complaint to repossess the property. If the sheriff 
does not serve the summons within 10 days after issuance, the summons may be served by 
a private process server. The bill generally repeals references to military, instead 
substituting active service member; accordingly, those in active service of PHS and NOAA 
are definitively included. Under the applicable definition, an active service member is an 
individual who is an active-duty member of the uniformed services or serving in a reserve 
component of the uniformed services on active-duty orders.  
  
Eligibility for Credit Under Selection Test – Local Governments:  If a county or 
municipality uses a selection test for the hiring or appointment of employees, the county 
or municipality may adopt a local law that allows for the application of a credit of 10 points, 
or its equivalent, on a selection test for an eligible spouse, an eligible veteran, the spouse 
of an eligible veteran who has a service-connected disability, or the surviving spouse of a 
deceased eligible veteran. However, an otherwise eligible veteran who is convicted of a 
crime after being discharged from or completing military service is ineligible for a credit. 
The bill replaces the reference to military with uniformed services.  
 
Military Protection Order:  A “military protection order” means a protection order issued 
in accordance with 10 U.S.C. § 1567 by a commanding officer against a person in the 
officer’s command in (1) any branch of the uniformed services; (2) the Maryland 
National Guard; or (3) the national guard of any other state. (The definition is unchanged 
under the bill.) 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 215/ Page 3 
Other Provisions:  In 2025, Maryland enacted several pieces of legislation establishing 
uniform definitions of various military‐related terms and expanding certain benefits more 
broadly to additional individuals based on military service. The bill also alters additional 
provisions, which generally conform and clarify existing provisions to the changes made 
in 2025.    
 
State Revenues:  According to DNR, approximately 2,200 additional State residents may 
qualify for a trout stamp exemption under the bill. Based on an assumption that 
approximately 10% of those individuals may acquire an angler’s license and fish for trout, 
special fund revenues may decrease from trout stamps by up to $4,400 on an annual basis.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Veterans and Military Families; Military Department; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3