START OF PAGE 1
  SB 267 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 267 
(Senator Brooks) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
Economic Matters 
 
Land Use - Residential Housing - Oversight and Approval (Building Affordably 
in My Back Yard Act) 
 
 
This bill requires specified (business) entities that own residential property in the State that 
they rent or intend to rent for residential use to file, under oath, a certificate with the 
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) disclosing the correct 
contact information for a representative of the entity authorized to communicate with the 
public about the entity. DHCD must provide the contact information to a local government 
on request. The bill also authorizes the governing body of a local jurisdiction – after making 
a determination that there is a shortage of affordable housing in the local jurisdiction – to 
establish, by local law, an administrative process to review, approve, modify, or deny a 
housing development project application. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures at DHCD increase by $74,100 in FY 2027, as 
discussed below. Future year expenditures increase to $98,500 by FY 2031. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
74,100 
86,200 
90,200 
94,300 
98,500 
Net Effect 
($74,100) 
($86,200) 
($90,200) 
($94,300) 
($98,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may be affected, as discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 267/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Business Entity Disclosure of Contact Information for an Authorized Representative  
 
An “entity” that owns residential real property in the State that the entity rents or intends 
to rent for residential use must file a certificate with DHCD, at least once per year, 
disclosing the correct contact information for a representative of the entity who has the 
authority to communicate with the public about the entity. The certificate must be (1) in 
writing and (2) affirmed or acknowledged under oath. DHCD must provide this 
information on request by a unit of local government in the State.  
 
“Entity” means a corporation, a limited liability company, a limited liability partnership, a 
limited partnership, a limited liability limited partnership, a professional corporation, a 
trade name filer, or a business trust. 
 
The requirement does not apply to an entity that provides contact information for an 
authorized representative to communicate with the public about the entity to a unit of local 
government at least once per year in accordance with the requirements of a local ordinance 
or program.  
 
Administrative Review Process – Housing Development Projects 
 
The bill authorizes the governing body of a local jurisdiction – after making a 
determination that there is a shortage of affordable housing in the local jurisdiction – to 
establish, by local law, an administrative process to review, approve, modify, or deny a 
housing development project application. A local law establishing the administrative 
process must include specified provisions, including (1) procedures, criteria, and 
conditions for the administrative process; (2) required reasonable public notice and 
opportunity for public comment during the administrative process; and (3) a process to 
appeal a decision made through the administrative process. 
 
The bill’s authorization for the establishment of an administrative process may not be 
construed to (1) limit the authority of a local jurisdiction to review, approve, or deny any 
matter under its jurisdiction or (2) transfer the authority of a local jurisdiction to make a 
final decision regarding a matter decided through the administrative process, unless 
authorized by local law. 
 
“Housing development project” means the new construction or substantial renovation of a 
residential real estate project. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 267/ Page 3 
“Housing development project application" means an application for a building permit, 
certification, authorization, site plan approval, subdivision approval, conceptual plan, or 
any other determination by a local jurisdiction relating to a housing development project 
that has been submitted to a local jurisdiction in compliance with applicable requirements.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Land Use – Generally  
 
The regulation of land use in the State, through planning and zoning, is implemented by 
local governments, subject to applicable State law. Planning and zoning authority is 
delegated by the State to local governments primarily under the Land Use Article and, for 
certain counties, the Express Powers Act (Title 10 of the Local Government Article). 
 
Both the Land Use Article and Express Powers Act contain the State’s policy statement 
that (1) the orderly development and use of land and structures requires comprehensive 
regulation through implementation of planning and zoning controls and (2) planning and 
zoning controls must be implemented by local government. State law includes various 
provisions authorizing local governments to regulate the location, size, and use of 
structures through zoning regulations. 
 
Housing Production Targets  
 
The Governor issued a September 2025 executive order – Executive Order 01.01.2025.19 
(“Addressing Maryland’s Affordable Housing Crisis”) – that requires DHCD to  
(1) designate a State Housing Ombudsman to facilitate and monitor housing production in 
the State; (2) publish housing production targets by January 1, 2026, and every five years 
thereafter for the State and each local jurisdiction, including a methodology and supporting 
basis for calculating the targets; and (3) publish an annual report on January 1, 2027, and 
annually thereafter, assessing the progress of the State and each local jurisdiction toward 
meeting the targets. DHCD published a report on January 1, 2026, establishing housing 
production targets for the State and each local jurisdiction through 2030. 
 
Housing Development Permit Applications – Local Reporting Requirements 
 
Section 7-105 of the Land Use Article requires a local jurisdiction with at least  
150,000 residents to report, by July 1 each year, to DHCD and the Maryland Department 
of Planning, specified information for each building or development permit application that 
includes a residential housing component that was considered by the local jurisdiction 
during the immediately preceding calendar year. The report must include, among other 
things, (1) the amount of time spent processing applications, including the time spent by 
agencies reviewing applications, by applicants making edits, and any public notice or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 267/ Page 4 
comment time periods and (2) any type of expedited permit application process that the 
local jurisdiction employed to accelerate residential housing development projects and the 
number of projects that benefited from an expedited process.  
 
State Permitting Acceleration  
 
Executive Order 01.01.2025.19 also required each principal department of the Executive 
Branch that issues permits related to housing construction to take specified actions relating 
to accelerating the issuance of such permits, including providing to the Governor’s Office 
by November 21, 2025, (1) standards and procedures for third-party review of applications 
for State-issued permits to help expedite permitting timelines at the applicant’s expense;  
(2) a written enumeration and assessment of additional potential legislative, regulatory, and 
administrative actions to increase efficiency in permitting processes; and (3) written 
recommendations for ways to increase predictability and transparency related to 
applications for permits related to housing construction. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $74,124 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost for 
DHCD to hire a communications assistant to handle work associated with administering 
the bill’s filing requirement, including (1) identification of, and outreach to, entities that 
own residential properties that they rent or intend to rent for residential use; (2) receipt and 
organization of the filed contact information; (3) any efforts needed to ensure compliance 
with the requirement; and (4) responding to local government requests for the filed contact 
information. The Department of Legislative Services notes the overall level of work 
required to implement the filing requirement is unclear, but it appears the full-time position 
included in this estimate could be needed. DHCD indicates that it cannot handle this 
additional work with existing staff. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits,  
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$64,983 
Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$74,124 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local government expenditures may increase to the extent that  
(1) local jurisdictions undertake an administrative process intended to expedite review of 
housing development applications, as a result of the bill, to address a shortage of affordable 
housing, and (2) the process requires additional personnel or other resources to implement. 
The extent of any impact on local government expenditures cannot be reliably determined, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 267/ Page 5 
in part because the undertaking of a new administrative process and the scope of the 
administrative changes associated with the process are subject to an individual 
jurisdiction’s discretion. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in residential housing development 
may meaningfully benefit to the extent the bill results in more efficiency in local 
development review processes for affordable housing and other residential development. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick, Harford, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Queen 
Anne’s, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland‑National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Washington Suburban 
Sanitary Commission; Cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; 
Comptroller’s Office; Governor’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Interagency Commission on School Construction; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 18, 2026 
Third Reader - April 2, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5