START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 249 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 249 
(Senator Beidle) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Tobacco Product Licensees - Additional Licensure for Electronic Smoking 
Devices 
 
   
This bill requires any person with a cigarette business license or other tobacco products 
(OTP) license that is seeking to manufacture, distribute, or sell electronic smoking devices 
(ESD) to obtain a separate license to manufacture, distribute, or sell ESD. An applicant for 
a license to act as an ESD retailer or vape shop vendor is exempt from paying an additional 
license fee if the applicant holds a cigarette business license (manufacturer, storage 
warehouse, subwholesaler, vending machine operator, or wholesaler) or an OTP license 
(manufacturer, storage warehouse, or wholesaler). Existing cigarette and OTP license 
holders as of September 30, 2026, are excluded from the bill’s requirement until their 
current license expires. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues for the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission 
(ATCC) increase by as much as $25,100 annually beginning in FY 2027 from ESD license 
fees. Any additional workload for State agencies can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
$25,100 
$25,100 
$25,100 
$25,100 
$25,100 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$25,100 
$25,100 
$25,100 
$25,100 
$25,100  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The additional operational impact can be absorbed by the clerks of the 
circuit courts. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 249/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Licensing and Regulation  
 
Generally, the Business Regulation Article governs the licensing of cigarette, OTP, and 
ESD manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, storage warehouses, and vending machine 
operators. ATCC issues manufacturer, wholesaler, storage warehouse, and vending 
machine operator licenses. The clerks of the circuit courts issue retail licenses in the 
applicable county.  
 
Any person with an applicable cigarette business license or OTP license (or the applicable 
affiliate) is also authorized to manufacture, distribute, or sell ESD and may not be required 
to obtain an additional ESD license.  
 
Without an appropriate license (with limited exception), a person may not act, attempt to 
act, or offer to act as (1) a cigarette manufacturer, retailer, storage warehouse, 
subwholesaler, vending machine operator, or wholesaler; (2) an OTP manufacturer, 
retailer, storage warehouse, wholesaler, or tobacconist; or (3) an ESD manufacturer, 
retailer, wholesaler distributor, wholesaler importer, or vape shop vendor. Violators are 
guilty of a misdemeanor and are subject to a fine up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up 
to 30 days. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
 
Select License Fees 
 
An applicant for a license to act as an ESD manufacturer must pay a fee of $25. An 
applicant for a license to act as an ESD wholesaler distributor or ESD wholesaler importer 
must pay a fee of $150.  
 
Cigarette, ESD, and OTP retailer licenses are issued by the Clerk of the Circuit Court in 
the applicable county at a fee of $300. Per Chapter 462 of 2024, from each license fee, the 
clerk of the court must distribute $25 to ATCC and $275 to the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) to be used by MDH or its designee to enforce existing laws prohibiting the 
sale or distribution of tobacco, tobacco products, or ESD to individuals younger than 21. 
 
State Revenues:  Under the bill, current cigarette business and OTP licensees (as of 
September 30, 2026) are not required to obtain a separate ESD license until their current 
license expires. As all licenses expire on April 30, regardless of when they were obtained, 
current license holders do not need to obtain a new license until May 2027. Even so, they 
must obtain a separate ESD license in fiscal 2027.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 249/ Page 3 
In fiscal 2025, ATCC issued 70 statewide cigarette licenses and 112 statewide OTP 
licenses. If all 18 currently licensed cigarette or OTP manufacturers seek an ESD 
manufacturer license (at a $25 fee), revenues increase by $450. If the remaining 
164 licensees (including 99 OTP wholesalers, 34 cigarette wholesalers, 23 cigarette 
subwholesalers, and 8 OTP storage warehouses) seek an ESD wholesaler license (at a 
$150 fee), revenues increase by $24,600.  
 
In total, should all such current cigarette and OTP licensees seek an ESD license, ATCC 
general fund revenues increase by as much as $25,050 in fiscal 2027 (and in the out-years) 
from additional license fees. To the extent fewer licensees seek an ESD license, less 
additional revenue is realized.    
 
Under the bill, a cigarette business or OTP licensee that manufactures, distributes, or sells 
ESD without a separate ESD license may be subject to existing penalties for operating 
without a license. Any such penalties are not expected to have a meaningful impact on 
State revenues. 
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s 
Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2026 
Third Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3