START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 365 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 365 
(Senator Waldstreicher) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Security Guards - Certification Renewal - Requirements 
 
 
This bill (1) repeals the requirement that the Secretary of State Police, by regulation, 
stagger the terms of the certification of security guards; (2) requires the certification of 
security guards to expire on the last day of the certification holder’s birth month, rather 
than the date the Secretary of State Police sets; (3) repeals the late fee for late applications 
for the recertification of security guards; and (4) repeals the requirement that licensed 
security guard agencies or security guard employers notify the Secretary of State Police if 
a certified security guard no longer satisfies all of the criteria for certification, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000 only in FY 2027 for 
one-time information technology (IT) costs. General fund revenues decrease annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$100,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 365/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  At least 90 days, 60 days, and 30 days before a security guard’s 
certification expires, the Secretary of State Police must send a renewal notice to a 
certification holder that states the date on which the certification expires, and that the 
renewal application for certification must be received and accepted by the Secretary of 
State Police before the date the certification expires. The Secretary of State Police must 
send a renewal notice by electronic means to the last known email address of the 
certification holder. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Requirement for the Certification of Security Guards 
 
A licensed security guard agency or employer may provide or employ an individual as a 
security guard only if the individual is certified by the Secretary of State Police as a security 
guard. However, a licensed security guard agency or employer may provide or employ an 
uncertified individual as a security guard if (1) the security guard agency or employer has 
submitted to the Secretary of State police specified information about the individual for 
certification as a security guard and the Secretary of State Police has not disapproved the 
application or (2) the individual has obtained and currently possesses certification by the 
Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC) as a police officer. 
 
By regulation, the Secretary of State Police must stagger the terms of the certifications for 
security guards. Unless a certification is renewed for a three-year term, the certification 
expires on the date the Secretary of State Police sets. The fee for an original certification 
is $15, and the fee for a renewal certification is $10. Fees are paid to the general fund. 
 
Renewal Applications and Late Fees 
 
Generally, at least 90 days before a certification expires, the applicant for a certification as 
a security guard must submit to the Secretary of State Police (1) a renewal application;  
(2) a renewal fee; and (3) the amount of any late fee, as determined by the Secretary of 
State Police. An individual periodically may renew the certification for an additional 
three-year term, if the individual (1) otherwise is entitled to be certified; (2) pays a renewal 
fee of $10, fees for a fingerprint record check, and any late fees; (3) satisfactorily completes 
specified training approved by MPTSC; and (4) submits to the Secretary of State Police a 
renewal application. 
 
If a complete application for renewal of certification is not received by the Secretary of 
State Police by the first business day of the next calendar month immediately following the 
renewal date, the Secretary of State Police must assess a late fee of $5 per day until the 
application is received. The Secretary of State Police may not charge a late fee if the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 365/ Page 3 
applicant did not make timely renewal because of incapacity, hospitalization, being called 
into active military duty, or other hardship. 
 
The Secretary of State Police may not certify any applicant if the applicant has outstanding 
late fee obligations. The Secretary of State police must renew the certification of each 
individual who meets specified requirements. However, the Secretary of State Police must 
send written notice of the refusal to the individual who submitted a renewal application 
within five days after the Secretary refuses to renew the certification. 
 
Generally, at least 90 days before a certification expires, a licensed security guard agency 
or security guard employer must submit a declaration to the Secretary of State Police under 
the penalties of perjury stating whether they know that a certified security guard in their 
service no longer satisfies qualifications for certification. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Department of State Police (DSP) advises that it must update its 
online application portal so that (1) it sends out the required notices based on 
applicants’ birth months, rather than days established by the Secretary of State Police and 
(2) to no longer automatically accrue late fees for delinquent security guard certifications. 
Therefore, general fund expenditures for DSP increase by $100,000 in fiscal 2027 for 
one-time IT costs for DSP to update its online application portal. 
 
General fund revenues decrease annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to the extent DSP no 
longer collects late fees from individuals reapplying for certification as a security guard. 
DSP was unable to provide annualized data on late fees collected in recent years in time 
for this analysis, so a reliable estimate of foregone revenue is not feasible. For illustrative 
purposes only, DSP advises that between July 25, 2025, and December 31, 2025, it 
collected approximately $40,100 in late fees from affected security guards. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3