START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 379 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 379 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Recovery Residence Grant Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill extends, through fiscal 2030, the requirement to include a $500,000 appropriation 
for the Recovery Residence Grant Program in the annual budget bill. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 annually from FY 2028 
through 2030. Revenues are not affected. This bill extends a mandated appropriation 
beginning in FY 2028. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A recovery residence is a service that provides alcohol- and drug-free 
housing to individuals with substance-related disorders or addictive disorders (including 
those that co-occur with mental disorders) and does not include clinical treatment services.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 379/ Page 2 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) designated the Behavioral Health 
Administration (BHA) as the approved credentialing entity for recovery residences, 
pursuant to Chapters 710 and 711 of 2016. The Maryland Certification of Recovery 
Residences oversees the application, certification, recertification, monitoring, and 
inspection of recovery residences to improve the quality of services. Maryland 
RecoveryNet partners with service providers across the State to fund access to recovery 
support services for individuals seeking treatment for substance use and co-occurring 
disorders.  
 
Chapter 276 of 2023 established the Recovery Residence Grant Program in MDH to award 
competitive grants to recovery residences to support operations, services, and programs. 
From fiscal 2024 through 2027, the annual budget bill must include an appropriation of 
$500,000 for the program. Annually by December 1, MDH must submit a report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly that includes (1) the number of grants distributed and 
(2) information about the grant recipients and programs and services provided.  
 
MDH must establish for the grant program, in consultation with BHA, (1) application 
procedures; (2) criteria for prioritizing applications; (3) procedures for awarding grants; 
and (4) any other necessary procedures or criteria. To qualify for a grant, a recovery 
residence must, among other things, (1) be a nonprofit organization; (2) submit a current 
copy of its form 990; (3) be certified by the credentialing entity as a level I, II, or III 
recovery residence in accordance with the National Alliance for Recovery Residences 
standards; (4) not accept or receive reimbursement from Medicaid or private insurance; 
and (5) meet any other requirements established by MDH in regulation.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 annually from 
fiscal 2028 through 2030, due to the bill’s extension of the mandated appropriation to the 
Recovery Residence Grant Program. This estimate assumes discretionary funding is not 
otherwise provided to the grant program in those years. 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $500,000 for the grant program. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to MDH’s fiscal 2025 report on the Recovery 
Residence Grant Program, there are 259 recovery residences and 2,468 certified beds. In 
fiscal 2025, the program awarded $410,582 in grants to residences in Cecil, Garrett, 
Harford, and Howard counties to support such services as recovery housing, peer support, 
and transportation. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 379/ Page 3 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2026 
Third Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3