START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 390 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 390 
(Wicomico County Senators) 
Finance 
 
 
Wicomico County - Class A Beer, Wine, and Liquor License - Alterations 
 
 
This bill specifies that before July 1, 2026, a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license may 
only be issued to an establishment in Wicomico County that has been issued a Class B 
license and continually operating as a restaurant in the county since at least three months 
before the application for the license. Beginning July 1, 2026, the bill prohibits the 
Wicomico County Board of License Commissioners from issuing a Class A beer, wine, 
and liquor license to an establishment that has been issued a Class B license. The board 
may renew a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license for an establishment that has a 
Class B license that was issued before July 1, 2026. The bill authorizes the board to issue 
one Class A beer, wine, and liquor license for use in each county councilmanic district, 
which increases the maximum number of Class A beer, wine, and liquor licenses the board 
may issue in the county from three to seven by authorizing one license for use in each 
county councilmanic district. The bill repeals the authorization for Class A beer, wine, and 
liquor license holders to purchase liquor for retail sale from a wholesaler. The bill 
establishes that the prohibition against one person being issued more than one alcoholic 
beverages license does not apply to a Class A beer, wine, and liquor license issued to a 
holder of a Class B license before July 1, 2026, as specified. The bill also makes 
conforming changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Wicomico County operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 390/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Wicomico County, Class B alcoholic beverages licenses may be issued 
to a hotel or a restaurant, and license holders must meet specified average daily receipt 
ratios from the sale of food and the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
 
A Class A beer, wine, and liquor license may only be issued to an establishment that has 
been issued a Class B license and continually operating as a restaurant in the county since 
at least three months before the application for the license. The board may not issue a 
license to an establishment that is a corporation or limited liability company unless the 
license applicant owns 75% of the total issued capital stock of the corporation or the limited 
liability company. The place described in the application (1) may not exceed 20% of the 
area normally used in the operation of the restaurant business, and (2) must be contiguous 
to and adjoin the restaurant establishment. The board may not issue more than 
three licenses in the county. The license holder must purchase liquor for retail sale from a 
county dispensary or from a wholesaler. 
 
Generally, more than one license may not be issued to an individual or for the use of a 
partnership, a corporation, an unincorporated association, or a limited liability company, 
subject to specified exceptions. However, in Wicomico County, this prohibition does not 
apply to (1) a Class 6 pub-brewery license or a Class 7 micro-brewery license, or (2) a 
Class B beer, wine, and liquor license if the resident applicant is a resident of the county at 
the time of application, and the minimum capital investment in the premises is at least 
$200,000 or the premises have a fair market value of at least $200,000. 
 
The Wicomico County Council passed resolution 23-2025 in February 2025, which 
established seven council districts and eliminated the two at-large seats. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
caw/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2