START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 362 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 362 
(Senator Attar) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Law - Child's Access to Firearms - Penalty (Ny'Kala Strawder Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes an incarceration penalty for a person storing or leaving a loaded 
firearm in a location where the person knew or should have known that an unsupervised 
minor has access to the firearm. The bill alters the penalty from a maximum fine of $1,000 
to imprisonment for up to five years and/or a maximum fine of $1,000.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund incarceration expenditures due to 
the bill’s alteration of penalty provisions. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially 
affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s alteration of penalty provisions.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
Current Law:   
 
Access to a Firearm by a Minor 
 
A person may not store or leave a loaded firearm in a location where the person knew or 
should have known that an unsupervised minor has access to the firearm. A violator is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $1,000.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 362/ Page 2 
The prohibition does not apply if:   
 
 
the minor’s access to a firearm is supervised by an individual at least 18 years old;  
 
the minor’s access to a firearm was obtained as a result of an unlawful entry;  
 
the firearm is in the possession or control of a law enforcement officer while the 
officer is engaged in official duties; or  
 
the minor has a certificate of firearm and hunter safety issued under applicable 
provisions of the Natural Resources Article.  
 
A violation may not (1) be considered evidence of negligence; (2) be considered evidence 
of contributory negligence; (3) limit liability of a party or an insurer; or (4) diminish 
recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a firearm 
or ammunition. A party, witness, or lawyer may not refer to a violation during a trial of a 
civil action that involves property damage, personal injury, or death.  
 
Prohibition on Possession – Regulated Firearms 
 
A person may not possess a regulated firearm if the person (1) has been convicted on or 
after October 1, 2023, of a second or subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law 
Article (access to a firearm by a minor) or (2) has been convicted on or after 
October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 if the violation resulted in the use of a loaded 
firearm by a minor causing death or serious bodily injury to the minor or another person. 
In addition, a person who has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a violation of  
§ 4-104 may not possess a regulated firearm for five years following the date of the 
conviction.  
 
Permit to Wear, Carry, or Transport a Handgun  
 
The Secretary of State Police may not issue a permit to wear, carry, or transport a handgun 
to a person if the person (1) has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a second or 
subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article (access to a firearm by a 
minor) or (2) has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 if 
the violation resulted in the use of a loaded firearm by a minor causing death or serious 
bodily injury to the minor or another person. In addition, the Secretary may not issue a 
permit to a person who has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, of a violation of 
§ 4-104 for five years following the date of the conviction. 
 
Youth Suicide Prevention and Firearm Safe Storage Guide 
 
Chapter 622 of 2023 required the Deputy Secretary for Public Health Services to develop 
a youth suicide prevention and firearm safe storage guide. The Maryland Department of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 362/ Page 3 
Health (MDH) must post the guide on its website and make an electronic version of the 
guide available to families, health and social services providers, and other interested 
entities, as specified. MDH must provide grants to local school systems, local health 
departments, and nonprofit agencies to support the education of families on the safe storage 
practices recommended in the guide. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, there were 51 filings and 
one conviction in the District Court and 39 filings and two convictions in the circuit courts 
for violations of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article (access to a firearm by a minor) 
during fiscal 2025.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 1031 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
me/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3