START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 351 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 351 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Finance 
Judiciary 
 
Private Passenger Motor Vehicle Insurance - Use of Programs That Measure the 
Operation of an Insured Vehicle 
 
 
This bill establishes various prohibitions that apply to private passenger motor vehicle 
insurers that use programs to measure the operation of an insured’s motor vehicle. The bill 
establishes related responsibilities for the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA), 
including that MIA must adopt specified regulations related to the use of any such program 
by July 1, 2027. The bill applies to all private passenger automobile insurance policies 
issued or renewed in the State on or after the bill’s January 1, 2027 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is anticipated that MIA can adopt regulations using existing budgeted 
resources; while any other impact depends on the regulations adopted by MIA, the bill is 
not anticipated to materially affect MIA operations or finances, as discussed below. 
General fund revenues from the insurance premium tax are not anticipated to be materially 
affected. 
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to 
affect MAIF operations or finances because MAIF does not use programs to measure the 
operation of an insured’s motor vehicle. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 351/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Prohibitions for Private Passenger Motor Vehicle Insurers  
 
An insurer that issues or delivers private passenger motor vehicle insurance policies in the 
State must disclose to an applicant (at the time of application) or a policyholder (at the time 
of policy renewal) any use of a program that measures the operation of an insured vehicle. 
The disclosure must be provided in the manner specified by MIA. If an insurer implements 
any such program, the insurer must create an appeals process for policyholders to correct 
or appeal data believed to be erroneous. Additionally, with respect to private passenger 
motor vehicle insurance in the State, an insurer may not: 
 
 
require an applicant or a policyholder to participate in a program that measures the 
operation of an insured vehicle as a condition for underwriting private passenger 
motor vehicle risk; or 
 
use data obtained from a program that measures the operation of an insured vehicle 
to cancel, refuse to renew, or refuse to underwrite a private passenger automobile 
insurance policy risk. 
 
With respect to private passenger motor vehicle insurance policies that measure the 
operation of an insured vehicle, an insurer may not initiate a premium increase in 
increments of less than six months, except for binders or contracts for temporary insurance. 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration Responsibilities 
 
MIA must adopt regulations to limit the types and amount of data collected by programs 
that measures the operation of an insured vehicle for use by applicable insurers in the State 
by July 1, 2027. In addition, MIA is authorized to require an insurer that uses a program 
that measures the operation of an insured vehicle to establish and implement a governance 
plan that includes: 
 
 
monitoring the program to ensure that it does not collect or process data in a manner 
that is unfairly discriminatory, impacts premium rates in a manner that lacks 
actuarial justification, or otherwise violates the law; 
 
correcting or mitigating a finding that the program collects or processes data in a 
manner that is unfairly discriminatory, impacts premium rates in a manner that lacks 
actuarial justification, or otherwise violates the law; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 351/ Page 3 
 
periodically reporting to MIA on the scope, methodologies, and findings of the 
program monitoring in accordance with the governance plan and any corrective 
action or mitigation measures taken in accordance with the governance plan. 
 
Current Law:  MIA and the Insurance Commissioner’s statutory and regulatory duties 
include, among other things, certifying insurers to operate in the State, reviewing and 
approving the rates and forms used by insurers, and licensing and certifying insurance 
professionals. MIA and the Commissioner have broad authority to enforce the 
requirements and prohibitions that apply to insurers and insurance professionals. For 
example, depending on the type of violation and following the administrative processes 
required by Insurance Law and regulations, the Commissioner is authorized to issue orders 
directing insurers or insurance professionals to take certain actions, impose administrative 
penalties, and suspend or revoke certifications and/or licenses. 
 
The Insurance Article expressly prohibits certain insurer practices and activities as unfair 
trade practices. One such practice is that, with respect to private passenger motor vehicle 
insurance, an insurer may not require an applicant or a policyholder to participate in a 
program that measures the operation of an insured vehicle as a condition for underwriting 
a private passenger motor vehicle insurance risk, with certain exceptions. 
 
Furthermore, certain requirements and procedures must be followed by a private passenger 
motor vehicle insurer when it proposes to cancel, refuse to renew, reduce coverage for, or 
increase the premium of a policy. For example, an insurer may not terminate a policy  
mid-term, except in limited circumstances (e.g., nonpayment of a premium), and an insurer 
must send notice to an insured in a specified manner when it proposes to reduce the 
coverage provided by the policy. Additionally, when proposing to increase the premium of 
a policy, an insurer must notify the policyholder of certain information directly related to 
the premium increase, including the policyholder’s rate classification and the factors that 
may cause or contribute to an increase in the policy’s premiums. Different requirements 
and procedures apply to binders or contracts for temporary insurance. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MIA can adopt the regulations required by the bill using existing 
budgeted resources. Any other fiscal or operational impact experienced by MIA depends 
on the regulatory framework established; however, any such impact is not anticipated to 
materially affect MIA. 
 
As noted above, MIA already directly regulates insurers in the State and enforces State 
laws that require or prohibit certain insurer actions. As such, the regulatory framework 
established by MIA to implement the bill can likely be structured to work cohesively with 
its existing processes and enforcement actions without the need for significant additional 
changes or resources. Additionally, any new revenue MIA may realize due to the bill (for 
example, if MIA were to require a filing fee to submit information related to a governance 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 351/ Page 4 
plan for systems used in programs that measure the operation of an insured’s motor vehicle) 
is likely to be negligible relative to MIA’s other finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 984 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:   
First Reader - February 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 17, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 17, 2026 
 
caw/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4