START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 454 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 454 
(Senator Jennings, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Public Schools - School Resource Officers - Firearms Required 
 
 
This bill requires a school resource officer (SRO), including a Baltimore City school police 
officer, to carry a firearm while on the premises of a school to which the SRO is assigned. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill applies only to local school systems and law enforcement 
agencies.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill has no material effect on local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “school resource officer” is defined as:   
 
 
a law enforcement officer who has been assigned to a school in accordance with a 
memorandum of understanding between the chief law enforcement agency and local 
school system; or 
 
a Baltimore City school police officer.  
 
A Baltimore City school police officer is a person who, when acting in an official capacity, 
is a member of the Baltimore City School Police Force established in statute and who is 
authorized by law to make arrests. In general, a Baltimore City school police officer may 
act in an official capacity only on the premises of a Baltimore City school or under other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 454/ Page 2 
specified circumstances. When acting in an official capacity, a Baltimore City school 
police officer has all the powers of a law enforcement officer in the State. Members of the 
Baltimore City School Police Force are employees of and appointed by the Baltimore City 
Board of School Commissioners. During school days, Baltimore City school police officers 
are authorized to carry weapons on the premises of a school to which they are assigned 
only before or after regular school hours; they are also authorized to carry weapons on the 
premises of a school to which they are assigned on days other than school days.  
 
Maryland Safe to Learn Act 
 
Under Chapter 30 of 2018 (the Maryland Safe to Learn Act), the Maryland Center for 
School Safety (MCSS) developed, in consultation with local school systems, a specialized 
curriculum to be used in training SROs and school security employees that addresses 
specified issues. The curriculum was submitted to and approved by the Maryland Police 
Training and Standards Commission.  
 
Each local school system must annually file a report with MCSS that identifies (1) the 
public schools that have an SRO assigned and (2) if no SRO is assigned to a public school, 
the adequate local law enforcement coverage that will be provided to the school. MCSS 
must submit annual summaries of the SRO/law enforcement coverage reports it receives 
to the Governor and General Assembly. MCSS must also collect and report annually data 
on specified incidents of use of force involving SROs or school security employees.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2020 and each year thereafter, the Governor must include an 
appropriation of $10.0 million to provide grants to local school systems and law 
enforcement agencies to meet the SRO/law enforcement coverage requirements. Grants 
must be made based on the proportion of public schools in each jurisdiction and may be 
used for school security employees.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 644 of 2025, SB 819 of 2024; and SB 935 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Center for 
School Safety; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State 
Police; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick 
County Public Schools; Wicomico County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 454/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
jg/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3