START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 465 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 465 
(Senators James and Ready) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Admission of Out-of-Court Statements - Assault in the 
Second Degree 
 
 
This bill expands a limited exception to the hearsay rule in a criminal case – applicable in 
felony cases when a statement is offered against a party who, through wrongdoing, has 
caused the unavailability of the witness who made the statement – to include cases in which 
a defendant is charged with assault in the second degree.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is procedural in nature and does not materially affect State finances 
or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is procedural in nature and does not materially affect local 
government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  While evidentiary rules generally exclude hearsay from being admitted 
into evidence, there are exceptions. Under § 10-901 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article, a statement is not excluded by the hearsay rule and is admissible during the 
criminal trial of a defendant charged with a felony violation if the statement is offered 
against a party that has engaged in, directed, or conspired to commit wrongdoing that was 
intended to and did render the witness unavailable. Maryland Rule 5-801(a) defines a 
“statement” as (1) an oral or written assertion or (2) nonverbal conduct of a person, if it is 
intended by the person as an assertion.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 465/ Page 2 
Before admitting a statement under this exception to the hearsay rule, the court must hold 
a hearing outside the presence of the jury at which the Maryland Rules of Evidence are 
strictly applied. The court must find by a preponderance of the evidence that the party 
against whom the statement is offered has engaged in specified activities that rendered the 
witness unavailable.  
 
A statement entered under this exception may not be introduced into evidence unless it was 
made under oath and subject to the penalties of perjury at a trial, hearing, or other 
proceeding or in a deposition, was written and signed by the declarant, or was recorded at 
the same time the statement was made.  
 
As soon as practicable after learning that the declarant is unavailable, the party offering the 
statement must notify the adverse party of its intention to offer the statement, the particulars 
of the statement, and the identity of the witness through whom the statement will be 
offered. 
 
Maryland Rule 5-804 specifies that the “unavailability of a witness” includes situations in 
which the declarant (1) is exempted by a court ruling of privilege from testifying; 
(2) refuses to testify despite a court order to do so; (3) testifies to a lack of memory of the 
subject matter of the declarant’s statement; (4) is unable to be present or testify because of 
death or then existing illness or infirmity; or (5) is absent from the hearing and the party 
offering the statement has been unable to procure the declarant’s attendance by process or 
other reasonable means.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 281 and SB 146 of 2025 and HB 572 and SB 424 of 2024.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2