START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 489 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 489 
(Senator Lam, et al.) 
Finance 
Health 
 
Health Occupations - Physicians Trained in Foreign Countries - Exemption 
From Educational Requirements and Limited License 
 
 
This bill alters the exemption from certain educational requirements for a license to practice 
medicine for applicants who have studied at an international medical school. Beginning 
October 1, 2028, the Maryland Board of Physicians (MBP) may issue a limited license to 
practice medicine to a physician trained and licensed in a foreign country who meets 
specified requirements. A limited license authorizes the license holder to practice medicine 
only (1) while employed full-time by a “health care facility” and (2) in the employing 
health care facility or a facility operated by the employing health care facility. The term of 
a limited license may not exceed three years. A limited license may not be renewed. The 
bill also establishes reasons MBP may determine an applicant ineligible for a limited 
license or revoke a limited license. Uncodified language requires MBP to consult with 
MedChi on the development of policies and regulations to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBP special fund expenditures increase by $68,600 in FY 2028 for staff. 
Future years reflect annualization and ongoing costs. MBP special fund revenues increase, 
likely minimally, beginning in FY 2029 to the extent MBP sets a limited license fee. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$68,600 
$85,900 
$89,900 
$93,800 
Net Effect 
$0 
($68,600) 
($85,900) 
($89,900) 
($93,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 489/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:   
 
Exemptions to Educational Requirements 
 
Pursuant to § 14-307 of the Health Occupations Article, to qualify for a license as a 
physician, an applicant must be at least age 18, of good moral character, meet specified 
education requirements, pass an examination, submit to a criminal history records check, 
and meet any other requirements MBP establishes through regulations.  
 
An applicant must (1) have a doctoral degree of medicine that is accredited by an  
MBP-recognized organization and submit evidence to MBP of successful completion of 
one year of training in a postgraduate medical training program that is accredited by an 
MBP-recognized organization or (2) have a doctoral degree of osteopathy from a school of 
osteopathy in the United States, its territories or possessions, Puerto Rico, or Canada that 
has standards for graduation equivalent to those established by the American Osteopathic 
Association and submit acceptable evidence to MBP of successful completion of one year 
of training in a postgraduate medical training program that is accredited by an  
MBP-recognized organization.  
 
Under current law, an applicant for a physician license is exempt from the above specified 
educational requirements if the applicant:   
 
 
has studied medicine at a foreign medical school; 
 
is certified by the Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates 
(ECFMG) or its successor as approved by MBP; 
 
passes a qualifying examination for foreign medical school graduates required by 
MBP;  
 
meets any other qualifications for foreign medical school graduates that MBP 
establishes in its regulation for licensing of applicants;  
 
submits acceptable evidence to MBP of any requirements established in regulation; 
and  
 
meets at least one of the following requirements:  (1) the applicant graduated from 
any foreign medical school and submits acceptable evidence to MBP of successful 
completion of two years of training in a postgraduate medical education program 
accredited by an MBP-recognized organization or (2) the applicant successfully 
completed a fifth pathway program and submits specified evidence to MBP.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 489/ Page 3 
Under current law, a “fifth pathway program” means a program MBP approves in 
regulations for a student who (1) has studied medicine at an international medical school; 
(2) was a U.S. citizen when the student enrolled in the international medical school; and 
(3) has completed all of the formal requirements for graduation from the international 
medical school, except any social service or postgraduate requirements.  
 
The bill repeals the option to complete and submit evidence of completing a fifth pathway 
program as a qualification for exemption from educational requirements for physician 
licensure. Instead, an applicant is exempt from educational requirements for physician 
licensure if the applicant meets the requirements noted above and, rather than meeting one 
of two specified requirements (including successful completion of a fifth pathway 
program), graduated from any international medical school and submits acceptable 
evidence to MBP of successful completion of two years of postgraduate training in an 
accredited training program. 
 
Limited Licensure 
 
Under the bill, beginning October 1, 2028, MBP may issue a limited license to practice 
medicine to a physician trained and licensed in a foreign country who meets specified 
requirements. To be eligible for a limited license, an applicant must: 
 
 
be of good moral character; 
 
have received a degree of Doctor of Medicine or its equivalent from a medical 
school located outside the United States with recognized accreditation status from 
ECFMG; 
 
have completed at least two years of training in a residency program (1) accredited 
by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education – International, (2) in 
a country whose graduate medical education accrediting agency has been 
recognized by the World Federation for Medical Education, or (3) accredited by 
another accreditation authority approved by MBP; 
 
have been in good standing with the medical licensing or regulatory authority in the 
foreign country at the time of the applicant’s departure, or if reasonable attempts to 
obtain licensure status have been unsuccessful, be approved by MBP on an 
individual basis; 
 
have no pending disciplinary matters before a licensing or regulatory body; 
 
have an offer of employment with a participating “health care facility” (defined as 
a local health department, school of medicine, federally qualified health center, 
health system, hospital, hospital-based facility, or freestanding emergency facility) 
that will evaluate the applicant’s nonclinical skills and familiarity with standards 
appropriate for medical practice in the State; and 
 
satisfy any other requirements established by MBP in regulation, including prior 
practice experience. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 489/ Page 4 
MBP may determine an applicant ineligible for a limited license if the applicant (1) was 
subject to disciplinary action; (2) had discipline or competency problems during 
postgraduate training; or (3) fails to submit evidence acceptable to MBP that the applicant 
meets the requirements for a limited license. 
 
To apply for a limited license, an applicant must submit an application to MBP and pay the 
application fee set by MBP. 
 
MBP may revoke a limited license if the licensee (1) practices outside the scope of the 
limited license; (2) is no longer employed by the health care facility; (3) practices medicine 
outside the State without being legally authorized to practice in the other jurisdiction; 
(4) has been subject to a disciplinary action by the health care facility or MBP; or (5) is no 
longer eligible for the limited license. 
 
Limited license provisions do not apply to a physician who (1) has completed a residency 
accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, the American 
Osteopathic Association, or the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons in Canada, or 
(2) previously held a medical license issued in the United States or Canada. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MBP advises that, while health care facilities will likely assist the 
board in vetting applicants, the board requires a licensure analyst to review applicants’ 
credentials and process applications. Although limited licenses will not be issued until 
October 1, 2028, the bill requires MBP to work with MedChi on regulations and the new 
license type would require additional training for staff.  
 
Thus, MDH special fund expenditures increase by $68,645 in fiscal 2028. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one licensure analyst effective October 1, 2027 (one year prior to 
issuance of limited licenses) to consult with MedChi on the development of policies and 
regulations, promulgate limited licensure regulations, assist with related training, and 
review and process applications for limited licensure. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$59,484 
Operating Expenses 
    9,161 
Total FY 2028 State Expenditures 
$68,645 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 489/ Page 5 
To the extent MBP sets a license fee for a limited license, MBP special fund revenues 
increase, likely minimally, beginning in fiscal 2029. The amount of such revenues will 
depend on the fee set and the number of limited license applications received, which cannot 
be reliably estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2026 
Third Reader - March 25, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2026 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5