START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 487 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 487 
(Senator Henson) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Motor Vehicles - Speed Monitoring Systems - Safety Corridors (Vulnerable Road 
User Protection Act of 2026) 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Highway Administration (SHA) to place and use speed 
monitoring systems (i.e., speed cameras) on segments of highway identified as 
“safety corridors.” SHA may also authorize a local government to place and use such 
systems. The bill establishes various requirements related to the use of these speed cameras 
that are substantially similar to existing requirements applicable to other speed cameras 
used in the State. SHA may adopt regulations establishing standards and procedures for 
safety corridor speed monitoring systems. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase, potentially by millions of 
dollars annually (possibly beginning as early as FY 2027), as revenues from safety corridor 
speed cameras are collected by the Comptroller and disbursed to SHA. Transportation 
Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly as the revenues are 
received and used for authorized purposes. General fund expenditures for the Judiciary are 
not anticipated to be materially affected, as discussed below. General fund revenues from 
contested cases in the District Court may increase beginning in FY 2027, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that 
SHA authorizes a local government to implement a safety corridor speed camera program, 
as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 487/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Safety corridor” means a segment of a State highway that is identified 
by SHA as an area of high risk to vulnerable road users in a vulnerable road user safety 
assessment prepared pursuant to federal law. “Vulnerable road user” means an individual 
on a highway who is not traveling in a motor vehicle and explicitly includes pedestrians, 
bicyclists, other cyclists, persons using a personal conveyance or a mobility device, and 
persons on foot in a highway work zone. 
 
A speed monitoring system may be used by SHA or its contractor to record the images of 
motor vehicles traveling on a State highway within a safety corridor. Additionally, SHA 
may issue a permit that authorizes a local jurisdiction to place and use a speed monitoring 
system on a State highway in a safety corridor within its jurisdiction, under specified 
circumstances. Existing provisions of law governing locally operated speed monitoring 
systems apply to locally operated safety corridor speed monitoring systems, whereas the 
bill establishes new provisions that govern safety corridor speed monitoring systems used 
by SHA. 
 
The Comptroller must distribute revenue from civil fines collected through the use of safety 
corridor speed cameras by SHA to a special fund. Money in the fund must first be 
distributed to SHA to cover the costs of implementing and administering safety corridor 
speed cameras and, after this distribution, the remaining balance must be distributed to TTF 
for highway safety purposes and SHA system preservation. This additional funding is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that would otherwise be 
appropriated to SHA for these purposes. 
 
The other new requirements established by the bill for SHA’s safety corridor speed 
monitoring systems are substantially similar to the requirements applicable to the use of 
other speed cameras in the State, including provisions related to: 
 
 
the escalating penalty structure for a violation recorded by a speed monitoring 
system (which ranges from $40 to $425 depending on the excessiveness of the speed 
violation); 
 
enforcement actions related to vehicle registration that may be taken by the Motor 
Vehicle Administration (MVA), when a violator fails to pay the civil penalty or 
request a trial; 
 
the inspection of recorded images captured by the speed cameras; 
 
ongoing independent calibration testing for the speed cameras; 
 
a prohibition on issuing citations from a camera until the required signage is 
installed and for at least the first 15 calendar days after the signage is installed; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 487/ Page 3 
 
the issuance of warning notices and citations and payment of civil penalties 
associated with violations recorded by the cameras; 
 
liability for a violation between a vehicle owner and a driver of the vehicle, who in 
some cases may not be the owner; 
 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the District Court to hear contested cases regarding 
speed camera citations; 
 
court proceedings, evidentiary rules, and information that the District Court may 
consider in defense of an alleged violation; and 
 
the payment of contractor fees. 
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, 
including traffic control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus 
monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control 
systems. Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, a person who 
receives a citation, may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 
For additional information, please the Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
State Highway Administration 
 
SHA anticipates that revenues collected in any given year will fully offset its administrative 
costs for the program and the remaining revenues will be used for highway safety purposes 
and system preservation, as required by the bill. A precise fiscal impact for the program 
cannot be reliably estimated without actual experience under the bill because it depends on 
how many cameras are ultimately placed and, subsequently, how many citations are issued 
and penalties are paid. Moreover, driver behavior may change over time reducing the 
amount of citations. SHA also advises that it does not intend to install speed cameras on a 
safety corridor if a local jurisdiction expresses interest in installing speed cameras in the 
same location. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 487/ Page 4 
For illustrative purposes only, a preliminary analysis prepared by MDOT estimates that 
citation revenues could total as much as $26.8 million based on the following scenario:   
(1) 75 speed cameras are placed in subject corridors; (2) citations are issued to 0.05% of 
vehicular traffic along the corridors; and (3) the average fine is $50. 
 
MDOT also notes that when MVA places an administrative flag on a vehicle’s record 
related to unpaid citations, there is an associated fee to remove the flag. Thus, as additional 
citations are issued under the bill, TTF revenues may increase to the extent additional flags 
are placed and subsequently removed upon payment of the fee. Any impact, however, is 
anticipated to be minimal. 
 
Comptroller’s Office 
 
It is assumed that the Comptroller’s Office can collect, account for, and disburse safety 
corridor speed camera revenues using existing budgeted resources. Since the bill requires 
the Comptroller’s Office to act only as a pass-through entity for the revenues, there is no 
net impact on the Comptroller’s finances. 
 
District Court  
 
As additional speed cameras are installed and used in the State and additional speed camera 
citations are subsequently issued, the number of individuals opting for a trial in 
District Court is also likely to increase. Accordingly, general fund revenues increase, likely 
minimally, as fine revenues paid by individuals convicted in District Court are paid into 
the general fund. For context, the Judiciary advises that there were 6,479 requests for trial 
based on citations issued from speed monitoring systems in fiscal 2025. 
 
It is anticipated that any additional workload resulting from the bill’s requirements does 
not materially affect general fund expenditures for the District Court. 
 
The Judiciary advises that the significant expansion of automated enforcement systems in 
the State in recent years necessitates an upgrade to its case management system to improve 
citation intake and payment processing. For locally operated automated enforcement 
systems, the District Court administers citations and the payment of fines from contested 
citations only. For automated enforcement systems operated by a State agency, the 
District Court administers citations and the payment of fines for both contested and 
uncontested citations. The court currently processes these citations through a manual 
workflow that has struggled to keep pace with the expansion of automated enforcement 
systems. The Judiciary estimates the cost of an information technology upgrade to 
automate the process at approximately $1.4 million; additional staffing costs may also be 
incurred. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 487/ Page 5 
However, because the Judiciary’s need is not exclusively attributable to the bill, but rather 
due to the general expansion of automated enforcement systems, these costs are not 
reflected in this analysis. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes SHA to authorize local governments to establish 
safety corridor speed cameras on State highway in their respective jurisdictions. To the 
extent that any local jurisdiction implements a safety corridor speed camera program: 
 
 
expenditures increase to install the speed cameras and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the speed camera 
program (e.g., mailing or contractual costs); 
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the local 
jurisdiction; and 
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 520 and HB 348 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Comptroller’s Office; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police;  
Baltimore City; Baltimore, Howard, Montgomery, and Prince George’s County; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 487/ Page 6 
Appendix – Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
 
Speed Monitoring Systems – Authorization and Administrative Requirements 
 
Speed monitoring systems are authorized to be used by the State Highway Administration 
(SHA), the Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA), and local jurisdictions in 
specified locations as prescribed by State law. Most commonly, the systems are authorized 
for use in school zones; however, the systems may also be used on other specified highways 
and roadways, including Maryland Route 210 in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County, and Maryland Route 200 in Montgomery County. 
 
A speed monitoring system may not be used by a local jurisdiction unless its use is 
authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction after reasonable notice and a public 
hearing. Before activating a speed monitoring system, SHA, MDTA, or a local jurisdiction, 
as applicable, must publish notice of the location of the system on its website and in a 
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction. Statute prescribes additional 
requirements applicable to monitoring systems in certain locations. For example, speed 
monitoring systems in school zones may only operate Monday through Friday from 
6:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m. 
 
In addition, statute includes numerous specifications that, subject to limited exception, 
broadly apply to the use of speed cameras in the State, including those related to: 
 
 
the placement of new speed monitoring systems (and movement of existing 
systems), including the timeframe during which such systems may only be used to 
issue warnings instead of citations; 
 
the placement and location of speed limit signs approaching and within an area 
covered by a speed monitoring system; 
 
the designation of an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the speed camera program; 
 
required training for speed monitoring system operators; 
 
required annual calibration checks for each speed monitoring system; 
 
guidelines for if an agency or local jurisdiction hires a contractor to operate a speed 
camera program; 
 
procedures for the use of recordings captured by a speed monitoring system as 
evidence; and 
 
data collection and reporting. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 487/ Page 7 
Citations and Fines 
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the motor vehicle is recorded by a speed monitoring system while exceeding the posted 
speed limit. The authorized agency (e.g., a local law enforcement agency) must mail a 
citation to the owner with specified information, including a copy of the recorded image, 
the location where the violation occurred, and the amount of the civil penalty imposed and 
the date by which the civil penalty should be paid. A person who receives a citation may: 
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation 
(e.g., directly to the political subdivision for most locally administered programs); 
or 
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation. 
 
Chapter 505 of 2025 established an escalating penalty structure that generally applies for 
alleged violations recorded by speed monitoring systems in the State, as shown below in 
Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Speed Monitoring Systems 
Effective October 1, 2025 
 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Maximum Penalty 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$40 
16 ‐ 19 MPH, inclusive 
70 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
120 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
230 
40 or more MPH 
425 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7