START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 480 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 480 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Off-Highway Recreational Vehicle Recreation Oversight Board - Establishment 
 
  
This bill establishes and provides for the membership of the Off-Highway Recreational 
Vehicle (OHRV) Recreation Oversight Board to advise the Secretary of Natural Resources 
on the operation, acquisition, regulation, and general oversight of OHRV trails and 
recreation in the State. The board is staffed by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
and must meet at least quarterly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DNR’s staffing responsibility can be handled with existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Off-Highway Recreational Vehicle Trail Fund 
 
Chapter 700 of 2018 established the OHRV Trail Fund to maintain and construct trails for 
OHRVs. The special, nonlapsing fund, which is administered by the Secretary of Natural 
Resources, consists of 50% of the revenue from the excise tax imposed for each certificate 
of title issued for an OHRV, money appropriated in the State budget for the fund, and any 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 480/ Page 2 
other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Any interest 
earnings of the fund are credited to the general fund. 
 
The fund may be used only to (1) maintain trails for OHRVs on State park land that was 
purchased or leased by DNR before January 1, 2017; (2) maintain and construct trails for 
OHRVs on State park land that is purchased or leased by DNR on or after January 1, 2017; 
and (3) maintain and construct trails for OHRVs on land that is not State park land that is 
purchased or leased by DNR. Money expended from the fund is supplemental to and not 
intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for maintaining 
and constructing trails for OHRVs. 
 
Use of Off-road Vehicles on Department of Natural Resources Property 
 
Statute requires the Secretary of Natural Resources (or DNR) to (1) adopt regulations that 
govern the operation of off-road vehicles on department-owned or -controlled property and 
(2) designate areas of department-controlled property for use by the general public for the 
operation of off-road vehicles, where it is compatible with the character and existing uses 
of the property. DNR regulations establish (1) registration/licensing requirements for  
off-road vehicles; (2) equipment and operation standards/requirements; (3) noise level 
limits; and (4) designated off-road vehicle trails (all in Garrett County). The regulations 
define “off-road vehicle” as including (1) a four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicle; 
(2) an automobile; (3) a truck; (4) a motorcycle and related two-wheel vehicle; (5) an 
amphibious machine; (6) a ground effect or air cushion vehicle; (7) a snowmobile; and  
(8) a golf cart. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:   Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 711 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett and Worcester counties; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
 
caw/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2