START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 414 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 414 
(Senator Beidle) 
Finance 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
Anne Arundel County - Alcoholic Beverages - Consumption-Only Nonprofit 
Swim Club License 
 
 
This 
bill 
establishes 
a 
consumption-only 
nonprofit 
swim 
club 
license 
in  
Anne Arundel County and authorizes the Anne Arundel County Board of License 
Commissioners to issue the license to a nonprofit swim club. The license holder may allow 
club members and their guests to bring beer, wine, and liquor onto the licensed premises 
for on-premises consumption. The bill limits alcohol consumption to a designated area of 
the swim club, during a designated event, and up to five days per year, unless the board 
authorizes additional days. The license holder must provide notice to the board at least 
10 days before a designated event at which alcohol is consumed. During a designated 
event, alcohol consumption may occur between 2 p.m. and 10 p.m. The license fee is 
$100 annually, and a club may pay an additional fee of $50 per day for up to 
three additional days. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues increase minimally, beginning in FY 2027, 
to the extent consumption-only nonprofit swim club licenses are issued under the bill. 
Anne Arundel County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 414/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner. These include licenses for clubs, nonprofits, and 
special events. License fees are collected for county use, and the board administers and 
enforces licenses with existing staff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2026 
Third Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
me/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober and 
Alizeh Malik 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2