START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 442 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 442 
(Anne Arundel County Senators) 
Finance 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
Anne Arundel County - Population Ratio Quota for Class A (Off-Sale) and Class 
D (Off-Sale) Licenses - Exemption 
 
 
This bill excludes an application filed on or after January 1, 2023, and approved by the 
Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners by June 30, 2025 from statute in 
Anne Arundel County that restricts the issuance of a Class A (off-sale) or Class D (off-sale) 
license to a business if it is located in an assessment district where the ratio of off-sale 
licenses exceeds one for every 3,500 individuals, or if the issuance of the license would 
cause the ratio to exceed one license per 3,500 individuals. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2026, and terminates December 31, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County revenues increase by $5,160 annually beginning in 
FY 2027. Anne Arundel County expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s 23 counties, Baltimore City, and the City of Annapolis all have 
boards of license commissioners who issue and enforce retail alcoholic beverages licenses 
in their jurisdictions. Within each jurisdiction, the most common types of retail licenses 
are Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D licenses. Each license authorizes the sale of 
alcoholic beverages in a different manner and may authorize the sale of alcohol for on- and 
off-premises consumption, as specified.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 442/ Page 2 
Generally, off-sale licenses authorize the license holder to sell alcoholic beverages for 
consumption off the licensed premises. In the State, Class A licenses authorize the sale of 
alcoholic beverages as packaged goods, and Class D licenses authorize the sale of alcoholic 
beverages for taverns.  
 
Population Ratio Quota 
 
“Assessment district” means a tax assessment district established by the county and shown 
on the official map adopted by the county council titled “Tax Assessment Districts, 2005.” 
The population of each assessment district is determined by the latest federal census or 
estimates prepared by the Anne Arundel County Office of Planning and Zoning. 
 
The Anne Arundel County Board of License Commissioners may issue off-sale licenses 
based on its determination of whether the license is necessary to accommodate the public. 
Chapter 69 of 2020 authorized the board to consider the population-to-license ratio in the 
applicant’s assessment district in its determination.  
 
Chapters 818 and 819 of 2025 restricted the issuance of Class A (off-sale) and Class D 
(off-sale) licenses in Anne Arundel County if the business applying for a license is located 
in an assessment district where the ratio of off-sale licenses exceeds one for every 
3,500 individuals, or if the issuance of the license would cause the ratio to exceed 
one license per 3,500 individuals. This does not apply (1) to the transfer or renewal of a 
license issued by July 1, 2025; (2) in the sixth tax assessment district; or (3) to an 
application for an on-site consumption permit by an applicant that holds a State-issued 
Class 5 Brewery License. Additionally, the board may not approve the transfer of a Class A 
(off-sale) or Class D (off-sale) license to a location outside of the assessment district in 
which the license was located on July 1, 2025. If the license did not exist on July 1, 2025, 
it may not be transferred to a location outside of the assessment district in which the license 
was initially issued.  
 
Local Revenues:  Anne Arundel County advises that the bill would allow them to issue 
three licenses that were approved by the board before July 1, 2025. The issuance of those 
three licenses would generate approximately $5,160 annually in license fees. Thus, 
Anne Arundel County revenues increase by $5,160 annually beginning in fiscal 2027.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 442/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3