START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 461 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 461 
(Senator McCray) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program - Heat and Eat Program - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill alters eligibility for the Heat and Eat Program within the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program (SNAP) by specifying that a household is eligible to participate if the 
household includes an elderly or disabled individual. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill conforms Maryland law with federal law, thereby ensuring 
compliance with federal funding requirements. To the extent it requires administrative 
changes, the Department of Human Services (DHS) can handle them with existing 
budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Heat and Eat Program 
 
Chapters 362 and 363 of 2021 established the Heat and Eat Program to expand food access 
and increase the monthly benefit received for households that are receiving or eligible for 
SNAP. A household is eligible to participate in the program if they are eligible for SNAP 
under State and federal law. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 461/ Page 2 
In determining program eligibility, DHS must apply a “standard utility allowance” (SUA) 
to the shelter deduction used to determine countable gross income for SNAP eligibility. 
“SUA” means a Maryland Energy Assistance Program (MEAP) payment to a household 
that is at least $21 per year. 
 
Federal Changes Regarding the Treatment of Energy Assistance Payments 
 
The federal One Big Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) of 2025 excludes households without an 
elderly (60 years or older) or disabled member from automatic SUA eligibility. These 
households may still qualify for the SUA based on verified energy expenses but must 
submit verification of their heating and cooling expenses. Effective November 1, 2025, 
households with an elderly or disabled member will continue to have the SUA 
automatically applied.  
 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program 
 
SNAP is a federally funded benefit that helps low-income households purchase food. 
Program rules and requirements are issued by the federal government, while administrative 
costs are split equally between the State and federal government. Participants must meet 
income and resource requirements. The minimum federal SNAP benefit is $24 per month. 
Through December 2025, the average SNAP benefit provided to Maryland households was 
approximately $337 per month. 
 
Maryland provides a State supplemental benefit for households with a member who is at 
least 60 years old to ensure these households receive a total benefit of $50 per month.  
In December 2025, there were approximately 30,832 monthly recipients of the 
State supplemental benefit. An average monthly payment of approximately $25 was 
distributed to ensure these households received a total benefit of $50 per month. 
 
Maryland Energy Assistance Program 
 
The Office of Home Energy Programs within DHS administers MEAP to assist the 
State’s vulnerable populations pay their heating bills, minimize crises, and make heating 
costs more affordable. Benefits include utility and fossil fuel payments, the Utility Service 
Protection Program, referrals to weatherization services, emergency heating system 
repairs/replacement, waivers on utility fees, discounts on fuel purchases, and a gas 
arrearage component. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill conforms Maryland law with federal law by requiring a 
household to include an elderly or disabled individual to participate in the Heat and Eat 
Program, thereby ensuring compliance with federal funding requirements. Since the federal 
requirements went into effect on November 1, 2025, DHS advises that the department has 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 461/ Page 3 
already made necessary systematic and operational changes and can otherwise implement 
the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
 
DHS estimates that 108,136 households participating in the Heat and Eat Program do not 
have an elderly or disabled household member and are no longer automatically eligible for 
the federal SUA adjusted SNAP benefit. However, these households may still obtain the 
SUA with manual verification of their heating and cooling expenses. 
 
DHS advises that, in absence of the bill, State general funds may be required to ensure 
these households continue to receive a higher monthly SNAP benefit through the  
Heat and Eat Program. The average monthly reduction per household is $83. Therefore, 
should general funds be required to continue to provide the benefit under State law for 
those households, DHS general fund expenditures increase by approximately  
$107.7 million annually. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that it is not clear if, in absence of the bill, 
DHS would be required to provide a higher monthly SNAP benefit to households that no 
longer qualify for SUA under OBBBA. However, no funds are included in the fiscal 2027 
budget as introduced for this purpose.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 17, 2026 
Third Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
me/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3