START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 477 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 477 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Civil Actions - Real Estate Appraisals - Statute of Limitations 
 
 
This bill, subject to specified exceptions, establishes a statute of limitations for a civil 
action for damages against a person for an alleged act or omission related to the 
performance, review, supervision, or management of a real estate “appraisal,” regardless 
of whether the appraisal is in connection with a “federally related transaction.” A civil 
action to which the bill applies must be filed within the earlier of (1) two years after the 
date the complainant knew or reasonably should have known of the act or omission or 
(2) four years after the date when the performance, review, supervision, or management of 
an appraisal, as applicable, was provided or should have been provided. The bill applies 
prospectively only and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or 
application to any cause of action accruing before the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Appraisal” means an analysis, a conclusion, or an opinion about the nature, quality, utility, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 477/ Page 2 
or value of interests in or aspects of identified real estate. “Appraisal” includes a valuation 
appraisal, an analysis assignment, and a review assignment. “Appraisal” does not include 
an opinion provided to a potential seller or third party by a person licensed under Title 17 
of the Business Occupations and Professions Article (real estate brokers) about the 
recommended listing price or recommended purchase price of real estate, provided that the 
opinion is not referred to as an appraisal. 
 
“Federally related transaction” has the meaning stated in the federal Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989. 
 
Exceptions 
 
The bill does not apply (1) to administrative actions of the Commission of Real Estate 
Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies, and Home Inspectors or (2) if knowledge 
of the civil action was concealed by fraud. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Civil Statutes of Limitation – In General 
 
In general, the statute of limitations for a civil action requires that a civil action must be 
filed within three years from the date it accrues unless another statutory provision permits 
a different period of time within which an action can be commenced. The “discovery rule” 
is applicable generally in all actions, and the cause of action accrues when the claimant in 
fact knew or reasonably should have known of the wrong. Poffenberger v. Risser, 
290 Md. 631 (1981). 
 
Federally Related Transactions 
 
The federal Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 defines 
a “federally related transaction” as any real estate-related financial transaction which (1) a 
federal financial institutions regulatory agency or the Resolution Trust Corporation 
engages in, contracts for, or regulates and (2) requires the services of an appraiser. 
 
Real Estate Appraisals 
 
In general, real estate appraisers provide estimates of the value of commercial and 
residential real property to their clients. Real estate appraisals are most often associated 
with the purchase of a home but are also used for a variety of other purposes, including 
estate planning and property insurance. Generally, an individual must be licensed or 
certified by the State Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 477/ Page 3 
Companies, and Home Inspectors in the Maryland Department of Labor before the 
individual may provide services in the State. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful effect on small businesses that 
are parties to these lawsuits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3