START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 557 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 557 
(Senator Beidle) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Gaming - Definition of "Own" - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “own” for purposes of governing the operation of video 
lottery terminals (VLTs) and conduct of sports wagering. “Own” does not include having 
a beneficial or proprietary interest of 25% or less in the property or business of an applicant 
or licensee if the interest:  (1) does not confer any voting rights, and (2) is held directly by 
a person or is held in trust for the benefit of a person, provided that the trustee does not 
exercise any voting rights or control over the applicant or licensee. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None or minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statute governing the operation of VLTs defines “own” as having a 
beneficial or proprietary interest of at least 5% in the property or business of an applicant 
or licensee. 
 
An owner or operator of a video lottery destination location may submit an application for 
a video lottery operation license. An owner includes any type of owner or beneficiary of a 
business entity, including a person having an ownership interest regardless of the 
percentage of ownership interest. 
 
An individual or business entity may not own an interest in more than one video lottery 
facility. A Senator or Delegate may not be an owner or employee of any business that holds 
a video lottery operation license. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 557/ Page 2 
A business entity applying for a video lottery operation license must provide specified 
information to the State Lottery and Gaming Control Commission (SLGCC), which 
includes the names of persons who own or control the business entity, the rights and 
privileges acquired by the holders of ownership interests and the terms on which ownership 
interests have been offered, among other requirements. SLGCC may waive the requirement 
to provide this information for an institutional investor. 
 
SLGCC must disqualify an applicant for a video lottery operation license for failing to 
prove by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant and each person who owns or 
controls the application are qualified. If a video lottery operation licensee contracts with 
another person other than a licensee’s employee to provide services relating to operating a 
video lottery facility, each person and each person who owns or controls the person or 
management and supervisory personnel and other principal employees of the person must 
qualify under the same specified standards for video lottery operation licensees. 
 
SLGCC must regulate sports wagering and the conduct of sports wagering to the same 
extent that SLGCC regulates the operation of VLTs and table games. Thus, specified 
requirements relating to governing VLTs, such as licensing and application requirements, 
apply to the authority, duties, and responsibilities of SLGCC, a sports wagering licensee, 
and a contractor of a sports wagering licensee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
 
caw/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2