START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 509 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 509 
(Senator Rosapepe) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Higher Education - Workforce Pell Grant Program - Implementation 
 
 
This bill generally implements the Workforce Pell Grant Program in the State by which 
federal Pell Grants may be awarded to students enrolled in a short-term program that helps 
prepare students for careers. The bill establishes a process by which the Governor, in 
consultation with the Governor’s Workforce Development Board (GWDB) and Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC), may approve programs, as well as criteria for and 
conditions of program approval. MHEC may adopt regulations to carry out the bill and 
may collect an application fee to complete an evaluation for short-term program approval. 
The bill also requires institutions of postsecondary education with approved short-term 
programs to report specified data to MHEC annually by June 30. MHEC must report a 
summary of the information received from institutions to the General Assembly annually 
by September 30. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. General fund expenditures increase by $130,600 at 
GWDB and $137,800 at MHEC beginning in FY 2027 for staff. General fund revenues 
increase by an indeterminate amount beginning FY 2027 to the extent MHEC collects fees 
associated with short-term program approval. Higher education revenues and expenditures 
at public institutions of higher education may be affected to the extent institutions seek 
approval to participate in the Workforce Pell Grant Program, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$268,300 
$243,100 
$254,300 
$265,700 
$277,300 
Net Effect 
($268,300) 
($243,100) 
($254,300) 
($265,700) 
($277,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 509/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures at locally-funded community colleges may be 
affected to the extent they seek approval to participate in the Workforce Pell Grant Program 
in the same manner as public four-year institutions of higher education.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “short-term program” is a program of study that is at least 150 hours of 
instruction and eight weeks, less than 600 hours of instruction and 15 weeks, and not a 
correspondence course as defined in federal regulations. 
 
The Governor, in consultation with GWDB and MHEC must determine whether (1) a 
short-term program offered at an institution of postsecondary education meets the 
requirements of the bill and federal law for Workforce Pell Grants and (2) to approve the 
short-term program as eligible for the Workforce Pell Grants Program.  
 
To disburse Workforce Pell Grant Program funds to a student in the State or to advertise, 
market, or inform students in the State about the availability of funds for a short-term 
program, an institution of postsecondary education must obtain (1) approval from the 
Governor and (2) a determination from the U.S. Secretary of Education that the program 
meets applicable requirements. For approvals to remain active, programs must provide 
information verifying compliance with requirements of the bill every two years. The 
Governor must revoke approval if the Attorney General or court of appropriate jurisdiction 
finds the institution of postsecondary education engaged in unfair, deceptive, or abusive 
trade practice related to the Workforce Pell Grant Program. 
 
A short-term program seeking approval must (1) provide an education aligned with the 
requirements of the federal Carl D. Perkins Career and Technical Education Act or an 
in-demand industry sector or occupation; (2) meet the hiring requirements of employers in 
the sectors or occupations identified; (3) lead to a recognized postsecondary credential that 
is stackable and portable across more than one employer or prepare students for an 
occupation for which there is only one postsecondary credential, as specified; and 
(4) prepare students to pursue one or more certificates or degrees at an institution of 
postsecondary education by ensuring receipt of academic credit applicable towards a 
certificate or degree requirements, as specified. 
 
The bill establishes a rebuttable presumption that the related technical instruction 
component of a federally registered or State-registered apprenticeship program offered at 
an institution of postsecondary education satisfies the enumerated requirements for 
approval. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 509/ Page 3 
An institution of postsecondary education seeking approval for a short-term program under 
the bill must provide any information requested by MHEC to verify compliance and 
documentation verifying the short-term program (1) has been offered for at least 
12 months; (2) has a completion rate of at least 70% within 150% of normal time for 
completion for each federal aid award year; (3) has a job placement rate of at least 70% 
after 180 days of completion for each federal aid award year; and (4) charges tuition and 
fees in compliance with the requirements of the Workforce Pell Grant Program. 
 
The bill prohibits institutions of postsecondary education that run approved short-term 
programs from (1) partnering, contracting, or affiliating with an entity other than a joint 
apprenticeship committee to offer instruction that is not accredited as specified; 
(2) partnering or affiliated with an entity offering student loans, lines of credit, or income 
sharing agreements for the short-term program (unless the loan carries 0% interest); 
(3) charging tuition and fees to any student that exceed the maximum amount of Pell Grant 
funds available for enrolled students as specified; and (4) offering the program using  
non-credit-bearing courses unless those courses transfer to at least one institution of 
postsecondary education regardless of program completion. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Pell Grants 
 
The federal Pell Grant Program, authorized by Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965, as amended, is the single largest source of federal grant aid supporting postsecondary 
education students. Federal Pell Grants usually are awarded only to undergraduate students 
who display exceptional financial need and have not earned a bachelor’s, graduate, or 
professional degree. Awards are based solely on financial need, which is determined by an 
institution’s cost of attendance, the student’s expected family contribution, and a student’s 
enrollment status (full-time or part-time). The maximum federal Pell Grant award is 
$7,395 for the 2026-2027 award year (July 1, 2026, to June 30, 2027).  
 
To continue receiving a Pell Grant, a student must (1) maintain basic eligibility criteria for 
financial aid; (2) fill out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid annually; (3) make 
satisfactory academic progress for financial aid as determined by the institution; and 
(4) maintain enrollment in an eligible course of study. A student may receive a Pell Grant 
for up to 12 terms. 
 
Workforce Pell Grants 
 
On March 6, 2026, the U.S. Department of Education issued a notice of proposed 
rulemaking to alter thresholds of income for Pell Grant Eligibility and establish the 
Workforce Pell Grant Program as authorized under the federal One Big Beautiful Bill Act. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 509/ Page 4 
The notice specifies that implementation of Workforce Pell Grants allow students to 
receive Pell Grants for eligible workforce programs that are 150-599 clock hours in length 
or an equivalent number of credit hours and that take at least 8 weeks but less than 15 weeks 
of instructional time to complete. The proposed regulations establish additional eligibility 
requirements for Workforce Pell Grants, including (among other things) requiring program 
approval by a Governor and the Secretary via specified processes, setting limitations on 
program tuitions, and requiring annual outcome metrics.  
 
Institution of Postsecondary Education  
 
“Institution of postsecondary education” is defined as a school or other institution that 
offers an educational program in the State for individuals who are at least 16 years old and 
who have graduated or left elementary or secondary school. It does not include any adult 
education, evening high school, or high school equivalence program conducted by a public 
school system or any apprenticeship or on-the-job training program subject to approval by 
the Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council.  
 
The definition includes public and private four-year institutions, community colleges, and 
private career schools. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although Workforce Pell Grants are authorized under federal law, 
State participation in the program requires a written process to approve programs, as noted 
above. As the bill essentially effectuates State participation in the program, the costs 
associated with implementing the program are due to the bill, not the federal authorization. 
 
Administrative Costs 
 
The bill requires the Governor, in consultation with GWDB and MHEC, to approve  
short-term programs for participation in the Workforce Pell Grant Program. The approval 
process requires extensive review of applications from postsecondary institutions and 
ongoing monitoring of program compliance. Both GWDB and MHEC require additional 
staff to carry out these functions. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $130,575 for GWDB and $137,755 for 
MHEC in fiscal 2027, which accounts for a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s 
June 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager 
at MHEC to lead coordination with the Governor on program approval and reporting 
processes in the State and one performance analyst at GWDB to lead coordination on 
performance auditing of approved programs necessary for approval. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 509/ Page 5 
 
GWDB 
MHEC 
Total 
Positions 
1.0 
1.0 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$120,740 
$127,920 
$248,660 
Operating Expenses 
9,835 
9,835 
19,670 
FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$130,575 
$137,755 
$268,330 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Fees 
 
At least some of these administrative costs are likely offset by additional general fund 
revenue from program approval fees levied by MHEC beginning as early as fiscal 2027. 
An estimate of revenues from program fees is not feasible at this time as the number of 
likely applicants and the amount of the fee MHEC may charge are both unknown.  
 
Institutions of Postsecondary Education 
 
Revenues may decrease at institutions of postsecondary education (which potentially 
includes public four-year institutions of higher education and Baltimore City Community 
College) that choose to seek Workforce Pell Grant Program approval for short-term 
programs in accordance with the bill’s provisions limiting tuition in approved programs. 
Expenditures at such institutions may increase to comply with annual reporting 
requirements and to pay any fees charged by MHEC. However, any revenue decrease or 
expenditure increase is a result of an institution’s voluntary decision to seek approval for 
the Workforce Pell Grant Program, not a mandate by the bill on such institutions. Higher 
education revenues also increase to the extent short-term program approval allows 
additional students to enroll with Workforce Pell Grant funding.  
 
Attorney General 
 
The Office of the Attorney General advises that it can likely absorb any additional 
complaints generated by the bill with existing resources in its Consumer Protection 
Division. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Revenues may decrease at institutions of postsecondary education 
(which potentially includes locally-funded community colleges) that choose to seek 
Workforce Pell Grant Program approval for short-term programs in accordance with the 
bill’s provisions limiting tuition in approved programs. Expenditures at such institutions 
may increase to comply with annual reporting requirements and to pay any fees charged 
by MHEC. However, any revenue decrease or expenditure increase is a result of an 
institution’s voluntary decision to seek approval for the Workforce Pell Grant Program, not 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 509/ Page 6 
a mandate by the bill on such institutions. Revenues may also increase to the extent  
short-term program approval allows additional students to enroll with Workforce Pell 
Grant funding. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor) advises that, 
although the bill creates a rebuttable presumption that registered programs meet the 
requirements of Workforce Pell, MD Labor only oversees State-approved workforce 
development programs and may be unable to determine if a federally-registered programs 
meet the same quality standards.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; Department of Social and 
Economic Mobility; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Maryland Independent College and University Association; Office of the 
Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); University System of 
Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
me/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6