START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 587 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 587 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Patient Safety Center Fund - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires, rather than authorizes, the Governor to include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $1.0 million to the Maryland Patient Safety Center (MPSC) Fund for 
fiscal 2027 and annually thereafter. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2027. General fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million 
annually beginning in FY 2028 to reflect the mandated appropriation. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase accordingly. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2028. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
$1.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 529 and 530 of 2022 require the Maryland Health Care 
Commission (MHCC) to designate a Patient Safety Center to (1) develop, coordinate, and 
implement patient safety initiatives across the State; (2) be a model for patient safety 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 587/ Page 2 
innovation and implementation in the State; (3) convene health care providers, patients, 
and families to improve the quality of care, reduce preventable and avoidable harm, and 
provide safe and equitable health care for State citizens; and (4) share information relating 
to best practices among providers and patients in the State. 
 
Chapters 529 and 530 also established the MPSC Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund 
administered by MHCC. The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to 
the fund, interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the 
benefit of the fund. The fund may only be used to subsidize a portion of the costs of the 
center so that the center may perform the duties specified in the bill. Further, expenditures 
from the fund may only be made in accordance with the State budget. 
 
MHCC may provide an annual grant from the fund to the designated center in the amount 
appropriated to the fund, plus any interest or other income distributed to the fund. Money 
expended from the fund for the center is supplemental to and is not intended to take the 
place of funding that would otherwise be appropriated to the center. 
 
Chapters 529 and 530 required, for fiscal 2023 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor 
to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $1.0 million for the fund. The 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2025 repealed the funding mandate beginning 
in fiscal 2026 and instead authorized the Governor to include at least $1.0 million in the 
annual budget for the fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires the Governor, beginning in fiscal 2027, to include 
$1.0 million in the annual budget bill for the MPSC Fund. The Department of Legislative 
Services notes that any legislation mandating funding of a program must be enacted before 
July 1 of the fiscal year before the first fiscal year in which the funding is mandated. As 
the bill takes effect July 1, 2026, the Governor cannot be required to include funding in the 
fiscal 2027 budget. Thus, the bill’s mandated appropriation cannot begin until fiscal 2028. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2028 to reflect the mandated appropriation; special fund revenues to and 
expenditures from the fund increase accordingly. 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced does not include funding for the MPSC Fund.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 587/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2026 
Third Reader - March 17, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3