START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 594 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 594 
(Senators Beidle and Gile) 
Finance 
 
 
Cannabis - Advertising - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters existing restrictions on advertising for cannabis licensees, cannabis 
products, or cannabis-related services by, among other things, defining “therapeutic or 
medical claim” and expanding the authorized signage that a standard dispensary licensee 
may place on the exterior of the dispensary. Among other changes, the bill also  
(1) establishes a new method for determining whether an advertisement or a proposed 
advertisement meets specified audience composition requirements and (2) requires the 
Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA), by January 1, 2027, to adopt regulations that 
establish at least one alternative method for determining audience composition. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  It is anticipated that MCA can implement the bill with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. State revenues are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use 
cannabis industry in the State by, among other things, establishing MCA as an independent 
unit of State government responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis. 
MCA’s responsibilities generally include promulgating cannabis industry regulations, 
licensing and registering cannabis businesses in the State, and enforcing the statutes and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 594/ Page 2 
regulations related to the cannabis industry. MCA is funded through distributions from 
sales and use tax collections from adult-use cannabis sales. 
 
Title 36, Subtitle 9 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article establishes restrictions 
related to cannabis advertising – the affected provisions under Subtitle 9 are discussed 
below. Under current law and the bill, “advertisement” means the publication, 
dissemination, or circulation of any auditory, visual, digital, oral, or written matter which 
is directly or indirectly calculated to induce the sale of cannabis or any cannabis-related 
product or service. “Advertisement” does not include packaging or labeling.  
 
Truth in Cannabis Advertising 
 
Under current law and the bill, an advertisement for a cannabis licensee, cannabis product, 
or cannabis-related service that makes a therapeutic or medical claim must (1) be supported 
by competent and reliable scientific evidence and (2) include information on the most 
serious and most common side effects or risks associated with the use of cannabis.  
Current law does not define “therapeutic or medical claim” under these provisions. The 
bill defines “therapeutic or medical claim” to mean a claim that explicitly states a product 
can diagnose, treat, mitigate, cure, or prevent a disease or condition.  
 
Prohibited Content and Intended Audience Restrictions in Cannabis Advertising  
 
Current law establishes several restrictions related to advertising for a cannabis licensee, 
cannabis product, or cannabis-related service targeting young people. These restrictions 
include a prohibition against advertising directly or indirectly targeting individuals younger 
than age 21. The bill repeals the prohibition against indirect targeting to individuals 
younger than age 21. Current law also prohibits an advertisement from containing a design, 
an illustration, a picture, or a representation that targets or is attractive to minors, including 
a cartoon character or a mascot or any other depiction that is commonly used to market 
products to minors, is modified. Under the bill, the prohibition against such an 
advertisement being attractive to minors is repealed.  
 
Under current law and the bill, advertising for a cannabis licensee, cannabis product, or 
cannabis-related service may not engage in advertising by means of television, radio, 
Internet, mobile application, social media, or other electronic communication, event 
sponsorship, or print publication, unless at least 85% of the audience is reasonably expected 
to be at least age 21. Under current law, this determination of audience composition must 
be made by reliable and current audience composition data. Under the bill, to determine 
whether an a advertisement or a proposed advertisement meets audience composition 
requirements, MCA must (1) accept the most recent and readily available audience 
composition data from the applicable media entity with which the cannabis licensee 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 594/ Page 3 
advertises or proposes to advertise and (2) by January 1, 2027, adopt regulations 
establishing at least one alternative method of determining audience composition.  
 
Restrictions on Outdoor Cannabis Advertisements 
 
Under current law and the bill, there is a prohibition against engaging in advertising by 
means of placing an advertisement on the side of a building or another publicly visible 
location of any form (including a sign, a poster, a placard, a device, a graphic display, an 
outdoor billboard, or a freestanding signboard). However, there is an exception to that 
prohibition, which authorizes a cannabis business to place exterior signage on the premises 
of the business for the limited purpose of identifying the business to the public. The bill 
establishes a second exemption for a standard dispensary licensee to place exterior signage, 
including a poster or a placard that meets specified size restrictions and is attached to the 
building, or a freestanding signboard that is immediately adjacent to the entrance of the 
licensed premises, for the limited purpose of (1) identifying itself as a licensed cannabis 
business and a Cannabis Trusted Source; (2) providing contact information for the 
dispensary and MCA, as specified; (3) providing information on what to do if an adverse 
event occurs; and (4) identifying an ownership or licensure designation (as approved by 
MCA).  
 
Prohibition Against Third-Party Use of a Cannabis Licensee’s Trademarks, Brands, 
Names, Locations, or Other Distinguishing Characteristics for Advertising 
 
Under current law and the bill, advertising restrictions applicable to cannabis licensees 
may not be avoided by hiring or contracting with a third party or outsourcing 
advertisements that do not comply with statutory advertising restrictions. Moreover, 
current law specifies that a cannabis licensee may not allow the use of the licensee’s 
trademarks, brands, names, locations, or other distinguishing characteristics for third-party 
use for advertisements that do not comply with statutory advertising restrictions. The bill 
specifies that the use of trademarks, brands, names, locations, or other distinguishing 
characteristics in a news article, interview, documentary, or other editorial content that is 
not intended as commercial advertising is not subject to this prohibition.  
 
State Expenditures:  MCA advises that it needs to hire an administrator – at a cost of 
approximately $85,600 in fiscal 2027, increasing to approximately $114,800 by fiscal 2031 
– primarily to evaluate whether an advertisement or a proposed advertisement meets 
audience composition requirements under the bill’s requirement that MCA accept the most 
recent and readily available audience composition data for the media entity with which the 
cannabis licensee advertises or proposes to advertise. MCA notes that it must still 
determine whether at least 85% of the audience is reasonably expected to be at least age 21 
and that it anticipates significant growth in the number of licensees over the next few years.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 594/ Page 4 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees that the bill’s alterations to 
cannabis advertising standards alone justify the need to hire additional staff. DLS notes 
that the anticipated growth of MCA’s regulated license base is not a result of the bill and 
that the requirement to determine whether at least 85% of the audience for cannabis 
advertising is reasonably expected to be at least age 21 is a requirement under current law 
that is unchanged by the bill. The bill merely adds specificity as to how the determination 
is made. Thus, DLS assumes that MCA can likely implement the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. To the extent that existing staff prove insufficient, MCA can seek 
additional resources through the annual budget process.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Many cannabis licensees are considered small businesses. Such 
licensees likely benefit from the less stringent restrictions and additional clarity added to 
the interpretation of existing cannabis advertising restrictions. Dispensary licensees may 
benefit from being able to use additional outdoor advertisement and signage.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Maryland 
Cannabis Administration; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4