START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 521 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 521 
(Senator Kramer) 
Finance 
Health 
 
Health Insurance - Material Changes to Provider Networks - Notification and 
Special Enrollment Period 
 
 
This bill expands the requirements on carriers regarding notification to enrollees about the 
termination of providers from provider panels. The bill alters when and how carriers must 
notify the Insurance Commissioner about a material change to their provider network, 
including requirements relating to updating a carrier access plan. The Commissioner may 
impose a specified fine on carriers that fail to timely file the required update. The bill 
requires carriers and health systems to provide notice of intent to terminate a contract. For 
specified contracts, carriers and health systems must adhere to the terms of the contract 
(including reimbursement terms and patient balance billing protections) for at least 90 days, 
with specified exception. The bill also requires carriers in the individual market to provide 
a special enrollment period (SEP) for an individual (or dependent) whose provider is 
terminated from the health plan’s provider panel. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload on the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) 
and the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange is minimal and absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. The bill’s penalty provision is not anticipated to materially impact 
State revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 521/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Carrier Notification to Enrollees Regarding Provider Termination of Participation 
 
Under current law, a carrier that uses a provider panel must establish procedures to notify 
an enrollee when the enrollee’s primary care provider is terminated from the provider 
panel. Notification must include the right of the enrollee to request and continue to receive 
health care services from the provider for up to 90 days after the notice of termination. This 
requirement applies to Medicaid managed care organizations as well as commercial 
carriers. 
 
The bill specifies that a carrier must also provide notice regarding the termination of any 
provider of behavioral health services for whom the carrier has received a claim for services 
performed on the enrollee within the preceding three months. The bill extends the right of 
the enrollee to request and continue to receive health care services to encompass care from 
these behavioral health providers for up to 90 days. The bill also requires that notice be 
given regarding the termination of a primary care or specified behavioral health provider, 
including if the provider elects to terminate participation from the provider panel. The 
notice provided to the enrollee by the carrier must include (1) contact information the 
enrollee may use to direct comments or concerns to the carrier regarding the provider’s 
termination; (2) instructions on how to notify the carrier of the need for transitional care 
by submitting a uniform form developed by the Commissioner; and (3) the telephone 
number and email address for the MIA office that receives and responds to complaints. 
 
Carrier Reimbursement  
 
Under current law, for at least 90 days from the date of the notice of termination of a 
primary care provider from a carrier panel, the primary care provider must furnish health 
care services to an enrollee who (1) was receiving services from the primary care provider 
before the termination and (2) requests to continue receiving services. A carrier must 
reimburse a primary care provider that furnishes this care in accordance with the primary 
care provider’s agreement with the carrier.  
 
The bill adds a provider of behavioral health care services to these provisions and 
substitutes the term “primary care provider” with “provider.” A provider that furnishes 
health care services under these provisions in accordance with a provider’s agreement with 
a carrier must accept as payment in full for the services payment from the carrier and the 
cost sharing from the patient, as applicable.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 521/ Page 3 
Carrier Access Plan 
 
Under current law, a carrier that uses a provider panel for a health benefit plan must 
annually file a network access plan with the Commissioner. An access plan must include, 
among other things, a description of the carrier’s network, the process for monitoring and 
ensuring network sufficiency, and factors used to build the provider network. A carrier that 
makes a material change to their access plan must notify the Commissioner within 
15 business days after the change occurs and provide a reasonable timeframe within which 
the carrier will file an update to their existing access plan. 
 
The bill specifies that, if the termination of a provider or health care facility from a carrier’s 
provider panel will result in a material change to the carrier’s access plan, the carrier must 
(1) notify the Commissioner of the impending termination at least 60 days before the 
anticipated termination date; (2) have a continuing obligation to update and supplement 
initial and subsequent notifications until the termination is effective or an agreement is 
reached with the provider or health care facility; and (3) submit an update to the access 
plan for review by the Commissioner within five business days after the effective date of 
the termination. 
 
However, the bill further specifies that notice of a material change due to the impending 
termination of a provider is only required if (1) the provider or health care facility provides 
advance notice of its intention to terminate participation; (2) the carrier provides advance 
notice to the provider or health care facility of the intent to terminate participation; (3) the 
current contract between the carrier and the provider or health care facility is set to expire 
within 60 days and no extension or renewal agreement has been reached; or (4) the carrier 
possesses other information that indicates that termination of the provider or health care 
facility is likely within 60 days. Also, carrier updates to the access plan are only required 
to include information related to the provider specialty types affected by the material 
change and, unless the network experienced a 10% reduction, the geographic areas where 
enrollees were affected by the material change. 
 
The bill authorizes the Commissioner to impose a $5,000 fine (per day) for each day 
beyond five business days that a carrier fails to file a required update to the access plan. 
 
Carriers and Health Systems 
 
The bill defines “health system” to mean (1) a hospital and any entity affiliated with the 
hospital through ownership, governance, membership, or other means or (2) a parent 
corporation of one or more hospitals and any entity affiliated with the parent corporation 
through ownership, governance, membership, or other means. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 521/ Page 4 
Under the bill, a carrier and a health system must provide each other with written notice of 
any intent to terminate a contract at least 90 days before the proposed termination date or 
the end of the contract period.  
 
The bill specifies that, for each contract between a carrier and a health system that is entered 
into, renewed, amended, or continued on or after October 1, 2026, if the contract is not 
renewed or is terminated, the carrier and the health system must continue to adhere to the 
terms of the contract (including reimbursement terms and patient balance billing 
protections for all health care services) for at least 90 days after the termination or 
nonrenewal. Except as otherwise agreed to, the reimbursement terms during the 90-day 
period must be retroactive to the date of termination or the end of the contract period. This 
requirement does not apply if the carrier and the health system agree in writing to the 
termination or nonrenewal of the contract and provide notice to each other regarding any 
intent to terminate or not renew the contract. 
 
Uniform Form for Requests to Continue to Receive Health Care Services 
 
The bill requires the Commissioner to develop a uniform form that carriers, providers, and 
health systems must use for requests to continue to receive health care services, as 
specified. 
 
Special Enrollment Period – Individual Market 
 
The bill establishes a new SEP for an individual (or their dependent) who is a patient being 
treated on a regular basis by or at a “provider” (which includes a health care practitioner or 
facility) and enrolled in a health benefit plan in which the provider is terminated from the 
provider panel. An SEP must be open for 90 days and begin on (1) the date of the 
termination of the provider from the health benefit plan’s provider panel or (2) if the 
consumer did not receive notice of the termination before the termination date, the date of 
the notice of the termination. An individual who enrolls for coverage (or enrolls a 
dependent for coverage) under this SEP must select if coverage must become effective on 
the first day of the month (1) following the date the health benefit plan was selected or 
(2) in which the termination of the provider became effective. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that disputes between carriers and large provider 
groups can lead to provider groups leaving carrier provider panels, which may leave current 
plan participants and future enrollees without access to a provider network that matches 
their health needs. Negotiation disputes between carriers and large provider 
groups/medical systems have increasingly threatened enrollee access to enough in-network 
providers. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 521/ Page 5 
Currently, a carrier must notify the Commissioner 15 business days after a material change 
to its network access plan. However, MIA advises that the administration needs to receive 
advance notification of potential material changes to carrier networks to be able to monitor 
the progress of negotiations and ensure that a carrier is taking all reasonable steps to 
maintain an adequate network. Likewise, should negotiations fail between carriers and 
providers and health systems, MIA advises that consumers need to be properly notified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Health 
Benefit Exchange; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5