START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 559 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 559 
(Senator Bailey) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Natural Resources - Recreational Striped Bass Catch - Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires every person who catches striped bass under a Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing license or registration to report the catch to the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR). The department must adopt regulations to implement the bill, that 
(1) authorize reporting methods that the department determines to be feasible; (2) to the 
maximum extent feasible, authorize a person to report the catch through a mobile 
application (“app”); and (3) establish a reporting method that is usable by persons who do 
not have Internet access. The bill takes effect January 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $905,600 in FY 2027. Future 
years reflect annualization and inflation. Special fund revenues may decrease annually 
beginning in FY 2027. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$905,600 
$621,800 
$629,900 
$638,100 
$646,300 
Net Effect 
($905,600) 
($621,800) 
($629,900) 
($638,100) 
($646,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 559/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Fishing License 
 
In general, a person who is age 16 or older is required to obtain a Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing (recreational tidal) license before fishing for finfish in the tidal waters 
of the State, including the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries, the State waters of the 
Atlantic Ocean, and the Atlantic coastal bays. The annual license fee for a Maryland 
resident is $15.00, while the fee for a resident seven-day short-term recreational tidal 
fishing license is $6.00. The annual license fee for a nonresident is $22.50, while the fee 
for a nonresident seven-day short-term recreational tidal fishing license is $12.00. DNR 
collects these fees and deposits them into the Fisheries Research and Development Fund 
(FR&D). 
 
Consolidated Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Boat License  
 
Under the provisions governing the Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license, DNR 
is authorized to provide by regulation for the issuance of an annual special Chesapeake Bay 
and coastal sport fishing license (which DNR calls a “consolidated Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport boat license”), which when permanently affixed to a boat (other than a boat 
hired to take persons fishing) authorizes any person on the boat to fish under the license, 
provided the person registers with DNR. The annual license fee is $50 for a resident and 
$100 for a nonresident.  
 
Registration Requirement 
 
A person must register with DNR if they fish on a boat that has a consolidated 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license affixed to it (and are not the holder of the 
license). There is no fee for the registration. The registration requirement also applies to 
persons fishing under certain other exceptions to the requirement to hold a Chesapeake Bay 
and coastal sport fishing license – those fishing in a free fishing area established by the 
department or on private real property bordering on tidal water as an owner or tenant of the 
property, or a spouse or an immediate family member who resides on the property with the 
owner or tenant. 
 
Reporting 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 520 of 2024, every person licensed under the Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing license provisions must submit any report DNR requires in accordance 
with department regulations. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 559/ Page 3 
Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Fishing License Pilot Program 
 
Chapters 409 and 410 of 2022 established a Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Fishing 
License Pilot Program in DNR. The purpose of the pilot program is to (1) collect contact 
information and demographic data of individuals fishing under a consolidated 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license; (2) collect information regarding the 
number of trips taken and fish caught and released under a consolidated Chesapeake Bay 
and coastal sport boat license; and (3) improve compliance with the provision under the 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license statute that requires certain individuals 
authorized to fish without a license (including those fishing on a boat that has a 
consolidated Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license affixed to it) to register with 
DNR.  
 
The department must track monthly costs associated with implementing the pilot program, 
and each December 1, for the duration of the program, report recommendations on 
expected funding needed to grow and establish the program as a permanent program, to 
the Governor and the General Assembly. The provisions of Chapters 409 and 410 that 
establish the pilot program terminate June 30, 2027. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $905,634 in 
fiscal 2027, at least $621,825 in fiscal 2028, and by similar ongoing minimum amounts in 
future years, for DNR to establish a reporting system to support the bill’s requirement that 
every person who catches striped bass under a Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing 
license or registration report the catch to the department. This estimate accounts for the 
bill’s January 1, 2027 effective date, and assumes certain expenses are incurred prior to 
that date to establish the reporting system. The costs are assumed to be covered by general 
funds, due to limited availability of special funds for fisheries management. The estimate 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
It accounts for: 
 
 
DNR hiring (1) one natural resources biologist – starting July 2026 – to oversee the 
development and maintenance of the reporting system, outreach to recreational 
anglers, and analysis of data collected for use in striped bass management and  
(2) one administrative specialist – starting January 2027 – to assist the natural 
resources biologist, coordinate processing of paper reports submitted by persons 
without Internet access, and assist with data quality assurance and control; 
 
costs for in-state outreach travel, signage at popular fishing sites and ramps, and 
other supplies ($50,000 annually); 
 
development costs to modify DNR’s MD Outdoors licensing mobile app to be 
configured to receive mandatory reporting of striped bass recreational catch 
(one-time cost of $500,000); 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 559/ Page 4 
 
annual maintenance and data storage costs associated with data collection through 
the MD Outdoors licensing mobile app (at least $250,000 annually); and  
 
costs for data entry of paper reports submitted by persons without Internet access 
($150,000 annually). 
 
For additional context regarding this estimate being a minimum estimate, DNR indicates 
that configuring the MD Outdoors app for reporting of striped bass catch will provide the 
department a certain level of data collection ability, but development of an independent, 
more comprehensive, and high-level catch reporting mobile app (providing more effective 
data for fishery management) requires development costs in the range of $2.0 million for 
development, and potentially upwards of $500,000 for annual maintenance and data 
storage. 
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Positions (New) 
2.0 
0.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$137,352 
$166,216 
Outreach/Supplies 
50,000 
50,000 
Mobile App Development 
500,000 
0 
Maintenance/Storage (Minimum) 
125,000 
250,000 
Data Entry 
75,000 
150,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
  18,282 
    5,609 
Minimum State Expenditures 
$905,634 
$621,825 
 
Future year minimum expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (FR&D) revenues may decrease to the extent the bill’s 
mandatory reporting requirement causes any individuals to choose to fish in another state 
to avoid the requirement and not purchase a Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing 
license. The extent to which this occurs, if at all, cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent the bill’s reporting requirement causes any 
individuals to fish in other states, small businesses involved in, or benefiting from, 
recreational fishing in the State (fishing guides that guide recreational licensees, for 
example) may be meaningfully affected by the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 559/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5