START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 533 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 533 
(Frederick County Senators) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Frederick County - Sheriff - Salary 
 
 
This bill alters the annual salary of the Frederick County Sheriff by establishing that the 
salary is $125,000 for calendar 2026, $175,00 for calendar 2027, and for calendar 2028 
and beyond, equivalent to 82.5% of the Frederick County State’s Attorney’s annual salary, 
including any increments and salary adjustments, as specified. Any change in the salary of 
the State’s Attorney during the sheriff’s term of office may not apply during the sheriff’s 
current term of office, but the changed rate takes effect at the beginning of the next term. 
Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the salary structure specified in the bill takes effect 
at the beginning of the next term of office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  Frederick County expenditures increase by approximately $33,700 in 
FY 2027 and by at least $92,000 annually thereafter. County revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The current salary of the Frederick County Sheriff is $125,000. The current 
salary of the Frederick County State’s Attorney is $234,993. Under statute, the salary of 
the State’s Attorney must be increased annually in a percentage equal to the average 
annual increment and salary adjustment given to Frederick County employees over the 
State’s Attorney’s prior four-year term. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the salary 
increase takes effect at the beginning of the next term of office. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 533/ Page 2 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public officer from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the Counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Frederick County expenditures increase by approximately $33,750 
in fiscal 2027, and by at least $92,011 annually thereafter. Pursuant to constitutional 
requirements, the salary is not altered until the next term of office. Absent additional 
information from the county, this estimate (1) reflects the next term of office beginning 
December 2026; (2) assumes that the Frederick County State’s Attorney’s salary increases 
by 3.5% annually per calendar year, with a related increase to the sheriff’s salary; and 
(3) includes fringe benefits as provided by the county. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 626 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2