START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 597 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 597 
(Senator Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Higher Education - Maryland Artificial Intelligence Partnership 
 
 
This bill (1) establishes the Maryland Artificial Intelligence (AI) Partnership in the 
University System of Maryland (USM) to develop a strategic plan and coordinate AI 
initiatives; (2) requires the partnership to establish Maryland Technology Extension Hubs 
in partnership with the Maryland Department of Labor (MD Labor); (3) establishes an AI 
Incubation Lab in USM to, in coordination with the Department of Information Technology 
(DoIT), assist State agencies to accelerate the responsible use of AI; (4) requires 
Morgan State University’s (MSU) Center for Equitable AI and Machine Learning Systems 
to support State agencies on questions relating to productive and ethical use of AI; 
(5) authorizes the Governor’s AI Subcabinet to request research from the center; 
(6) expands the Cyber Warrior Diversity Program (CWDP) to include training students in 
AI; and (7) expands eligibility for the Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship to include 
AI-related programs and renames the program the Emerging Technology Public Service 
Scholarship. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures at USM, DoIT, and MD Labor increase by an 
indeterminate but significant amount beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below; staffing 
costs for DoIT and MD Labor alone are assumed at $346,000 in FY 2027. Expanding 
eligibility for CWDP and the Cyber Public Service Scholarship has no effect on 
State expenditures, and the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can make 
updates to eligibility with existing resources. MSU can likely conduct research as may be 
requested under the bill with existing resources. Higher education revenues and 
expenditures increase to the extent the Maryland AI Partnership applies for and receives 
external funding. 
 
Local Effect:  Local workforce development boards and locally funded community 
colleges may collaborate with the Maryland AI Partnership or participate in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 597/ Page 2 
Maryland Technology Extension Hub activities; however, participation is not required, and 
any direct effect on local revenues or expenditures cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Artificial Intelligence Partnership 
 
The Maryland AI Partnership in USM must (1) connect, accelerate, and scale AI initiatives; 
(2) ensure alignment of the State’s AI efforts to prevent fragmentation; (3) leverage 
resources to increase the State’s AI-trained workforce and to integrate the use of AI in 
State government; (4) identify and pursue funding opportunities across all resources, 
including federal, State, industry, and philanthropic entities; and (5) establish 
Maryland Technology Extension Hubs in accordance with the bill. 
 
The bill specifies that there is a director in the partnership and requires the partnership to 
carry out its powers and duties in consultation and collaboration with State agencies, 
institutions of higher education in Maryland, the Maryland Small Business Development 
Center, and local workforce development boards. 
 
The partnership must develop, by December 1, 2026, a strategic plan that includes metrics 
for the core areas of AI literacy, workforce development, business development, and 
research and innovation. Annually thereafter, the partnership must submit a progress report 
to the Governor and General Assembly. 
 
Maryland Technology Extension Hubs 
 
In partnership with MD Labor, the Maryland AI Partnership must establish 
Maryland Technology Extension Hubs in strategic locations to (1) act as a single point of 
contact to connect small businesses with critical AI resources; (2) partner with 
organizations, including a community college, local employers, small business 
associations, and community organizers; (3) facilitate remote, cloud-based access to 
critical infrastructure, including leveraging the significant computing power of colleges 
and universities; and (4) provide AI skills training to individuals at no charge, including 
through courses and credit-bearing credentials. 
 
By December 15, 2026, the bill requires that there be, established on a pilot basis, at least 
one hub in each of three regions of the State. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 597/ Page 3 
Artificial Intelligence Incubation Lab 
 
The bill establishes the AI Incubation Lab in USM to assist State agencies to accelerate the 
responsible use of AI – specifically by helping State agencies to discover, develop, and 
apply prototypes and manage risk of AI solutions. In coordination with DoIT, the lab must 
support State agencies, as specified. The lab must also match State agencies with USM 
faculty, researchers, and students with expertise and support DoIT’s AI program to provide 
a proving ground for experimentation on how to apply AI technologies within 
State agencies. 
 
DoIT must provide policy guidance and support for integrating the work of the lab into 
State agencies and may provide funds to support the activities of the lab. 
 
Research Coordination 
 
The Center for Equitable AI and Machine Learning Systems at MSU is required to serve 
as a statewide resource and coordinating hub to support State agencies on the productive, 
secure, and ethical use of AI in the State. 
 
Annually by December 1, the bill authorizes the Governor’s AI Subcabinet to request that 
the center complete research. If such a request is made, the center must coordinate and lead 
the research, collaborate with other entities as needed, summarize the research conducted, 
and summarize any conclusions or recommendations resulting from the research. By 
December 1 of the year following any research request, the center must submit a report, as 
specified, to the Governor’s AI Subcabinet and the Joint Committee on Cybersecurity, 
Information Technology, and Biotechnology. 
 
Scholarships and Programs 
 
The bill renames the Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship to be the Emerging 
Technology Public Service Scholarship. Under the bill, the purpose of the program is to 
support students who are pursuing an education in programs that provide core skills directly 
relevant to cybersecurity or AI. The bill likewise expands eligibility for the scholarship to 
include students enrolled full time at an eligible institution in an approved degree or 
certificate program that is directly relevant to cybersecurity or AI. The bill makes other 
conforming changes to include AI as a part of continuing eligibility requirements, 
post-graduation work requirements, and program information distribution. 
 
The bill expands the purpose of CWDP to include training students in computer 
networking, cybersecurity, and AI. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 597/ Page 4 
Current Law:  For additional information on the status of AI in the nation and State, 
including governance of AI at the State level, please see the Appendix – Artificial 
Intelligence. 
 
Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship Program 
 
The Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship Program supports students who are pursuing 
an education in programs that are directly relevant to cybersecurity. 
 
Eligible Individuals:  An individual eligible for in-state tuition who is enrolled as a 
full-time student in an eligible institution in an approved degree or certificate program 
directly relevant to cybersecurity may apply if within three years of graduation. 
Chapters 208 and 209 of 2022 expanded eligibility to include part-time students who 
continue to be eligible for in-state tuition and take at least six semester hours of courses 
each semester leading to a cybersecurity relevant degree or certificate. An applicant must 
have maintained a cumulative GPA of at least 3.0 on a 4.0 scale. Further, an applicant can 
neither have received a federal CyberCorps Scholarship for Service nor have applied for 
but not received a federal CyberCorps Scholarship for Service. 
 
Eligible Institutions:  The award may be used at a public or private nonprofit institution of 
higher education in the State that possesses a certificate of approval from MHEC or is 
approved under operation of law. 
 
Scholarship Award:  A scholarship award may be used to pay for education expenses as 
defined by the Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) within MHEC, including 
tuition, mandatory fees, room, and board. A scholarship recipient must continue to 
maintain a GPA of at least 3.0 on a 4.0 scale. Each recipient of a scholarship may hold the 
award for three years of full-time study (six years for part-time students eligible under 
Chapters 208 and 209). 
 
Work Obligation and Repayment:  For each year a recipient receives a scholarship, the 
recipient must complete a one-year service obligation by working (1) in a local education 
agency, public high school, or community college; (2) in a unit of State, county, city, or 
municipal government; or (3) as a teacher at a public high school or community college in 
the State in a program that is directly relevant to cybersecurity (work obligations must be 
prorated for part-time students under Chapters 208 and 209). 
 
A scholarship recipient must repay MHEC the scholarship funds received if the recipient 
does not (1) earn credit as a full-time or part-time student; (2) complete an approved degree 
or certificate program that is directly relevant to cybersecurity at an eligible institution; and 
(3) perform the work obligation. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 597/ Page 5 
Generally, a recipient must begin repayment at any time during the period that the recipient 
is no longer performing the required work obligation. Also, repayment must be made to 
the State within six years after the repayment period begins and adhere to a repayment 
schedule established by OSFA. However, OSFA may waive or defer repayment if the 
recipient is unable to fulfill the work obligation due to disability or extended sickness. 
 
Cyber Warrior Diversity Program 
 
CWDPs are located at Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), Bowie State 
University (BSU), Coppin State University (CSU), MSU, the University of Maryland 
Eastern Shore (UMES), and the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) 
Training Centers to train students in computer networking and cybersecurity, including 
training to achieve specified CompTIA certifications. For fiscal 2020, and each fiscal year 
thereafter, the Governor must include an annual appropriation of $2.5 million for MHEC 
to provide grants to all of these institutions for their CWDPs. Grants must be in the amount 
of at least $10,000 per student at BCCC, BSU, CSU, SU, and UMES and $500 per student 
at UMBC Training Centers. This funding must supplement, but not supplant, any funds 
that would otherwise be provided for each institution. 
 
Under Chapter 578 of 2023, MHEC, in consultation with the Cybersecurity Association of 
Maryland, Inc., must, if applicable, expand the CWDP to accommodate any changes in 
certification trends annually by July 1. At the end of each fiscal year, any unexpended funds 
allocated by MHEC under the program must revert to MHEC to be allocated for the 
upcoming fiscal year and be used to supplement, but not supplant, MHEC required 
appropriations for the upcoming year. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase significantly beginning in 
fiscal 2027; a portion of these costs is readily quantified at $346,024 for assumed staffing 
needs at MD Labor and DoIT. Additional significant expenditures, likely totaling at least 
$500,000, are assumed for USM in fiscal 2027; given the timing, general fund support is 
needed to cover those costs that year. In future years, the USM costs may be partially 
defrayed by funding from other revenue streams. 
 
General fund expenditures are assumed to increase to cover costs incurred by USM to 
implement the bill, particularly given the required timeframes to do so. While the bill 
expressly authorizes the Maryland AI Partnership to “pursue funding sources across all 
resources, including federal, State, industry, and philanthropic entities,” this analysis 
advises that general fund support is needed to complete the early activities specified in the 
bill, including creating a strategic plan and establishing three hubs across the State by the 
December 2026 deadlines. Such costs are potentially significant. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 597/ Page 6 
Maryland AI Partnership and Maryland Technology Extension Hubs 
 
For illustrative purposes only, UMBC estimates at least an additional $500,000 in 
annual expenditures throughout USM beginning in fiscal 2027 to establish the 
Maryland AI Partnership and to support the establishment of Maryland Technology 
Extension Hubs in each of three regions of the State by December 15, 2026. These 
expenditures reflect the cost of hiring, within UMBC, one full-time employee to act as 
program coordinator (or program director, as specified in the bill), three full-time graduate 
assistants to complete the needed strategic plan and work to establish regional hubs in the 
State, and part-time student interns to support the work of the partnership. The estimate 
also includes $55,000 in annual contractual service costs for cloud-based systems to enable 
remote access to AI tools at hubs. Also, UMBC contemplates at least $100,000 in costs for 
partner USM institutions in other regions to conduct the work of establishing two more 
hubs elsewhere in the State. 
 
Assuming significant participation from USM on the scale estimated by UMBC, MD Labor 
advises that the agency requires at least one additional labor market economist in its 
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning, Labor Market Information team 
dedicated to AI-workforce analysis to be able to support the partnership in its establishment 
of the hubs. Current MD Labor analysts are fully subscribed by mandated federal and 
State reporting requirements and cannot absorb the extra responsibilities associated with 
coordination under the bill. Therefore, MD Labor requires additional staff to coordinate 
with the partnership, specifically to conduct research to identify areas where workers may 
be heavily impacted by AI, AI skills that are needed, or where there are areas of growth for 
employers. 
 
AI Incubation Lab 
 
Higher education expenditures at USM also increase, by an indeterminate but potentially 
significant amount, to establish the AI Incubation Lab. General fund expenditures may 
commensurately increase to the extent DoIT provides funding to support the activities of 
the lab. Assuming the lab is engaged in significant novel research and development efforts, 
significant staffing and equipment costs may be necessary – on a similar scale to those 
needed to establish the Maryland AI Partnership in USM. However, should the AI 
Incubation Lab merely connect existing research projects and resources with 
State agencies, USM may be able to leverage existing resources to establish the lab. Under 
either scenario, DoIT advises that providing policy guidance and support for integrating 
the lab’s work into State agencies necessitates hiring at least two new AI specialists. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 597/ Page 7 
Quantifiable Staffing Costs for the Partnership and Lab 
 
In addition to the significant indeterminate general fund and higher education expenditures 
at USM needed to establish the partnership, hubs, and lab described above, general fund 
staffing expenditures increase by a combined $346,024 at MD Labor and DoIT in 
fiscal 2027. This accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2026 effective 
date for staff at DoIT associated with supporting the AI Incubation Lab and expeditious 
hiring of support at MD Labor to enable the agency to support the creation of three regional 
hubs before the bill’s December 15, 2026 deadline to do so. This estimate includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. (As noted above, 
DoIT costs increase further to directly support the work of the AI Incubation Lab.) 
 
 
MD Labor 
DoIT 
Total 
Positions 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$107,771 
$210,136 
$317,907 
Operating Expenses 
      9,835 
    18,282 
    28,117 
Minimum FY 2027 GF Staffing Expenditures 
$117,606 
$228,418 
$346,024 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Research Coordination at Morgan State University 
 
MSU advises that it can likely manage the bill’s additional responsibilities with existing 
resources. To the extent research requests are extensive, time consuming, or require 
significant coordination and partnership beyond the existing resources of the center, higher 
education expenditures at MSU may increase to support research and complete required 
reports. However, this analysis assumes that the Governor’s AI Subcabinet considers the 
capacities of MSU’s Center for Equitable AI and Machine Learning Systems and the 
one-year reporting timeframe when making research requests such that the requests are 
feasible with existing resources. This analysis further assumes that the Governor’s AI 
Subcabinet can formulate research requests with existing resources. 
 
Cybersecurity Public Service Scholarship Program 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes a $1.0 million appropriation to the 
scholarship. In fiscal 2025, the program provided $519,958 awards to 44 recipients for an 
average award amount of $11,817. The amount of additional demand for scholarships 
generated by expanding the program to include AI-relevant degrees and certificates is 
unknown. To the extent that existing appropriations are insufficient to cover awards to 
newly eligible students, general fund expenditures may increase by $11,817 per award. 
However, this analysis assumes eligible students beyond the capacity of current 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 597/ Page 8 
appropriations to the program are added to the scholarship waitlist with no net effect on 
State finances. 
 
Cyber Warrior Diversity Program 
 
The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $2.5 million for CWDP. Expanding 
programs eligible to receive a CWDP grant has no effect on State funding for the program 
or the grant process MHEC uses to distribute funds, although the bill may facilitate 
additional applications for grant funding. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; Department of Commerce; 
Department of Information Technology; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Morgan State University; University System of Maryland; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2026 
 
caw/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 597/ Page 9 
Appendix – Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence – Generally 
 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a broad field of computer science that deals with the creation 
of “intelligent” systems that can reason, learn, and act autonomously. There are many 
different branches of AI, each with its own focus and set of techniques, such as machine 
learning, neural networks, robotics, expert systems, fuzzy logic, and natural language 
processing. AI research has been successful in developing algorithms for solving a wide 
range of problems, from game playing to conversation simulation. 
 
AI use has expanded significantly in recent years. Many of the largest technology 
companies have each developed their own AI systems and have integrated the systems into 
their respective companies’ products and services. AI’s ability to quickly synthesize and 
summarize vast amounts of data and apply the results have made it a useful tool in modern 
society while also raising questions about its use. The following list briefly describes a few 
of the impacts of and issues surrounding AI. 
 
 
Related to education, AI may have potential benefits to help tutor or otherwise 
provide additional resources to assist students in their studies. However, some 
students use AI to cheat on their schoolwork; 
 
Related to energy use, the significant power draw necessary to run the data systems 
that host AI systems has contributed to localized energy shortages and increased 
energy costs; 
 
Regarding environmental issues, these data centers require a significant amount of 
water for cooling and increasingly have been using freshwater resources for this 
purpose; 
 
Related to criminal justice, AI image and video generation systems can be used to 
make “deep fake” pictures and videos that may be difficult or impossible to 
differentiate from actual events; 
 
AI’s reliance on information from the internet has raised concerns regarding the 
accuracy of AI-generated content as well as copyright infringement and data 
privacy. 
 
Related to health, AI is being used to assist doctors in developing medical diagnoses, 
but is also being used by insurance companies to screen requests for care and claims; 
 
Related to labor and employment, the expansion of AI has led to concerns about 
employees being replaced by AI systems as a means to save money on labor costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 597/ Page 10 
Governance at the State Level 
 
The State defines AI as a machine-based system that (1) can, for a given set of 
human-defined objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing 
real or virtual environments; (2) uses machine and human-based inputs to perceive real and 
virtual environments and abstracts those perceptions into models through analysis in an 
automated manner; and (3) uses model inference to formulate options for information or 
action. At the State level, AI is governed primarily by the Department of Information 
Technology (DoIT) and the Governor’s AI Subcabinet. This governance structure was 
established by Chapter 496 of 2024 and, broadly speaking: 
 
 
requires DoIT to adopt policies and procedures, in consultation with the Governor’s 
AI Subcabinet, concerning the development, procurement, deployment, use, and 
ongoing assessment of systems that employ high-risk AI by a unit of State 
government; 
 
prohibits units of State government from procuring or deploying a new system that 
employs AI unless the system complies with the policies and procedures adopted by 
DoIT; 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct a data inventory to identify data 
that meets criteria established by the Chief Data Officer and that is (1) necessary for 
the operations of the unit or otherwise required to be collected as a condition to 
receive federal funds or by federal or State law and (2) in a form prescribed by the 
Chief Data Officer, including when the data is used in AI; and 
 
requires each unit of State government to conduct an inventory of systems that 
employ high-risk AI. 
 
Most recently, DoIT and the subcabinet have released the 2025 Maryland AI Enablement 
Strategy & AI Study Roadmap, which includes plans for studying opportunities, risks, and 
next steps associated with the use of AI in State services. Additionally, in November 2025, 
the Governor’s Office announced a State partnership with two AI companies to integrate 
certain AI systems into a portion of the State’s workforce. 
 
Other Recent State Laws and Policies 
 
In addition to the direct governance effectuated by Chapter 496, various other laws and 
policies address some of the issues posed by AI. 
 
Chapter 105 of 2025 established the Workgroup on AI Implementation to monitor issues 
and make recommendations related to AI, including (1) the regulation of AI used in 
decisions that significantly impact the livelihood and life opportunities of individuals in 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 597/ Page 11 
the State; (2) deployer and developer obligations related to labor and employment and 
protection of individual privacy rights; (3) protection of consumer rights; (4) current 
private sector use of AI; (5) general AI disclosures for all consumers; (6) enforcement 
authority for the Office of the Attorney General’s Consumer Protection Division; and 
(7) the impact of the use of AI in the determination of government benefits. The first report 
from the workgroup is due July 1, 2026. 
 
Chapter 747 of 2025 requires a carrier (i.e., insurance company or another organization 
that provides health benefit plans), pharmacy benefits manager, or a private review agent 
that uses AI, algorithms, or other software tools for utilization review (including working 
through an entity that uses such tools) to ensure that such tools are used in a specified 
manner. Notably, the Act specifies that an AI, algorithm, or other software tool may not 
deny, delay, or modify health care services and that carriers must submit in their quarterly 
appeals and grievance reports whether an AI, algorithm, or other software tool was used in 
making an adverse decision. 
 
Chapter 17 of the 2025 special session established an AI Evidence Clinic Pilot Program in 
the Administrative Office of the Courts to provide expertise in AI to the circuit courts and 
the District Court in the form of expert testimony on the authenticity of electronic evidence 
that a court determines may have been created or altered using AI. 
 
Regarding education, the Maryland State Department of Education has begun an 
AI initiative to develop policies and procedures for AI use by students and teachers. 
Additionally, Chapter 237 of 2025 specifies that, for school years 2025-2026 through 
2027-2028, certain requirements for the procurement and use of digital tools to assure 
equivalent access to technology for students with disabilities do not apply to digital tools 
that use AI. 
 
Federal Action 
 
The National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 became law on January 1, 2021. 
The aim of the Act is to promote U.S. leadership in AI research and development with the 
goal of accelerating the nation’s economic prosperity and national security through the 
development and use of trustworthy AI in the public and private sectors and preparation of 
the workforce for the inevitable integration of AI systems. This multi-agency initiative has 
included work by the U.S. Department of Energy, in consultation with the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology, to develop the AI Risk Management Playbook as a 
reference guide to support responsible and trustworthy AI use and development. Though 
not a binding document, the playbook addresses common AI risks and steps that AI leaders, 
practitioners, and procurement teams can take to manage data privacy and bias risks. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 597/ Page 12 
Other Executive Orders guiding and governing AI use of the federal level signed during 
the previous administration were revoked under the current administration. Moreover, an 
Executive Order signed in December 2025 generally expresses the federal government’s 
attempt to preempt State AI laws and regulations, directs certain federal agencies to 
penalize states that are found to not be in compliance with the preemption, and directs 
certain federal entities to prepare a legislative recommendation establishing a uniform 
federal policy framework for AI that preempts state AI laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 12