START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 512 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 512 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Law - Stalking - Penalties 
 
 
This bill alters existing penalties for stalking if a person committed the act and either (1) the 
person had an interim, temporary, or final protective order in effect against the person at 
the time of the offense in which the victim was the petitioner; (2) the person had a court 
order in effect against the person at the time of the offense prohibiting stalking involving 
the victim; (3) the person has a previous conviction in this State for stalking; or (4) the 
person has a previous conviction under the laws of another state that would constitute a 
crime of stalking if committed in this State. A violator who engages in stalking under these 
circumstances is guilty of a felony and subject to imprisonment for up to 10 years and/or a 
$10,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s 
incarceration penalty. Potential minimal decrease in general fund revenues from fines 
imposed in District Court misdemeanor stalking cases that shift to the circuit courts due 
the bill’s felony designation for specified stalking violations. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues from fines imposed in 
circuit court cases. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 512/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Stalking 
 
Section 3-802 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from engaging in “stalking.” 
“Stalking” means a malicious course of conduct that includes approaching or pursuing 
another where: 
 
 
the person intends to place or knows or reasonably should have known the conduct 
would place another in reasonable fear of serious bodily injury or death, of an assault 
in any degree, of rape or sexual offense as defined by §§ 3-303 through 3-308 of the 
Criminal Law Article or attempted rape or sexual offense in any degree, of false 
imprisonment, or that a third person likely will suffer any of these acts; or 
 
the person intends to cause or knows or reasonably should have known that the 
conduct would cause serious emotional distress to another. 
 
Stalking includes conduct that occurs (1) in person; (2) by electronic communication, as 
defined in § 3-805 of the Criminal Law Article; or (3) through the use of a device that can 
pinpoint or track the location of another without the person’s knowledge or consent. 
 
The prohibition against stalking does not apply to conduct that is performed to ensure 
compliance with a court order; performed to carry out a specific lawful commercial 
purpose; or authorized, required, or protected by local, State, or federal law. 
 
Stalking is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a 
$5,000 maximum fine. A sentence imposed for stalking may be separate from and 
consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any other crime based on the acts 
establishing the stalking violation. 
 
Protective Orders, Generally 
 
Only a “person eligible for relief” may file for a protective order under the Family Law 
Article. Statute specifies certain relationship requirements to qualify as a person eligible 
for relief. 
 
A person eligible for relief may file a petition for a protective order, alleging that the 
respondent has committed an act of “abuse.” For the purpose of protective orders, “abuse” 
means (1) an act that causes serious bodily harm; (2) an act that places a person eligible for 
relief in fear of imminent serious bodily harm; (3) assault in any degree; (4) rape or sexual 
offense, as specified; (5) false imprisonment; (6) stalking; or (7) revenge porn. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 512/ Page 3 
If a judge finds that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person eligible for relief 
has been abused, the judge may enter a temporary protective order to protect any person 
eligible for relief from abuse. In general, a judge may grant a final protective order if the 
judge finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the alleged abuse has occurred or if 
the respondent consents to the entry of the order. Among other relief, a final protective 
order may order the respondent to (1) refrain from abusing or threatening to abuse any 
person eligible for relief; (2) refrain from contacting, attempting to contact, or harassing 
any person eligible for relief; (3) refrain from entering the residence of any person eligible 
for relief; (4) remain away from the place of employment, school, or temporary residence 
of a person eligible for relief or home of other family members; or (5) remain away from a 
child care provider of a person eligible for relief while the child is in the provider’s care. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the Judiciary, there were 535 violations filed and 
28 guilty dispositions (convictions) in the District Court and the circuit courts for stalking 
in fiscal 2025. During fiscal 2025, Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
conducted zero correctional intakes and 24 probation intakes for stalking. Data is not 
readily available on how many of these individuals would have qualified for the penalty 
established under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Department 
of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2026 
 
sj/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3