START OF PAGE 1
SB0559/643327/1

BY: Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee

AMENDMENTS TO SENATE BILL 559
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in line 2, strike “Striped Bass Catch” and substitute “Fishery Data
Collection Program”; in the same line, strike “Reporting” and substitute
“Established”; strike beginning with “requiring” in line 3 down through “requiring” in
line 5 and substitute “establishing the Recreational Fishery Data Collection Program
in”; strike beginning with the first “to” in line 5 down through “access” in line 9 and
substitute “of Natural Resources to develop and implement a data collection system for
recreational anglers in the State”; strike beginning with “reporting” in line 9 down
through “bass” in line 10 and substitute “the Recreational Fishery Data Collection
Program”; and strike in their entirety lines 11 through 20, inclusive.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 1, in line 22, strike “the Laws of Maryland read as follows”; and after
line 22, insert:

“(a) In this section, “Program” means the Recreational Fishery Data Collection
Program.

(b) On or before December 31, 2026, the Department of Natural Resources
shall establish the Recreational Fishery Data Collection Program.

(c) The purpose of the Program is to develop and implement a data collection
system for recreational anglers in the State.

(d) In coordination with State and federal partners, the Department of
Natural Resources shall:
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
SB0559/643327/01 Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee
Amendments to SB 559
Page 2 of 2

(1) survey and collect data on recreational fishing reporting programs
in other states; and

(2) subject to available funding, enter into a contract for the
development and implementation of a data collection system for recreational anglers.

(e) On or before December 31, 2027, the Department of Natural Resources
shall report to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and
the House Environment and Transportation Committee, in accordance with § 2-1257 of
the State Government Article, on the findings of the Program, including a workplan
detailing the proposed development and implementation of a data collection system for
recreational anglers.”.

On pages 1 and 2, strike in their entirety the lines beginning with line 23 on page
1 through line 20 on page 2, inclusive.

On page 2, in line 22, strike “January” and substitute “July”; in the same line,
strike “2027.” and substitute “2026. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 6
months and, at the end of December 31, 2027, this Act, with no further action required
by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.”.
END OF PAGE 2