START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 588 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 588 
(Senator Simonaire) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Natural Resources - Complimentary Fishing and Hunting Licenses - Alterations 
 
 
This bill modifies provisions authorizing or requiring the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR) to issue complimentary angler’s licenses, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing 
licenses, recreational oyster licenses, and hunting licenses to specified individuals, 
including specified veterans, with the changes establishing consistency among the 
provisions. The bill also (1) requires that DNR compile specified statistics on hunting 
licenses, primarily complimentary licenses, and (2) establishes that commemorative 
lifetime hunting licenses that were issued until December 31, 2011, are not transferable. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can be implemented by DNR with existing resources, and the bill’s 
changes to hunting and recreational fishing license provisions are not expected to 
materially affect license fee revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Complimentary Licenses 
 
The bill makes changes to provisions authorizing DNR to issue complimentary angler’s 
licenses, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing licenses, recreational oyster licenses, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 588/ Page 2 
and hunting licenses, that establish certain consistency among the authorizations, as 
follows: 
 
 
The bill makes existing authorizations for DNR to issue a complimentary angler’s 
or Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license to any official of the game and 
fish department of any other state also applicable to any enforcement officer of the 
game and fish department of any other state; however, the bill limits the 
authorizations only to officials and enforcement officers of other states that 
reciprocally offer a complimentary angler’s or sport fishing license, respectively. 
These changes are consistent with a similar existing authorization for DNR to issue 
complimentary hunting licenses to officials and enforcement officers of the game 
and fish department of another state which reciprocally offers complimentary 
hunting licenses. 
 
 
Similar to existing authorizations for DNR to issue lifetime complimentary angler’s, 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sportfishing, and hunting licenses to specified resident 
and nonresident veterans, the bill authorizes DNR to issue a complimentary 
recreational oyster license to any resident of any other state who certifies that the 
person is (1) a former prisoner of war; (2) an American veteran who the  
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) determines is unemployable; or  
(3) a 100% service-connected disabled American veteran. The nonresident’s state 
must extend reciprocal privileges to former prisoners of war, American veterans 
who the VA determines are unemployable, or 100% service-connected disabled 
American veterans. This authorization is in addition to a similar existing 
complimentary recreational oyster license available to residents, and the bill 
(1) establishes that DNR is authorized, rather than required, to issue the 
complimentary license to residents and (2) makes both the resident and nonresident 
licenses lifetime licenses and nontransferable. 
 
 
The bill clarifies under the complimentary Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport 
fishing, recreational oyster, and hunting license provisions that the complimentary 
licenses are issued without a fee. 
 
 
The bill also establishes that DNR may issue an annual complimentary recreational 
oyster license without a fee to a person that is blind, regardless of whether the person 
is or is not a resident of the State (under current law, the department must issue a 
complimentary license to a resident who is blind). 
 
 
The bill establishes under the complimentary recreational oyster and hunting license 
provisions that not more than 20 complimentary licenses (of each type) for each 
state other than Maryland may be outstanding at any time (there are similar 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 588/ Page 3 
limitations on complimentary angler’s and Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport 
fishing licenses under current law). 
 
Statistics on Hunting Licenses 
 
The bill adds to an existing requirement that DNR compile statistics, after the close of the 
hunting season each year, concerning hunting license sales. The bill requires that statistics 
be compiled annually after each hunting season concerning: 
 
 
the number of annual complimentary hunting licenses issued for the previous 
season, including the names, occupations, and states of residence of the persons who 
were issued the annual complimentary hunting licenses; 
 
the number of lifetime complimentary hunting licenses issued for the previous 
season and in total, including the names, eligibility categories, and states of 
residence of the persons who were issued the lifetime complimentary hunting 
licenses; and 
 
the total number of hunting licenses that are no longer issued by the department that 
remain valid. 
 
Commemorative Lifetime Hunting Licenses 
 
The bill establishes that commemorative lifetime hunting licenses – which DNR was 
required to issue, pursuant to Chapter 367 of 2010, until December 31, 2011 – are not 
transferable, except for the initial sale by a nonprofit organization. The bill repeals 
provisions governing the initial sale of the licenses by nonprofit organizations and the use 
of the proceeds. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Complimentary Licenses 
 
 
Angler’s, Sport Fishing, and Hunting Licenses  
 
DNR is authorized to issue annually a complimentary angler’s license, Chesapeake Bay 
and coastal sport fishing license, and/or hunting license to the President of the 
United States, the governor of any state, and any official of the game and fish department 
of any other state. DNR may also issue an annual complimentary hunting license to an 
enforcement officer of the game and fish management agency of another state, but in the 
case of both officials and enforcement officers of a game and fish management agency of 
another state, the other state must reciprocally offer complimentary hunting licenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 588/ Page 4 
DNR is also authorized to issue lifetime complimentary angler’s, Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing, and hunting licenses to residents and nonresidents who certify that 
they are (1) a former prisoner of war; (2) an American veteran who the VA determines is 
unemployable; or (3) a 100% service-connected disabled American veteran. However, a 
nonresident’s state of residence must extend similar privileges to Maryland residents. 
 
The complimentary licenses are nontransferable. Statute clarifies that a complimentary 
angler’s license is issued without a fee. 
 
For complimentary angler’s and Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing licenses, not 
more than 20 complimentary licenses (of each type) for each state other than Maryland 
must be outstanding at any time. 
 
 
Recreational Oyster License  
 
Chapter 518 of 2024 established a recreational oyster license, available to residents of the 
State, and, as part of the statute, authorized DNR to issue a complimentary recreational 
oyster license to a resident who certifies that they are (1) a former prisoner of war;  
(2) an American veteran determined to be unemployable by the VA; (3) a 100% 
service-connected disabled American veteran; or (4) blind. 
 
Statistics on Hunting Licenses  
 
Statute requires DNR to compile statistics after the close of the hunting season each year 
concerning the sale of hunting licenses for the previous season, including the names, 
addresses, counties of residence, and ages of the persons who purchased the hunting 
licenses and the types of hunting licenses sold. 
 
Commemorative Lifetime Hunting Licenses 
 
Chapter 367 of 2010 established a commemorative lifetime hunting license and required 
DNR to issue a limited number of them to certain nonprofit organizations, consistent with 
eligibility criteria developed by the department, until December 31, 2011. Nonprofit 
organizations issued hunting licenses were authorized to market and sell the licenses in 
cooperation with the department, and all proceeds were required to be used by DNR to 
fund conservation law enforcement by the Natural Resources Police Force. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 588/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Veterans and 
Military Families; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5