START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 520 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 520 
(Senator Kramer) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Property Tax - Charter Counties - Application of County Tax Limitation on 
Public Safety Budget 
 
 
This bill authorizes the county council of a charter county that has either a property tax 
revenue or rate limitation to set, by a simple majority of the council, a property tax rate 
higher or to collect more property tax revenues than authorized under the county charter 
for the sole purpose of funding the approved county public safety budget. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential revenue increase in Anne Arundel, Montgomery, Prince George’s, 
Talbot, and Wicomico counties. County expenditures are not directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There are eleven charter counties in the State:  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, 
Cecil, Dorchester, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Talbot, and 
Wicomico counties. 
 
Five charter counties (Anne Arundel, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Talbot, and 
Wicomico) have amended their charters to limit property tax rates or revenues. In  
Anne Arundel County, the total annual increase in property tax revenues is limited to the 
lesser of 4.5% or the increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). In Montgomery County, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 520/ Page 2 
a real property tax rate that exceeds the real property tax rate approved for the previous 
year may only be adopted if approved by all members of the county council. In  
Prince George’s County, the general property tax rate is capped at $0.96 per $100 of 
assessed value. Special taxing districts, such as the Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission, are not included under the tax cap. In Wicomico County, the total 
annual increase in property tax revenues is limited to the lesser of 2% or the increase in 
CPI. In Talbot County, the total annual increase in property tax revenues is limited to 2%. 
However, in fiscal 2022 through 2026, the property tax rate set by the county council can 
exceed the charter limit by 1 cent. 
 
Counties may exceed the charter limitations on local property taxes for the purpose of 
funding the approved budget of the local boards of education. If a local property tax rate is 
set above the charter limit, the county governing body may not reduce funding provided to 
the local board of education from any other local source and must appropriate to the local 
board of education all of the revenues generated from any increase beyond the existing 
charter limit. This authority was adopted at the 2012 regular session to ensure that counties 
have the fiscal ability to meet education maintenance of effort requirements. In fiscal 2013, 
Talbot County became the first jurisdiction to exercise this new authority by establishing a 
2.6 cent supplemental property tax rate for the local board of education. In fiscal 2016, 
Prince George’s County became the second county to do so by enacting a 4.0 cent 
supplemental property tax rate to fund its schools. This authority has also been used by 
Montgomery County in fiscal 2017 and by Anne Arundel County in fiscal 2020. For 
fiscal 2024, three counties (Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and Talbot) imposed a property 
tax rate exceeding the charter limit. For fiscal 2025 and 2026, only Talbot County imposed 
a property tax rate that exceeded the charter limit. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill allows Anne Arundel, Montgomery, Prince George’s, 
Talbot, and Wicomico counties to raise property tax revenue in excess of each county’s 
revenue or property tax rate limit, provided the excess revenues are earmarked to the county 
public safety budget. However, the actual amount of any revenue increase depends on 
whether the county council sets a tax rate higher than authorized and the amount of revenue 
generated from that tax rate that is in excess of any county revenue limitation. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the additional revenue resulting from various real property tax rate 
increases in fiscal 2027 for the affected counties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 520/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Potential County Revenues from Property Tax Rate Increases 
Fiscal 2027 
 
County 
1/10 of $.01 
Increase 
1/4 of $.01 
Increase 
1/2 of $.01 
Increase 
$0.01 
Increase 
Anne Arundel 
$1,052,312 
$2,630,781 
$5,261,562 
$10,523,124 
Montgomery 
2,522,948 
6,307,371 
12,614,742 
25,229,484 
Prince George’s 
1,294,065 
3,235,163 
6,470,325 
12,940,651 
Talbot 
95,514 
238,785 
477,569 
955,138 
Wicomico 
94,234 
235,586 
471,172 
942,345 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Related Data and Budget Information 
 
Information on local tax rates and revenue collections for each county government is 
provided in the County Revenue Outlook Report. 
 
Information on public safety expenditures at the county government level is provided in 
the Local Government Finances Report. The report includes a summary analysis on a  
per capita basis as well as detailed spending charts (pages 231, 266, 275, and 285). 
 
Information on violent crime offenses in each county for calendar 2023 and 2024 is 
available in the State Aid Overview Report (page 22). 
 
A copy of these reports is available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB1041 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 520/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Dorchester, Frederick, Harford, 
Howard, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
 
caw/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4