START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 694 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 694 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Government, Labor, and Elections 
 
Human Relations - Violations of County Discrimination Laws - Complaints 
 
 
This bill establishes that filing a complaint with the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights 
(MCCR) satisfies specified prerequisites to commencing a civil action alleging the 
violation of a discriminatory act prohibited by a county or local discrimination law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is procedural in nature and does not materially affect State 
operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.    
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Government Article § 20-1202 – Civil Actions in Howard, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s Counties 
 
A person that is subjected to a discriminatory act prohibited by the county code may bring 
and maintain a civil action against the person that committed the alleged discriminatory act 
for damages, injunctive relief, or other civil relief. An action must be commenced in the 
circuit court for the county in which the alleged discriminatory act occurred within 
two years after the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory act. An action alleging 
discrimination in employment or public accommodations may not commence sooner than 
45 days after the aggrieved person files a complaint with the county unit responsible for 
handling violation of the county discrimination laws. An action alleging discrimination in 
real estate may commence at any time. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 694/ Page 2 
The court may award the prevailing party reasonable attorney’s fees, expert witness fees, 
and costs.  
 
State Government Article § 20-1203 – Civil Actions in Baltimore County 
 
A person that is employed by an employer with fewer than 15 employees and that is 
subjected to a discriminatory act prohibited by the county code may bring and maintain a 
civil action against the employer that committed the alleged discriminatory act for relief. 
An action must commence in the Baltimore County Circuit Court within two years after 
the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory act. An action may not be commenced sooner 
than 60 days after the aggrieved person files a complaint with the county unit responsible 
for handling violations of the county discrimination laws.  
 
In a civil action, the court may award the prevailing party injunctive relief and/or 
compensatory damages, including back pay. A prevailing party may not be awarded 
punitive damages. The court may award the prevailing party reasonable attorney’s fees.  
 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights   
 
MCCR is the State agency generally charged with the enforcement of laws prohibiting 
discrimination in specified areas. An individual alleging discrimination may file an inquiry 
with MCCR, which initiates the intake process. Generally, a complaint must be filed within 
six months after the date on which the alleged discriminatory act occurred; however, a 
complaint alleging an unlawful employment practice other than harassment must be filed 
within 300 days after the date on which the alleged discriminatory act occurred. A 
complaint alleging harassment against an employer must be filed within two years after the 
date the alleged harassment occurred. A complaint filed with a federal or local human 
relations commission within the aforementioned time periods must be deemed to have 
complied with these filing requirements.  
 
Once a complaint has been properly filed, the case is assigned to an MCCR investigator to 
determine whether there is probable cause that discrimination has occurred. If at the 
conclusion of the investigatory stage, MCCR believes there is probable cause that 
discrimination occurred, MCCR issues a finding and attempts to resolve the matter through 
conciliation. If an agreement to remedy and eliminate the discrimination cannot be reached, 
the matter is certified for litigation and may proceed in a number of ways, including being 
heard before an administrative law judge. Available remedies vary depending on the type 
of discrimination alleged; such remedies may, under certain circumstances, include 
injunctive relief, the imposition of civil penalties, and actual and/or punitive damages, as 
specified. 
 
Additional Comments:  In Rachel-Smith v. FTData, Inc., 247 F. Supp. 2d 734  
(D. Md. 2003), the District Court of Maryland dismissed a plaintiff’s claim of employment 
discrimination prohibited by the Prince George’s County Code because, despite initially 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 694/ Page 3 
filing a complaint with MCCR (which then cross-filed her claims with the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)), the plaintiff did not also file a complaint 
directly with the Prince George’s County Human Rights Commission (PGCHRC). 
Rachel‑Smith argued that existing work sharing agreements supported her good faith belief 
that after timely filing with MCCR, MCCR would automatically cross‑file her complaint 
with the EEOC, and the EEOC would automatically cross-file with PGCHRC. 
Rachel‑Smith cited 29 C.F.R. § 1601.70(d) that “where there exist agencies of concurrent 
jurisdiction, the EEOC may defer to the fair employment practice agency which would best 
serve the purposes of title VII or the ADA, or to both.”  
 
However, 29 C.F.R. § 1601.70(d), also states that “where both State and local fair 
employment practice agencies exist, the EEOC reserves the right to defer to the State 
agency only.” Accordingly, the District Court held that Rachel‑Smith was not justified to 
believe her claim would be cross‑filed with PGCHRC via the EEOC, thus her claims 
brought under the Prince George’s County Code were dismissed. 
 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights – Fiscal 2025 Annual Report 
 
According to MCCR’s Fiscal 2025 Annual Report, it received 113 complaints in 
Baltimore County; 
43 
complaints 
in 
Howard 
County; 
123 
complaints 
in 
Montgomery County; and 97 complaints in Prince George’s County. The majority of 
complaints alleged discrimination in employment and housing.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Baltimore and  
Prince George’s counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
Third Reader - March 24, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 24, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3