START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 678 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 678 
(Senator Folden) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Procedure - Forensic Genetic Genealogical DNA Analysis and Search - 
Affidavit for Judicial Authorization 
 
 
This bill alters the information that must be asserted and is required to be included in a 
sworn affidavit submitted by a law enforcement agent for the initiation of a forensic genetic 
genealogical DNA analysis and search (FGGS). Under the bill, a sworn affidavit must, 
among other requirements, include an assertion that (1) a short tandem repeat (STR) DNA 
profile has already been developed from the forensic sample, was entered into the 
statewide DNA database system and the national DNA database system, and failed to 
identify a known individual (as exists under current law) or (2) an evidentiary DNA profile 
suitable for direct comparison has already been developed from the forensic sample, failed 
to identify a known individual, and was not able to be entered into the statewide DNA 
database system or national DNA database system because the DNA profile failed to meet 
tier requirements, such as core locus criteria, for entry into the Combined DNA Index 
System (commonly known as CODIS) and at least 15 years have elapsed since the crime 
being investigated was committed. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 678/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  FGGS means the forensic genetic genealogical DNA analysis of biological 
material using single-nucleotide polymorphisms or other sequencing techniques to develop 
a forensic genetic genealogical (FGG) profile; a subsequent search using the FGG profile 
in a publicly available open-data personal genomics database or a direct-to-consumer 
genetic genealogy service to find individuals related to the source of the FGG profile; and 
a genealogical search using public records and other lawful means to obtain information in 
accordance with statutory requirements. 
 
Generally, FGGS may not be initiated without judicial authorization and without certifying 
before the court that the forensic sample and the criminal case meet specified criteria. If a 
FGGS is certified in accordance with specified criteria, the court must authorize the 
initiation of the FGGS. Chapters 830 and 831 of 2024 exempt from these requirements 
FGGS conducted solely for the purpose of identifying an individual who is deceased or the 
subject of a missing person report filed with a law enforcement agency in the State and 
whose whereabouts are unknow. 
 
As part of this process, a law enforcement agent must submit a sworn affidavit, with 
prosecutorial approval, asserting (1) that the identity of the perpetrator is unknown; 
(2) specified facts regarding the crime being investigated and the collection of the forensic 
sample to be subjected to FGGS; (3) an STR DNA profile has already been developed from 
the forensic sample, was entered into the statewide DNA database system and the national 
DNA database system, and failed to identify a known individual; and (4) that, unless the 
crime being investigated presents an ongoing threat to public safety or national security 
concerns, reasonable investigative leads have been pursued and failed to identify the 
perpetrator. The sworn affidavit requirements may not be construed to require that all 
investigative leads have been exhausted. 
 
FGGS is restricted to direct-to-consumer or publicly available open data personal genomics 
databases meeting specified notice requirements. There are informed consent requirements 
that must be met before law enforcement can obtain a DNA sample from a third party to 
assist in FGGS. Law enforcement may not collect a covert reference sample for a FGGS 
investigation from any third-party individual who has refused consent. However, 
investigators may seek authorization to obtain a covert sample from a third party if 
obtaining informed consent from the third party presents specified risks to the investigation 
and the third party has not already refused informed consent. The fear that a third party will 
refuse informed consent may not constitute the basis for seeking a covert sample. The 
person obtaining the informed consent must have training from a genetic counselor 
approved by the Office of Health Care Quality, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 678/ Page 3 
Law enforcement seeking to collect a covert DNA sample from a potential putative 
perpetrator or a third party must meet specified criteria, including (1) required notification 
to the authorizing court prior to collection of the covert sample; (2) with respect to a covert 
sample from a third party, an affidavit submitted by investigative authorities to the court 
that seeking informed consent from a third party presents specified risks to the 
investigation; and (3) a proffer by investigative authorities to the court of their plan to 
collect the sample without unduly intrusive surveillance and invasions of privacy. 
Law enforcement must also follow requirements regarding testing, use, and destruction of 
the sample. The law enforcement officer conducting the covert collection must report back 
to the court every 30 days about the progress of the covert collection, as specified. Absent 
a showing of good cause, efforts to collect a covert sample must cease after six months. 
 
DNA samples and genetic genealogy information must be destroyed in compliance with 
specified requirements. A genetic genealogist participating in a FGGS must turn over to 
investigators all records and materials collected in the course of the FGGS on the 
completion of a FGGS investigation and a genetic genealogist may not keep any records 
or materials. In addition, a genetic genealogist must ensure that specified records have been 
deleted or removed from any FGG website. Further, the prosecutor must retain and disclose 
any records or materials as required under the Maryland Constitution, U.S. Constitution, 
and the rules of discovery under Maryland Rules 4-262 and 4-263, but the prosecutor may 
not otherwise use or share the records or materials. 
 
A person who discloses genealogical or DNA information without authorization of a court 
order is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or 
a $5,000 maximum fine. A person who willfully fails to destroy DNA and genetic 
information as required is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. A person whose genetic genealogy information, 
FGG profile, or DNA sample is wrongfully disclosed, collected, or maintained in violation 
of statutory provisions has a private right of action under relevant State law guiding tort 
claims, and is entitled to minimum liquidated damages of $5,000 for a violation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 678/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4