START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 632 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 632 
(Senators West and Hester) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
State Government - State Elected Officials - Protection of Personal Information 
 
 
This bill establishes (1) the State Elected Officials Address Confidentiality Program to 
safeguard the personal information, including a home address, of specified elected officials 
and (2) the Office of State Elected Officials Information Privacy within the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) to administer the program. The bill authorizes a “protected 
individual,” or the office on behalf of the individual, to request that a person or 
governmental entity not publish the individual’s “personal information” or remove such 
information from an existing publication, as specified. The bill also establishes related 
requirements and procedures, and penalties for noncompliance. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $650,200 in FY 2027 for 
staffing and information technology (IT) costs; future years reflect annualization, inflation, 
and the termination of one-time costs. The bill’s penalty provision is not expected to have 
a material effect on general fund revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
650,200 
636,500 
665,800 
695,600 
726,000 
Net Effect 
($650,200) 
($636,500) 
($665,800) 
($695,600) 
($726,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill has no material effect on local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 632/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Selected Definitions 
 
“Office” means the Office of State Elected Officials Information Privacy in DLS. 
 
“Personal information” means a home address, home telephone number, mobile telephone 
number, personal email address, Social Security number, driver’s license number, federal 
tax identification number, bank account number, credit or debit card number, license plate 
number or unique identifier of a vehicle, birth or marital record, child’s name, school or 
daycare, place of worship, or a place of employment. 
 
“Personal information” does not include information that (1) has been publicly disclosed 
with the consent of the protected individual or (2) is relevant to and displayed as part of a 
news story, a commentary, editorial, or other speech on matters of public concern. 
 
“Protected individual” means: 
 
 
a current or former Governor of Maryland; 
 
a current or former Lieutenant Governor of Maryland; 
 
a current or former Attorney General of Maryland; 
 
a current or former Comptroller of Maryland; 
 
a current or former member of the Maryland Senate; 
 
a current or former member of the Maryland House of Delegates; or 
 
a spouse, child, or dependent who resides in the same household as an individual 
described above. 
 
“Publish” means to post or otherwise make available to the general public on the Internet, 
social media, or social networks. 
 
Personal Information of Protected Individuals – Request to Not Publish or Remove from 
Publication 
 
Governmental Entities:  A request made to a governmental entity to not publish or remove 
personal information must (1) be in writing and sent by certified mail or email; (2) include 
sufficient information to confirm the requester’s identity as a protected individual or certify 
that the office is making the request on behalf of a protected individual; and (3) adequately 
identify the document, posting, or other publication containing the personal information. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 632/ Page 3 
A governmental entity must promptly acknowledge receipt of the request and must (1) take 
steps reasonably necessary to ensure that the personal information is not published or (2) if 
already published, provide for the removal of the personal information within 72 hours 
after receipt of the request. 
 
Other Persons:  A request made to a person to remove the protected individual’s personal 
information from publication must (1) be in writing and sent by certified mail or email; 
(2) include sufficient information to confirm the requester’s identity as a protected 
individual or certify that the office is making the request on behalf of a protected individual; 
and (3) adequately identify the document, posting, or other publication containing the 
personal information. 
 
The person to whom the request is made must (1) remove the personal information within 
72 hours after receiving the request and (2) notify the protected individual or the office by 
certified mail or email of the removal. 
 
Enforcement Provisions 
 
Civil Remedies:  A protected individual or the office may bring a civil action against a 
governmental entity or a person for violating the aforementioned provisions. The action 
may seek declaratory relief, injunctive relief, or reasonable attorney’s fees. For an action 
against a person, a court may also award punitive damages if it finds that a person willfully 
refused to remove personal information of a protected individual, as specified. 
 
Criminal Penalty:  An individual may not knowingly publish the personal information of 
a protected individual if (1) the individual knows or reasonably should know that 
publishing the personal information poses an imminent and serious threat to the protected 
individual and (2) the publishing results in an assault in any degree, harassment, trespass, 
or malicious destruction of property. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
a maximum penalty of 18 months’ imprisonment and/or a $5,000 fine. 
 
State Elected Officials Address Confidentiality Program 
 
DLS must establish an Office of State Elected Officials Information Privacy and administer 
a State Elected Officials Address Confidentiality Program for protected individuals. The 
purpose of the program is to: 
 
 
enable State and local agencies to respond to requests for public records without 
disclosing the actual address of a program participant; 
 
encourage interagency cooperation in providing address confidentiality for program 
participants; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 632/ Page 4 
 
allow governmental entities and persons to accept a program participant’s use of an 
address as designated by the office as a substitute address; and 
 
provide a program participant with protections in addition to those provided under 
the bill. 
 
Protected individuals may apply to participate in the program in the manner required by 
the office. On receipt of an application, the office must determine whether the applicant 
qualifies as a program participant. 
 
Requests from the Protected Individuals and Protection of Records:  The office may 
request that: 
 
 
a person or governmental entity use a substitute address designated by the office as 
the program participant’s address; 
 
a program participant’s actual address be shielded from public inspection in a record 
maintained by a governmental entity; and 
 
real property records be shielded on behalf of a program participant who has an 
ownership interest in real property, in accordance with recordation procedures for 
participants of the Address Confidentiality Program administered by the Secretary 
of State (the bill makes some conforming changes to extend applicability to the 
participants in the State Elected Officials Address Confidentiality Program 
established under the bill). 
 
A person or governmental entity must promptly acknowledge receipt of the request, as 
specified, and take steps reasonably necessary to comply. 
 
A custodian of record may: 
 
 
maintain a copy of a record containing a program participant’s actual address in a 
separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate reason for access 
are denied access; 
 
permit public inspection of a record with the consent of the program participant; 
 
permit public inspection of a record with the actual address redacted from the 
record; or 
 
after notification to the program participant, permit public inspection of a record if 
the inspection will further a substantial public interest or a legitimate business need. 
 
A record of a program participant’s actual address and telephone number maintained by 
the office or a governmental entity is not a public record under the Maryland Public 
Information Act (PIA). 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 632/ Page 5 
Enforcement Provision:  A protected individual or the office may bring a civil action for 
declaratory relief, injunctive relief, or reasonable attorney’s fees against a person who 
knowingly discloses a program participant’s actual address. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Judge Andrew F. Wilkinson Judicial Security Act 
 
Chapters 414 and 415 of 2024 established the Office of Information Privacy within the 
Administrative Office of the Courts (AOC). Generally, a “protected individual,” or the 
Office of Information Privacy on behalf of the individual, is authorized to make a request 
for a person or governmental entity to not publish “personal information” of the protected 
individual. The Acts also establish the Judicial Address Confidentiality Program for the 
general purpose of safeguarding the actual address of a program participant in relation to 
public records or inspection, including the shielding of real property records, as specified. 
 
The bill’s proposed processes regarding the removal of personal information of protected 
individuals and Public Servant Address Confidentially Program are structured similarly to 
the provisions established under Chapters 414 and 415. 
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. OAG must post all such contact information 
on its website and in any Public Information Act Manual published by OAG. 
 
Under PIA, “public record” means the original (or any copy) of any documentary material 
that (1) is made by a unit or an instrumentality of the State or of a political subdivision or 
received by the unit or instrumentality in connection with the transaction of public business 
and (2) is in any form, as further specified. 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 632/ Page 6 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the 
Maryland Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for 
specified personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, 
personnel and student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial 
information, and shielded criminal and police records. In general, PIA requires denial of 
inspection for the part of a public record that contains the home address, personal telephone 
number, or personal email address of an employee of a unit of an instrumentality of the 
State or of a political subdivision unless (1) the employee gives permission for the 
inspection or (2) the unit or instrumentality that employs the individual determines that 
inspection is needed to protect the public interest. 
 
Discretionary Denials:  Unless otherwise specified, if a custodian believes that inspection 
of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to the public interest, the 
custodian may deny inspection to the applicant of that part of the record. PIA specifies the 
types of records and information that are eligible for discretionary denials, including 
documents that would not be available through discovery in a lawsuit. 
 
Procedure for Denial:  A custodian who denies inspection of a public record must, within 
10 working days, provide a written statement to the applicant that gives (1) the reason for 
denial; (2) if denying a part of a record on a discretionary basis, a brief explanation of why 
the denial is necessary and why redacting information would not address the reasons for 
the denial; (3) the legal authority for the denial; (4) a brief description of the undisclosed 
record (without disclosing the protected information); and (5) notice of the available 
statutory remedies. 
 
Recordation of Instruments for Address Confidentiality Program Participants 
 
As referenced above, the existing Address Confidentiality Program (unchanged by the bill) 
is administered by the Secretary of State to provide address confidentiality to survivors of 
threatened, attempted, or actual domestic violence, sexual assault, stalking, harassment, or 
human trafficking. Program participants who acquire an ownership interest in real property 
while participating in the program may request the shielding of real property records 
concerning the property. 
 
In general, to shield the real property records, a program participant must submit specified 
information to the clerk of the circuit court and the appropriate county finance office, 
including the deed or other instrument to be recorded and specified notice of program 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 632/ Page 7 
participation that includes, among other items, a substitute address designated by the 
Secretary of State to be used as the program participant’s address. The clerk of the circuit 
court must provide a copy of the notice to the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation (SDAT) and the State Archives. The notice is not a public record under PIA and, 
subject to limited exceptions, a clerk and any State or local agency that receives notice may 
not disclose the program participant’s identity information in conjunction with the property 
identified in the notice. 
 
The clerks of the circuit courts and AOC must establish uniform statewide procedures for 
recording deeds and other instruments under the Address Confidentiality Program. The 
procedures must, at a minimum, include provisions for (1) shielding recorded instruments 
that contain a participant’s actual address or identity information and (2) providing notice 
to the public of the existence of a shielded instrument and instructions for requesting access 
to the shielded instrument in accordance with statutory provisions that govern authorized 
disclosures for purposes of a bona fide title examination. All State and local agencies must 
similarly establish uniform procedures for maintaining related records, including tax, 
utility, and zoning records. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Under § 1‐114 of the General Provisions Article, a “person” includes an individual, 
receiver, trustee, guardian, personal representative, fiduciary, representative of any kind, 
corporation, partnership, business trust, statutory trust, limited liability company, firm, 
association, or other nongovernmental entity. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $650,238 in fiscal 2027 
for one-time online portal upgrades and related training programs for the State Ethics 
Commission (SEC), and for DLS to hire staff for the new office. These effects are discussed 
in more detail below. 
 
State Ethics Commission – Programming Costs 
 
The Public Ethics Law requires financial disclosure filers to disclose information related 
to ownership interests or lease interests in real property, employment of the filer and the 
filer’s spouse, and employment information of a dependent child if the dependent child’s 
employer does business with the filer’s governmental unit. SEC advises that in order to 
meet the bill’s requirements regarding the removal of a protected individual’s personal 
information upon request of specified entities, SEC must update its electronic financial 
disclosure system and related training programs. Therefore, general fund expenditures 
increase by $115,000 only in fiscal 2027 for SEC to hire contractors to update its electronic 
financial disclosure system and update its training programs. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 632/ Page 8 
Department of Legislative Services – Office of State Elected Officials Costs 
 
DLS advises that it cannot absorb the duties established under the bill with existing 
resources. Moreover, the bill requires that DLS hire a director of the office. Thus, to 
establish the new Office of State Elected Officials and administer a State Elected Officials 
Address Confidentiality Program, DLS must hire additional staff. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $535,238 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring (1) an 
office director to oversee the activities of the program; (2) three policy analysts to generally 
operate the program; and (3) an assistant attorney general to handle related legal issues that 
may arise. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, rent, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$489,534 
Other Operating Expenses 
    45,704 
Total FY 2027 SOS Expenditures 
$535,238 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of  
one-time expenditures. 
 
Other Effects 
 
Most agencies and local governments advise that the bill does not have a material fiscal or 
operational effect on them. However, several agencies responded that the bill may require 
additional resources or result in other operational impacts. Those responses are detailed 
below. 
 
The Department of State Police (DSP) advises that if the bill is intended to only protect the 
personal information of protected individuals from being posted on its website, then DSP 
can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. However, if the bill is intended 
to require it to remove personal information of protected individuals from previously 
produced documents relating to traffic accident or incident reports and related camera 
systems, then DSP advises it requires approximately $1.65 million in fiscal 2027 to procure 
software to retroactively retract previously released information and automatically blur 
vehicle license plate information from traffic cameras. For illustrative purposes only,  
DSP advises that it received 37,885 requests for motor vehicle crash reports and 
2,601 incident reports from the public during fiscal 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 632/ Page 9 
The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) advises that it downloads data from SDAT 
containing owner names, addresses, and premise addresses on a monthly basis.  
MDP advises that to verify program participant eligibility and ensure it meets the  
72‑hour response requirement, it must hire one database administrator at an estimated cost 
of $89,300 in fiscal 2027. The Maryland State Archives advises that during fiscal 2025, it 
shielded approximately 1,500 land records of eligible program participants under the 
Wilkinson Act and Safe at Home programs, and anticipates that, due to the substantially 
greater number of eligible participants under the program established by the bill, it must 
hire one archivist trainee at a cost of approximately $64,900 in fiscal 2027. 
 
The Judiciary advises that it does not anticipate a significant operational or fiscal impact 
on the District Court, but the circuit courts may experience a more noticeable impact 
because of the volume and types of data they handle; however, any such impact cannot be 
estimated without experience under the bill. The Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services advises that while it can implement the bill with existing resources, 
the bill does not explicitly provide for any exceptions for individuals who otherwise must 
register with the Maryland Sex Offender Registry. 
 
DLS cannot independently verify the aforementioned estimates without empirical data 
regarding the volume of protected individuals who request that their information be 
removed, the processes used by each individual IT system to maintain and protect that data, 
and greater clarity regarding legal interpretations of the bill’s requirements. To the extent 
State agencies must hire additional staff or procure contractual services to update their 
IT systems, general fund expenditures increase further beginning in fiscal 2027. However, 
any such costs cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Office of the Attorney General and DLS advise that the bill 
may violate the constitutional separation of powers doctrine. Specifically, the bill intrudes 
on functions exclusive to the Executive Branch as the proposed program is not exclusively 
a legislative activity. Additionally, the bill impairs the Governor’s constitutional budget 
authority by making a program that affects members of the Executive Branch a part of the 
Legislative Branch. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 632/ Page 10 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Cecil, 
Frederick, 
and 
Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Maryland Cannabis Administration; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Natural Resources; Department of Social and Economic Mobility; Maryland State 
Archives; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Governor’s Office; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans and Military 
Families; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Comptroller’s Office; Public Service Commission; Register of Wills; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Washington Suburban Sanitary 
Commission; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City Community College; 
Wicomico County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10