START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 676 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 676 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Criminal Law - Threat of Mass Violence - Penalty 
 
   
This bill reclassifies the crime of making a threat of mass violence from a misdemeanor to 
a felony. The bill retains the existing penalties for this offense. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in general fund revenues from fines imposed in 
District Court misdemeanor threat of mass violence cases that shift to the circuit courts due 
to the bill’s felony designation. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues from fines imposed in 
circuit court cases. Expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person may not knowingly threaten to commit or threaten to cause to be 
committed a “crime of violence,” as defined in § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article, that 
would place five or more people at substantial risk of death or serious physical injury if the 
threat were carried out. This prohibition applies to oral threats, written threats, or electronic 
threats, as specified. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment 
for up to 10 years and/or a $10,000 maximum fine. If appropriate, a court must also order 
a person convicted of this offense to reimburse governmental entities or persons for 
expenses and losses incurred to respond to the threat, as specified. A violator may be 
indicted, prosecuted, tried, and convicted in any county where the threat was made, the 
threat was received, or the consequences of the threat occurred. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 676/ Page 2 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy 
advises that it received information on four individuals sentenced to five counts of 
threatening mass violence under § 3-1001 of the Criminal Law Article in the State’s 
circuit courts during fiscal 2025. District Court data for this offense is not readily available. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2