START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 672 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 672 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Prince George's County - Expanding Access to Early Childhood Education and 
Child Care 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to develop an 
implementation and financing plan to expand access to high-quality early childhood 
education and child care in Prince George’s County for children from birth through  
three years of age. MSDE must consult with Prince George’s County and relevant State 
agencies. The plan must include an analysis of (1) the cost to parents, the county, and the 
State; (2) the workforce needs of early childhood education and child care providers to 
expand access; (3) the capacity of early childhood education and child care providers to 
serve more children; and (4) additional county and State revenue options to expand access. 
By December 1, 2026, MSDE must submit the plan to the Governor, the  
General Assembly, and the members of the Prince George’s County Delegation to the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in FY 2027 only for 
contractual costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
500,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($500,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County can consult with MSDE using existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 672/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State oversees a variety of early education services that are provided 
to Maryland children and their families in cooperation with local governments, local school 
systems, and private child care providers. The Division of Early Childhood coordinates the 
State’s early childhood care and education system and is composed of three subdivisions:  
(1) the Office of Child Care; (2) the Office of Early Learning and Instruction; and (3) the 
Office of Family Support Services. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that meeting the bill’s requirements necessitates 
contracting with an outside vendor, and accordingly anticipates general fund expenditures 
of $500,000 in fiscal 2027 for this purpose. The vendor’s responsibilities are to include 
leading required consultation efforts, as well as coordinating all activities related to the 
development of an implementation and financing plan.  
 
MSDE further advises that the vendor will need to conduct a comprehensive child care 
market rate analysis, which will include collecting tuition and fee data from licensed 
providers Statewide; segmenting rates by provider type, region, age group, and quality 
rating; and determining the percentile of market rates for scholarship reimbursement. These 
findings are necessary to inform the development and implementation of the plan. In 
addition, a survey of the early childhood workforce in Prince George’s County is needed 
to assess the current capacity to serve more children, along with an assessment of the unmet 
need for early child care and education in the county.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2