START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 697 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 697 
(Senator Feldman) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Election Law - Actions to Influence an Election - Social Media Platform 
Algorithms and Bots Purchased by Foreign Nationals 
 
 
This bill establishes (1) specified circumstances in which a social media platform is 
presumed to have made an independent expenditure if it knowingly and purposely alters 
its algorithm to amplify political content beneficial to a clearly identified candidate for a 
public State or local office for the purpose of influencing an election and (2) establishes 
penalties for making such an independent expenditure and failing to comply with 
independent expenditure reporting requirements. The bill also prohibits a foreign national 
from using a bot to (1) publish, distribute, or disseminate campaign material in the State to 
influence an election or (2) artificially amplify political content to users of an online 
platform to influence an election. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) can implement the bill’s changes with 
existing resources. Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase 
annually, beginning in FY 2027. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 697/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Social Media Algorithm Alterations 
 
 
Independent Expenditure Presumption 
 
The bill establishes a presumption that a social media platform has made an independent 
expenditure when it knowingly and purposely alters its algorithm to amplify political 
content that is beneficial to a clearly identified candidate for a public State or local office 
in the State, for the purpose of influencing an election, if: 
 
 
the alteration is made without (1) a legitimate business purpose or standard policy 
for editorial control and judgment before an election and (2) the cooperation, 
consultation, understanding, agreement, or concert with the clearly identified 
candidate; and 
 
the political content is not paid advertising for the clearly identified candidate or a 
political party, an agent of the candidate or a political party, or a campaign finance 
entity. 
 
The value of the presumed independent expenditure is determined by the fair market value 
of the cost to boost content on the social media platform based on (1) the factors used by 
the social media platform to determine costs and (2) the actual effect of the alterations to 
the algorithm. 
 
A social media platform may rebut the presumption by presenting sufficient contrary 
evidence and obtaining a declaratory ruling from SBE that (1) the alteration to the 
algorithm was not for the purpose of influencing an election; (2) the amplified political 
content was the result of organic virality; or (3) a legitimate business purpose or editorial 
control over content moderation was not the result of the advancement of a specific 
political viewpoint or ideology. 
 
 
Definitions 
 
“Social media platform" means a website or mobile application that (1) allows users to 
upload, create, share, and view content to share with other users and (2) enables users 
viewing content to react, comment, or share the content viewed with the user. 
 
“Political content” means content that (1) expresses opinions or viewpoints on a clearly 
identified candidate in an election that are designed to influence a voter to cast a vote or 
make a voting decision in that election or (2) is campaign material.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 697/ Page 3 
“Content” means text, images, videos, memes, graphics, and other expressive media 
created by a person that are shared or disseminated on a social media platform. 
 
“Legitimate business purpose” does not include a business decision to support or oppose a 
candidate due to the perceived commercial or financial benefit to the person if the candidate 
wins or loses the election. 
 
 
Investigation and Penalties 
 
A person that is deemed to have made an independent expenditure and willfully and 
knowingly fails to file an independent expenditure report is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding 300% of the amount by which the 
independent expenditure exceeded a specified contribution limit. 
 
The bill authorizes the State Administrator of Elections or the State Administrator’s 
designee to investigate a potential violation of independent expenditure reporting 
requirements by a person deemed to have made an independent expenditure by knowingly 
and purposely altering its algorithm to amplify political content that is beneficial to a 
clearly defined candidate for the purpose of influencing an election. The  
State Administrator or the State Administrator’s designee must (1) notify a social media 
platform that is subject to an investigation of the circumstances that gave rise to the 
investigation and (2) provide the social media platform ample opportunity to be heard at a 
public meeting of SBE. 
 
The State Administrator or the State Administrator’s designee may issue a subpoena for 
the attendance of a witness to testify, or the production of records, provided the 
State Administrator makes a finding that the subpoena is necessary to and in furtherance 
of the investigation. A subpoena issued under this authority must be served in accordance 
with the Maryland Rules. If a person fails to comply with a subpoena, a circuit court of 
competent jurisdiction may compel compliance on petition of the State Administrator. 
 
At the conclusion of the investigation and following the hearing, SBE must issue a public 
report of its findings and may (1) impose a civil penalty if SBE determines that the social 
media platform has unintentionally violated independent expenditure reporting 
requirements or (2) refer the matter for further investigation by the State Prosecutor if SBE 
has reasonable cause to believe that the social media platform has willfully and knowingly 
violated the bill’s provisions. 
 
A civil penalty must be assessed in the manner specified for civil penalties for violations 
of campaign finance laws and may not exceed (1) 100% of the amount by which the 
expenditure made by the social media platform exceeded a specified contribution limit or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 697/ Page 4 
(2) 100% of the amount by which the independent expenditure of which the candidate or 
political party was the beneficiary exceeded a specified contribution limit. 
 
A fine or penalty imposed must be paid by the social media platform that committed the 
violation unless a court or SBE finds that the candidate engaged in conduct that constitutes 
coordination, in which case the candidate may be held jointly and severally liable. A fine 
or penalty must be distributed to the Fair Campaign Financing Fund (which holds funds 
for public campaign financing of gubernatorial tickets under the Public Financing Act). 
 
 
Regulations 
  
The bill authorizes SBE to adopt regulations to carry out the above provisions. 
 
Prohibition on the Use of Bots by a Foreign National 
 
The bill prohibits a foreign national from using a bot to (1) publish, distribute, or 
disseminate campaign material online to a person in the State for the purpose of influencing 
an election or (2) artificially amplify political content to users of an online platform for the 
purpose of influencing an election. If SBE determines that there has been a violation of the 
prohibition, SBE may seek to remove the bot. 
 
“Foreign national” means (1) an individual who is a citizen of a foreign county;  
(2) a government of a foreign country or of a political subdivision of a foreign country;  
(3) a foreign political party; or (4) an individual, a partnership, an association, a 
corporation, an organization, or any other combination of individuals organized under the 
laws of or having its principal place of business in a foreign country. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Independent Expenditures and Electioneering Communications  
 
Independent expenditures in general – political spending by individuals or organizations 
without coordination with a candidate – cannot be limited or prohibited, pursuant to the 
2010 Supreme Court decision Citizens United v. FEC. Requirements for disclosure of 
independent expenditures, however, have been upheld by courts. Under Maryland’s 
disclosure requirements, independent expenditures are expenditures for public 
communications that are not made in coordination with a candidate or campaign finance 
entity and that expressly advocate the success or defeat of a clearly identified candidate or 
ballot question. Electioneering communications, on the other hand, do not expressly 
advocate the success or defeat of a candidate or ballot question, but refer to a clearly 
identified candidate or ballot question, are made within 60 days of an election, are capable 
of being received by a certain amount of individuals (with the amount depending on the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 697/ Page 5 
type of communication) in the constituency where the candidate or ballot question is on 
the ballot, and are not made in coordination with a candidate or campaign finance entity. 
 
Within 48 hours after a person makes aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements 
for electioneering communications of $5,000 or more in an election cycle, the person must 
file a registration form with SBE. Within 48 hours after a day on which a person makes 
aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements for electioneering communications 
of $10,000 or more in an election cycle, the person must file a report with SBE providing 
information on the person, the expenditures or disbursements, and persons who made 
cumulative donations of $6,000 or more to the person during the period covered by the 
report. Further, a person who files an independent expenditure or electioneering 
communication report must file an additional report within 48 hours after a day on which 
the person makes aggregate independent expenditures or disbursements for electioneering 
communications of $10,000 or more following the closing date of the person’s previous 
report. 
 
Bot Disclosure Requirements 
 
Under State law, person that uses a bot to publish, distribute, or disseminate campaign 
material online to another person in the State for the purpose of influencing an election 
must disclose in a clear and conspicuous manner on the campaign material that the person 
is using a bot. If a person violates this requirement, SBE may seek to remove the bot. 
 
Violations of State Campaign Finance Law 
 
Unless otherwise provided under State campaign finance law: 
 
 
a person who knowingly and willfully violates a provision of the law is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
one year; and 
 
a person who violates the law without knowing the act is illegal is subject to a civil 
penalty of up to $5,000. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase 
annually, beginning in fiscal 2027, to the extent fine/penalty revenues are collected. The 
extent of any increase cannot be reliably estimated.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 697/ Page 6 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Prosecutor’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6