START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 696 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 696 
(Senator Jackson) 
Finance 
 
 
Financial Institutions - Complaint Database and Analysis - Required 
 
 
This 
bill 
requires 
the 
Office 
of 
Financial 
Regulation 
(OFR) 
within 
the 
Maryland Department of Labor to (1) create and maintain a database on its website that 
includes complaints filed by State residents against financial institutions for unfair, 
abusive, or deceptive trade practices and (2) publish a quarterly analysis of the trends in 
and resolutions to the complaints. The purpose of the database is to provide transparency 
to consumers about products, issues, or companies about which a consumer has filed a 
complaint. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $400,600 beginning in FY 2027 for 
staffing and one-time information technology (IT) costs. Out-year costs reflect 
annualization, inflation, ongoing operating and maintenance costs, and the termination of 
one-time costs. Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
400,600 
128,200 
131,900 
135,700 
139,400 
Net Effect 
($400,600) 
($128,200) 
($131,900) 
($135,700) 
($139,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 696/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The database must be:  (1) updated regularly; (2) searchable by metrics 
that increase transparency and OFR’s ability to analyze the complaints; and 
(3) downloadable. OFR must redact any personally identifiable information (PII) from 
narratives in the database. 
 
Each complaint on the database must be written by the consumer in narrative form 
describing the consumers’ experiences that led them to file a complaint. 
 
Current Law:  The financial services industry in Maryland is regulated by OFR and the 
Securities Division of the Office of the Attorney General. Under the direction and authority 
of the Commissioner of Financial Regulation, OFR regulates State-chartered and 
State‑licensed financial institutions operating in Maryland. These include depository 
institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, trust companies, bank holding companies, 
and credit unions, as well as nondepository entities such as money transmitters, check 
cashers, consumer lenders, sales finance companies, installment lenders, mortgage lenders, 
mortgage loan originators, credit services businesses, debt management services providers, 
debt settlement services providers, consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies. 
 
OFR’s mission is to ensure that the citizens of Maryland are able to conduct their financial 
transactions through safe, sound, and well-managed institutions that comply with Maryland 
law, while providing a flexible, yet sound regulatory environment that promotes fair 
competition, encourages innovative business development, and supports the economy of 
Maryland. OFR supervises the activities of the financial services industry through periodic 
on-site examinations and off-site monitoring programs. Additionally, OFR provides 
assistance to consumers by investigating complaints of questionable business practices 
involving State-chartered, licensed, and registered financial institutions under its 
supervision and authority. 
 
OFR may undertake investigatory examinations to determine whether a person has violated 
any law, regulation, rule, or order over which the office has jurisdiction. The office has 
authority to enforce the laws and regulations against individuals and entities that are 
licensed by OFR, as well as unlicensed persons that engage in an activity requiring 
licensure. OFR may suspend or revoke a license, issue a cease and desist order, and impose 
a fine. 
 
Personally Identifiable Information 
 
The bill does not define PII as it relates to the database, nor is there a definition of PII in 
the Financial Institutions Article that applies to the bill. For information purposes only, 
Title 10, Section 13A of the State Government Article defines PII as any information that, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 696/ Page 3 
taken alone or in combination with other information, enables the identification of an 
individual including, among other things:   
 
 
a full name; 
 
a Social Security, driver’s license, and/or passport number; 
 
geolocation data; and 
 
a credit card, debit card, or a financial or other account number, as specified. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires OFR to create a searchable database for consumers 
to access the aggregated and anonymized complaint data. OFR advises that, while it 
regularly receives and processes consumer complaints, it does not currently have the 
capacity to allow consumers to view aggregated and anonymized data with existing 
resources. 
 
OFR further advises that all development, maintenance, and technical work required to 
create and support the consumer interface is conducted by the Maryland Department of 
Labor’s Office of Information Technology (OIT). OFR operates on a fee-for-service model 
with OIT, meaning OFR is responsible for compensating OIT for all hours and resources 
expended on any IT project. OIT estimates that the cost to develop a consumer interface as 
required by the bill would be $332,868 in fiscal 2027, and that annual maintenance costs 
would be approximately $50,000. Moreover, OFR advises that it is transitioning to a new 
data platform within the next two to three years, and there may be additional costs 
associated with ensuring the new platform complies with the provisions of the bill. 
 
OFR advises that additional staff is required to ensure that all PII is scrubbed from 
consumers’ complaint narratives, as required by the bill. According to OFR, it received 
1,142 complaints in fiscal 2025. All IT and staffing costs for the bill are paid from the 
Nondepository Special Fund. 
 
Therefore, special fund expenditures increase by $400,634 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one Administrative Officer I to oversee the complaint database, including removing PII 
from complaint data, and the cost of developing and maintaining the online database. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses 
related to the consumer complaint data portal. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$58,625 
IT Expenses 
342,009 
Other Operating Expenses 
      9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$400,634 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 696/ Page 4 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, including ongoing 
fee‑for‑service IT costs; and (3) termination of one-time IT costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4