START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 608 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 608 
(Senator Mautz) 
Finance 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Plan and Health Insurance - Pharmacogenomic 
Testing - Required Coverage 
 
 
This bill requires certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers), beginning October 1, 2026, to provide 
coverage for single-gene and multigene “pharmacogenomic testing” under specified 
circumstances. Beginning July 1, 2027, Medicaid, including managed care organizations 
(MCOs), must provide the same coverage. The bill limits the prior authorization 
requirements that may be applied to pharmacogenomic testing and establishes monetary 
penalties for noncompliance by carriers and MCOs. The Insurance Commissioner and the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must ensure compliance and establish a process 
for patients, prescribers, and laboratories to report instances of noncompliance. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 only from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Any 
additional workload on MIA can likely be handled with existing resources. As Medicaid 
and the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program generally cover 
pharmacogenomic testing, there is likely no material impact on State agencies. Potential 
minimal increase in general fund revenues from penalties beginning in FY 2027. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in health insurance costs for local governments that 
purchase fully insured plans to the extent such testing is not already covered. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 961/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Mandated Coverage of Pharmacogenomic Testing 
 
“Pharmacogenomic testing” means laboratory genetic testing, including single-gene and 
multigene panel testing, conducted to evaluate how an individual’s genetic profile may 
impact the efficacy, safety, or toxicity of medications. Coverage must be provided if  
(1) pharmacogenomic testing is ordered by a treating provider for an insured or enrollee 
with a diagnosis of depression or anxiety and (2) the treating provider is considering a 
medication change, dose adjustment, or augmentation and the medication under 
consideration has a known gene-drug interaction. 
 
Limitation on Prior Authorization Requirements 
 
A prior authorization requirement imposed for coverage of pharmacogenomic testing must  
(1) provide a clear and meaningful pathway for coverage that ensures timely access to 
coverage; (2) require only the minimum necessary documentation from the treating 
provider to determine whether the patient meets criteria for coverage; (3) allow a sufficient 
authorization timeframe following the collection of a specimen for the submission of a 
prior authorization request and claims; and (4) allow a prior authorization request to be 
submitted by a treating provider or a laboratory. A prior authorization requirement may not 
impose undue administrative burdens or delays that create barriers to care. 
 
Enforcement and Monetary Penalties for Noncompliance 
 
The Commissioner must conduct periodic audits and reviews of carriers to determine 
compliance and establish a process for patients, prescribers, and laboratories to report 
instances of noncompliance. 
 
A carrier that does not comply with the bill is subject to a monetary penalty of up to 
$10,000 per instance and an additional penalty of up to $1,000 per day that the 
noncompliance continues after notification from the Commissioner. The Commissioner 
may require a noncompliant carrier to submit and implement a corrective action plan within 
30 days of receipt of a request from the Commissioner. Failure to implement a corrective 
action plan may result in additional enforcement actions. A carrier subject to a penalty may 
request an administrative hearing under the Administrative Procedure Act. 
 
Medicaid 
 
Beginning July 1, 2027, Medicaid, including MCOs, must provide the same coverage of 
pharmacogenomic testing in the same manner as carriers. MDH must conduct periodic 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 961/ Page 3 
audits and reviews of MCOs to determine compliance and establish a process for patients, 
prescribers, and laboratories to report instances of noncompliance. An MCO that does not 
comply with the bill is subject to the same monetary penalties as a carrier and the 
requirement to submit a corrective action plan, to be imposed by MDH rather than the 
Commissioner. An MCO subject to a penalty may request an administrative hearing under 
the Administrative Procedure Act.  
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that specified carriers must provide. Carriers must provide coverage for 
“biomarker testing” for the purpose of diagnosis, treatment, appropriate management, or 
ongoing monitoring of a disease or condition that is supported by medical and scientific 
evidence. “Biomarker testing” is the analysis of a patient’s tissue, blood, or other 
biospecimen for the presence of a biomarker, the results of which (1) provide information 
that may be used in the formulation of a treatment or monitoring strategy that informs a 
patient’s outcome and impacts the clinical decision and (2) include both information that 
is actionable and some information that cannot be immediately used in the formulation of 
a clinical decision. Coverage of biomarker testing must include, among other things, testing 
that is required or recommended through a warning or precaution for an U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration-approved drug to identify whether an insured or enrollee will have 
an adverse reaction. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered 
health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services 
in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care.  
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the 
State benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must 
be the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE.  
 
For additional information on mandated health insurance benefits in Maryland, please see 
the Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits. 
 
Under Medicaid regulations (COMAR 10.67.09.04), any Medicaid MCO that implements 
prior authorization must make a determination within 2 business days of receipt of 
necessary clinical information, but no later than 14 calendar days from the date of the initial 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 961/ Page 4 
request. For expedited authorization decisions, the MCO must make a determination and 
provide notice no later than 72 hours after receipt of the request for service if the provider 
indicates, or the MCO determines, that the standard timeframe could jeopardize the 
patient’s life, health, or ability to attain, maintain, or regain maximum function. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Penalties 
 
A carrier or MCO that does not comply with the bill is subject to a monetary penalty of up 
to $10,000 per instance and an additional penalty of up to $1,000 per day that the 
noncompliance continues after notification from the Insurance Commissioner or MDH, 
respectively. To the extent a carrier or MCO fails to comply, general fund revenues increase 
by an indeterminate but likely minimal amount beginning as early as fiscal 2027. 
 
Medicaid 
 
MDH advises that Medicaid currently covers pharmacogenetic testing. In calendar 2024, 
1,709 pharmacogenomic tests were provided to 1,075 Medicaid participants. MDH does 
not require prior authorization for testing for fee-for-service Medicaid participants; 
however, prior authorization is required by MCOs. As MDH assumes the current 
prior authorization process for MCOs complies with the bill’s limitations and 
pharmacogenomic testing is currently covered by Medicaid, there is likely no material 
impact on Medicaid. 
 
This analysis assumes that MDH can ensure MCO compliance with the bill through 
existing audits and reviews; review corrective action plans; impose penalties; and establish 
a process for patients, prescribers, and laboratories to report instance of noncompliance 
using existing budgeted resources. 
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is largely 
self-insured for its medical contracts and, as such, except for the one fully insured 
integrated health model medical plan (Kaiser), is exempt from most State health insurance 
mandates. However, the program generally provides coverage as otherwise required under 
State law. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) advises that pharmacogenomic testing 
is generally covered under the program when recommended by a treating provider after 
prior authorization. In calendar 2025, the program covered 1,967 total pharmacogenomic 
tests with potential use for depression or anxiety at an average cost per test of $209. Thus, 
there is likely no material impact on the program under the bill. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 961/ Page 5 
DBM notes that there is some potential for increased utilization of pharmacogenomic 
testing under the bill. Alternatively, there is also potential for decreased spending based on 
avoiding waste and adverse events through identification of responders and nonresponders 
to medications and optimizing drug dose. 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration 
 
MIA advises that it can likely conduct periodic audits and reviews of carriers to determine 
compliance; review corrective action plans; impose penalties; and establish a process for 
patients, prescribers, and laboratories to report instances of noncompliance using existing 
budgeted resources.  
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that the bill does not apply to the nongrandfathered 
individual and small employer markets. Should the bill be amended to apply to all markets, 
the State would be required to defray the cost of the new mandate to the extent it applies 
to the individual and small group ACA plans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 961 of 2025. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 961/ Page 6 
Appendix – Mandated Health Insurance Benefits 
 
 
Overview 
 
Fully insured, large group plans and certain individual plans must cover Maryland’s 
mandated health insurance benefits. These mandates do not apply to most individual or 
small group plans, public health insurance, or plans issued outside of Maryland. However, 
individual and small group plans and plans sold through the Maryland Health Benefit 
Exchange (MHBE) must cover federal essential health benefits (EHBs). Thus, the type of 
plan an individual is enrolled in generally determines which benefits must be provided. 
 
Most Marylanders Are Insured by Employment-based Coverage 
 
Maryland residents generally obtain health insurance from one of three sources:  
(1) employment-based coverage; (2) private coverage in the individual market; or 
(3) public health insurance provided by the State and/or federal government (i.e., Medicaid, 
the Maryland Children’s Health Program (MCHP), Medicare, and military-related 
coverage). In calendar 2023 (the most recent data available), more than one-half (53.9%) 
of the State’s population had employment-based coverage, more than one-third (34.1%) 
were covered by public health insurance programs, and 5.7% purchased coverage in the 
individual market. The remaining 6.5% of Marylanders were uninsured. 
 
State Regulation of Insurance Applies Only to Certain Plans 
 
Employment-based coverage is either fully insured or self-insured. A fully insured plan is 
a traditional model for health insurance under which an employer pays a fixed premium to 
an insurer and the insurer assumes all financial risk and responsibility for paying claims. 
Fully insured plans are most common among small to mid-sized businesses as they offer 
more predictable costs and less administrative burden. In a self-insured plan, the employer 
assumes all financial risk and pays claims directly, usually through a third-party 
administrator. Self-insured plans are more common among larger employers with the 
resources to assume the financial risk. 
 
The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act preempts states’ ability to require 
private employers to offer health insurance coverage and exempts self-insured plans from 
state insurance regulation. As a result, only fully insured plans are regulated by state 
insurance regulators. Thus, in Maryland, self-insured plans are not regulated by the 
Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) and are not subject to Maryland law. 
 
In calendar 2024, 2.58 million Maryland residents younger than age 65 were insured 
through commercial health benefit plans, of which 890,245 were covered by a fully insured 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 961/ Page 7 
plan and 1.69 million were covered by a self-insured plan. Thus, only about one-third 
(34.5%) of those covered through commercial plans were in fully insured plans subject to 
State regulation. Overall, only 17.4% of the State’s nonelderly population was covered by 
a plan subject to State regulation. 
 
Mandated Benefits Apply Only to Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
Maryland law requires insurers, health maintenance organizations, and nonprofit health 
service plans to cover more than 50 specific benefits. These “mandated benefits” apply to 
expense-incurred contracts that provide “hospital, medical, and surgical benefits,” which 
include non-major medical products and federally excepted benefits (benefits outside of 
primary medical coverage that are not subject to certain federal requirements). These 
include fully insured, large group plans (≥50 employees), individual grandfathered plans 
in effect on or before March 23, 2010, when the federal Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (ACA) was enacted, and limited or specialty plans such as fixed-indemnity plans. 
Maryland’s State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program is 
predominately self-insured and thus largely exempt from mandated benefits. However, the 
program generally provides coverage for these benefits as otherwise required under State 
law. 
 
Mandated benefits could apply to individual and small group policies. However, if the 
benefits go beyond those in the State benchmark plan (a reference plan that defines the 
minimum benefits that must be offered in the individual and small group markets in 
Maryland), the State must cover the cost. Thus, mandated benefits are not typically applied 
to those policies. 
 
Mandated benefits do not apply to Medicaid/MCHP, Medicare, the Federal Employees 
Health Benefits Program, or military/Veterans Administration coverage. Mandated 
benefits also do not apply to health benefit plans issued outside of Maryland – such as when 
a Maryland resident works for an employer based in another state and the plan is issued in 
that state. In that instance, the plan is subject to the requirements (and mandated benefits) 
of the state in which it is issued. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes mandated benefits for large group and grandfathered plans. For 
further specifics on mandated benefits, see Title 15, Subtitle 8 of the Insurance Article. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 961/ Page 8 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland’s Mandated Health Insurance Benefits for 
Large Group and Grandfathered Plans 
 
 Amino-acid elemental formula 
 Anesthesia for dental care 
 Biomarker testing 
 Blood products 
 Breast cancer screening 
 Breast prosthesis following a mastectomy 
 Child well visits and immunizations 
 Chlamydia screening 
 Cleft lip/palate treatment/management 
 Clinical trials 
 Colorectal cancer screening 
 Contraceptive drugs or devices 
 Diabetic equipment or supplies 
 Emergency room services 
 Fertility awareness-based methods 
 Fertility preservation due to medical 
treatment that may cause infertility 
 Gynecological care 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Human papilloma virus screening 
 Infertility benefits (including IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Laboratory services 
 Lung cancer screening 
 Lymphedema diagnosis, evaluation, and 
treatment 
 Male sterilization 
 Mastectomies 
 Medical foods 
 Mental health and substance use 
treatment 
 Morbid obesity surgical treatment 
 Osteoporosis prevention and treatment 
 Ostomy equipment and supplies 
 Physician services 
 Pregnancy and maternity benefits 
 Prescription benefits 
 Preventive services 
 Prosthetic devices 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Reconstructive breast surgery 
 Referrals to specialists 
 Second opinions and coverage of 
outpatient services 
 Smoking cessation 
 Surgical removal of testicles 
 Temporo-Mandibular Joint Syndrome 
treatment 
 X-rays 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Mandated benefits as of January 2025. Coverage of calcium score testing is required beginning 
January 1, 2026. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 961/ Page 9 
Application of Mandated Benefits in Practice 
 
Legislation is frequently introduced to add new mandated benefits. For example, 
Senate Bill 518 of 2025 would have required coverage for preventive screenings for 
ovarian cancer for individuals aged 45 and older. The bill would have applied only to 
commercial health insurance, specifically fully insured large group plans and individual 
grandfathered plans. Coverage would not have applied to self-insured plans, 
nongrandfathered individual or small group plans, plans issued in another state to a 
Maryland resident, or any public health insurance program (in the same way that current 
mandated benefits do not apply to these plans). 
 
Essential Health Benefits Apply to Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
The ACA requires nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 EHBs, which include items 
and services in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency 
services; (3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services; (6) prescription drugs; (7) rehabilitative and habilitative 
services and devices; (8) laboratory services; (9) preventive and wellness services and 
chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric services. 
 
Maryland law requires that EHBs be included in the State benchmark plan and in all 
qualified health plans offered through MHBE. Exhibit 2 summarizes the EHBs required 
as of September 2025. For further specifics, see MIA’s Essential Health Benefits Chart:  
Individual and Small Group Plans. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 961/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 2 
Essential Health Benefits for Individual and Small Group Plans 
 
 Allergy serum 
 Ambulance service 
 Bariatric surgery 
 Blood and blood products 
 Breast reconstructive surgery/prosthesis 
 Cardiac rehabilitation 
 Care in office for illness or injury 
 Case management 
 Chiropractic services 
 Controlled clinical trials 
 Diabetic treatment/equipment/supplies 
 Durable medical equipment 
 Emergency services 
 Family planning services 
 General anesthesia/associated care for 
dental care for children 
 Habilitative services 
 Hair prosthesis following cancer 
 Hearing aids 
 Home health care 
 Hospice 
 Infertility services (excludes IVF) 
 Inpatient hospital services 
 Medical food 
 Mental health and substance use 
benefits 
 Nutritional services 
 Outpatient hospital services 
 Outpatient laboratory/diagnostic 
services 
 Outpatient short-term rehabilitation 
 Patient centered medical homes 
 Pediatric dental 
 Pediatric vision 
 Pregnancy and maternity 
 Prescription drugs 
 Preventive services 
 Prostate cancer screening 
 Pulmonary rehabilitation 
 Skilled nursing facility 
 Transplants 
 Wellness benefits 
 
IVF:  in vitro fertilization 
 
Note:  Essential health benefits as of September 2025. 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10