START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 647 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 647 
(Senator Bailey) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Law Enforcement Officers' Pension System and State Police Retirement System - 
Line-of-Duty Catastrophic Injury Disability 
 
 
This bill creates a catastrophic disability benefit for members of the State Police Retirement 
System (SPRS) and Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS). Under the new 
benefit, a member of SPRS or LEOPS who is totally and permanently unable to engage in 
any substantial gainful activity because of a medically determinable physical impairment 
that is the natural and proximate result of an accident that occurred in the actual 
performance of duty at a definite time and place without negligence by the member is 
entitled to a catastrophic disability benefit. The benefit is equal to the sum of (1) an annuity 
that is the actuarial equivalent of the member’s accumulated contributions and (2) a pension 
equal to 100% of the member’s average final compensation (AFC). A member of SPRS or 
LEOPS who is awarded a catastrophic disability benefit is not eligible for an accidental, 
special, or ordinary disability benefit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in a limited number of circumstances, as 
discussed below, it likely has no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or 
contribution rates. The State Retirement Agency (SRA) can likely implement the bill with 
existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  As with the State, for participating governmental units that participate in 
LEOPS, the bill is expected to apply in only a limited number of cases, as discussed below, 
and therefore likely has no discernible effect on local governmental pension liabilities or 
contribution rates. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 647/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Participants in Deferred Retirement Option Programs under SPRS or 
LEOPS are eligible for the catastrophic disability benefit under the same conditions as 
members not in the Deferred Retirement Options Program. 
 
An individual receiving the catastrophic disability benefit must have the benefit reduced to 
an accidental/special disability retirement if the individual is (1) employed at any time by 
an employer that participates in the State Retirement and Pension System or (2) engages in 
any substantial gainful activity. An individual who has the benefit reduced in this manner 
is no longer eligible for a catastrophic disability benefit.  
 
Each year, an individual receiving a catastrophic disability benefit must provide SRA the 
individual’s annual federal tax return with supporting documentation and any other 
information that SRA requires. An individual may request, and SRA may grant, an 
extension to provide the information, as specified. In the absence of an extension, if the 
individual fails to provide the information within 45 days after SRA sends a late notice, the 
individual’s benefit is suspended. Once the information is provided, the benefit is restored, 
as specified. 
 
By November 1, 2028, and annually thereafter, SRA must report to the Joint Committee 
on Pensions specified information about the awarding of catastrophic disability benefits. 
 
Current Law:  A member of LEOPS is eligible for an accidental disability retirement 
benefit (also called a “line-of-duty” benefit) if (1) the member is totally and permanently 
incapacitated for duty arising out of or in the course of the actual performance of duty 
without willful negligence by the member (emphasis added) and (2) the medical board 
certifies that the member is totally incapacitated, either mentally or physically, for the 
further performance of duty; the incapacity is likely to be permanent; and the member 
should be retired. A member of SPRS is entitled to the same benefit under the same 
conditions, except that it is called a “special” disability benefit instead of an accidental 
disability benefit. 
 
An accidental or special disability benefit is equal to the lesser of (1) a member’s AFC or  
(2) the sum of an annuity based on the actuarial value of the member’s accumulated 
contributions and a pension equal to two-thirds of the member’s AFC. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:   
 
Pension Liabilities 
 
The catastrophic disability benefit created by the bill is different from an accidental or 
special disability benefit in three important ways: 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 647/ Page 3 
 
the disabling condition must be physical (i.e., not mental health related) and be the 
natural and proximate result of an accident that occurs at a specific time and place;  
 
the disabling condition must result in the member being unable to engage in any 
substantial gainful activity (instead of being incapacitated for duty); and 
 
the benefit includes 100% of AFC instead of two-thirds of AFC (the most common 
benefit awarded under accidental or special disability). 
 
Although the catastrophic disability benefit provides a more generous benefit payment than 
accidental/special disability, it is expected to apply in a very limited number of 
circumstances. The benefit is limited to instances in which a member of SPRS or LEOPS 
is severely physically injured in the line of duty as a result of a discrete accident or incident 
and can no longer engage in gainful employment of any kind. Such accidents (including 
shootings and vehicle accidents), while certainly not unprecedented, are fortunately rare. 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that common causes of 
accidental/special disability benefits are not physical injuries, but rather mental health 
conditions and hypertension and related ailments, none of which qualify for the 
catastrophic benefit. Therefore, it is anticipated that the catastrophic disability benefit 
applies in only a limited number of instances over time and has no discernible effect on 
State pension liabilities and contribution rates. 
 
State Retirement Agency 
 
SRA advises that, if five or more SPRS and LEOPS members apply for and/or are awarded 
the catastrophic disability benefit each year, it may require one additional position to 
manage the application and review process. However, neither SRA nor DLS expects the 
number of applicants or awardees to exceed that amount in most years. Moreover, the bill 
does not increase the number of applicants for disability benefits, as a member who applies 
for the catastrophic benefit under the bill likely would have applied for an 
accidental/special disability benefit under current law. For both of these reasons, SRA 
likely does not require additional staff to implement the bill. 
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been implemented within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, Garrett, and 
Howard counties; City of College Park; Maryland Municipal League; Department of State 
Police; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 647/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4