START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 775 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 775 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Public Safety - Gun Buyback Programs - Destruction of Firearms 
 
 
This bill requires a federal firearms licensee or law enforcement agency operating a “gun 
buyback program” to destroy each firearm, including every component and part attached 
to the firearm, that is surrendered to the licensee or agency at a gun buyback program, as 
specified; however, this requirement does not apply if a law enforcement agency 
determines that the firearm is stolen or is evidence of a crime. A licensee or agency that 
violates these provisions is subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 per violation. If the 
violator is a licensed firearms dealer, in addition to that penalty, the Secretary of 
State Police must revoke the dealer’s license. A person may not operate a gun buyback 
program except in accordance with the above provisions; a person who violates this 
prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum fine of 
$10,000. A law enforcement agency that receives a firearm as part of a gun buyback 
program must make reasonable efforts, including a check of the National Crime 
Information Center (NCIC) database, to determine whether the firearm is a crime firearm 
or has been reported as lost or stolen before the firearm or its component parts may be 
destroyed as required. Nothing in the bill may be interpreted as an exception to any other 
requirement or restriction under State or federal law relating to the purchase, rental, loan, 
or transfer of a firearm. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State government operations 
or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 775/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A federal firearms licensee or law enforcement agency may contract with 
a law enforcement agency or a business to satisfy the bill’s firearm destruction requirement. 
The destruction must make the firearm, and every component and part attached to the 
firearm, permanently inoperable and unrepairable. 
 
“Gun buyback program” means a program that is operated by a federal firearms licensee 
or a law enforcement agency that (1) allows firearm owners to voluntarily surrender 
firearms; (2) is operated, either explicitly or impliedly, for the purpose of reducing the 
number of firearms in a community; and (3) advertises that firearms that are surrendered 
to the program will be destroyed or made permanently inoperable. 
 
Current Law:  There are no statutory provisions directly applicable to gun buyback 
programs. 
 
The Department of State Police regulates firearms and regulated firearms dealer licensees 
under provisions of the Public Safety Article. A person must lawfully possess a regulated 
firearms dealer’s license issued by the Secretary of State Police before the person engages 
in the business of selling, renting, or transferring regulated firearms. One dealer’s license 
is required for each place of business where regulated firearms are sold. Current law 
requires the Secretary to revoke a dealer’s license under specified conditions. 
 
State licensees must also have a federal firearms license issued by the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives. 
 
Additional Comments:  NCIC is a secure, computerized database that provides federal, 
state, and local law enforcement agencies with real-time data on wanted persons, stolen 
property, and criminal histories. Access is strictly restricted to criminal justice agencies 
and authorized users through networks approved by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 444 of 2025 and SB 1097 of 2024. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 775/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and 
Somerset counties; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Commission on Criminal 
Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public 
Defender; Department of State Police; Federal Bureau of Investigation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
Third Reader - March 16, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2026 
 
jg/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3