START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 794 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 794 
(Senator Lam) 
Finance 
 
 
Health Insurance - Special Enrollment Period for Pregnancy - Coverage 
Effective Date 
 
   
This bill authorizes an individual who enrolls for coverage (or enrolls a dependent for 
coverage) during a special enrollment period (SEP) for pregnancy to choose when the 
coverage becomes effective. Coverage may become effective on either (1) the first day of 
the month the individual receives confirmation of pregnancy or (2) the first day of the 
month following the date of plan selection. If the individual fails to select the day on which 
coverage becomes effective, the carrier must select the day from these options. The bill 
takes effect January 1, 2027, and applies to all health benefit plans issued, delivered, 
or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2027 from the $125 rate and form filing fee; MIA’s review 
of filings can likely be handled with existing resources. Any minimal operational impact 
on the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. No effect on the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits 
Program. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 794/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A small employer health benefit plan must provide an SEP for an eligible 
employee who becomes pregnant and an eligible employee’s spouse or dependent who 
becomes pregnant, provided the spouse or dependent is otherwise eligible for coverage. A 
carrier participating in the Individual Exchange must provide an SEP for an individual who 
purchases coverage through the Individual Exchange if the individual or a dependent 
becomes pregnant. Other carriers must provide an SEP for an individual who purchases 
coverage outside the Individual Exchange if the individual or a dependent becomes 
pregnant.  
 
Small employer and individual health benefit plans must provide an SEP during which an 
individual who becomes pregnant, as confirmed by a health care practitioner, may enroll 
in a health benefit plan. The SEP must be open for 90 days and begin on the date a health 
care practitioner confirms the pregnancy. Coverage must become effective on the first day 
of the month in which the individual receives confirmation of pregnancy.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2