START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 741 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 741 
(Senators Beidle and Hettleman) 
Finance 
 
 
Financial Institutions and Activities - Virtual Currency Kiosks - Alterations 
 
 
This bill (1) expands the definition of “virtual currency kiosk operator” to include a person 
who installs or operates software that enables a stand-alone automated device to provide 
virtual currency services in the State (thereby making such individuals subject to 
registration requirements in current law) and (2) makes other related and conforming 
changes to the regulation of virtual currency kiosks. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Regulation of Virtual Currency Kiosks in the State 
 
Chapter 117 of 2025 established a regulatory framework for “virtual currency kiosks” and 
their operators to do business in the State, including that, beginning January 1, 2026, and 
annually thereafter, a virtual currency kiosk operator must register a kiosk with the 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation to operate in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 741/ Page 2 
Broadly speaking, Chapter 117: 
 
 
authorized the Commissioner of Financial Regulation to adopt and enforce various 
procedures and regulations relating to virtual currency kiosks; 
 
established license and registration requirements for virtual currency kiosk 
operators; 
 
required virtual currency kiosk operators to, among other things:  (1) ensure each 
virtual currency transaction does not accept or dispense greater than a specified 
amount each day; (2) ensure that each virtual currency kiosk operates solely for the 
purposes of virtual currency services; (3) make certain disclosures; and (4) maintain 
customer support, as specified. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Automated teller machine” means any electronic information processing device located 
in this State which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or 
convenience account. “Currency” means currency and coin of the United States or any 
other country. “Money transmission” means engaging in the business of selling or issuing 
payment instruments or prepaid access or receiving currency, funds, or other value that 
substitutes for currency and transferring currency, funds, or other value that substitutes for 
currency to another person or a location within or outside the United States by any means, 
including electronically, through the Internet, through a mobile application, through a 
network of persons, or through an informal value transfer system. “Money transmission” 
includes any other activity that the commissioner identifies as money transmission by 
regulation. 
 
In current law, a “virtual currency kiosk” means a stand-alone automated platform through 
which a consumer may deposit or receive cash or use a credit or debit card to obtain virtual 
currency services. “Virtual currency kiosk” does not include an automated teller machine. 
The bill repeals the provision that specifies a virtual currency kiosk does not include an 
automated teller machine but requires that an operator ensure that a virtual currency kiosk 
does not provide the same services as an automated teller machine. 
 
In current law, a “virtual currency kiosk operator” or “operator” means a person who owns 
or operates a virtual currency kiosk in the State. The bill adds a person who installs or 
operates software that enables a stand-alone automated device to provide virtual currency 
service in the State to the definition. 
 
In current law, “virtual currency service” does not include money transmission, as 
specified. Under the bill, virtual currency service also does not include accepting or 
dispensing cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 741/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  A small business operating a virtual currency kiosk may incur 
expenses related to ensuring software installers and operators comply with existing 
registration requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3