START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 704 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 704 
(Senator Mautz) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Maryland Estate Tax – Qualified Agricultural Property – Transfer to Limited 
Liability Company 
 
 
This bill authorizes a qualified recipient, within the meaning of the Maryland estate tax 
exclusion for qualified agricultural property, to transfer legal ownership of qualified 
agricultural property to a limited liability company (LLC) without estate tax recapture if 
(1) the ownership of the LLC consists only of qualified recipients and (2) the qualified 
agricultural property is used for farming purposes for at least 10 years after the decedent’s 
death. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and applies to decedents dying on or after 
July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may decrease beginning as early as FY 2027 to the 
extent the bill results in increased utilization of Maryland estate tax benefits for qualified 
agricultural property. It is assumed that the Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s 
provisions with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 704/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Estate Tax  
 
The estate tax is imposed on the transfer of the Maryland estate of a decedent who, at the 
time of death, was (1) a resident of the State or (2) a nonresident whose estate includes any 
interest in tangible real property located in the State or tangible personal property with a 
taxable situs in the State. The Maryland estate tax is based on the federal credit for death 
taxes paid as in effect on December 31, 2001, before the phase-out and repeal of the credit 
under the federal Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001. Because 
the federal credit is calculated based on a marginal rate schedule, no tax rates are specified 
in Maryland statute. A top marginal rate of 16% is applied to the portion of the adjusted 
taxable estate in excess of $10,040,000. Estates are allowed a credit against the Maryland 
estate tax for Maryland inheritance tax paid. 
 
The unified credit allowed against the federal estate tax effectively excludes a portion of 
the taxable estate from taxation (applicable exclusion amount). Maryland decoupled from 
increases in the value of the federal unified credit allowed against the federal estate tax for 
decedents dying after 2003. For decedents dying after 2018, the unified credit for Maryland 
estate tax purposes is $1,945,800 – the amount which effectively excludes the 
first $5.0 million of the taxable estate from tax. 
 
The federal Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 doubled the federal basic exclusion amounts 
for 2018 through 2025 only. For 2025, the federal basic exclusion amount is  
$13.99 million. The One Big Beautiful Bill Act of 2025 permanently increased the federal 
basic exclusion amount to $15.0 million for 2026 and inflation-adjusted amounts annually 
thereafter. 
 
Qualified Agricultural Property 
 
Maryland excludes from estate tax up to $5.0 million of the value of qualified agricultural 
property (real or personal property that is used primarily for farming purposes within the 
meaning of Internal Revenue Code § 2032A (special use valuation for certain farm and 
closely held business real property)) that passes from the decedent to or for the use of a 
qualified recipient who enters into an agreement to use the qualified agricultural property 
for farming purposes after the decedent’s death. The estate tax imposed on the value of any 
such property in excess of $5.0 million is limited to 5%. Maryland estate tax must be 
recaptured if the qualified agricultural property ceases to be used for farming purposes 
within 10 years after the decedent’s death; the amount of estate tax imposed in such 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 704/ Page 3 
circumstances is the additional tax that would have otherwise been payable at the time of 
the decedent’s death.  
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may decrease beginning as early as fiscal 2027 
to the extent the bill increases utilization of the exclusion for and limitation on the estate 
tax imposed on qualified agricultural property. Any such effect cannot be reliably predicted 
at this time.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Register of Wills; Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
me/jrb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3