START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 769 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 769 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - University System of Maryland) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
University System of Maryland - Academic Facilities Bonding Authority 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the use of $50.0 million in academic facilities bonds for 
the purpose of financing and refinancing construction, renovation, and renewal projects at 
University System of Maryland (USM) buildings and campuses. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No likely effect in FY 2026. Revenues and expenditures from bond proceeds 
increase by $50.0 million in FY 2027. The revenues and expenditures are included in the 
FY 2027 Capital Improvement Program (CIP) as introduced. Higher education 
expenditures increase by an estimated $4.2 million annually, beginning in FY 2028, to pay 
debt service on the revenue bonds. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Bond Rev. 
$50.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$0 
$4.2 
$4.2 
$4.2 
$4.2 
Bond Exp. 
$50.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($4.2) 
($4.2) 
($4.2) 
($4.2)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  USM has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 769/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  USM must gain legislative approval to use academic revenue 
bond (ARB) proceeds for certain capital improvement projects at academic facilities. 
 
The maximum aggregate principal amount of bonds that USM may issue was increased by 
$300.0 million, from $1.4 billion to $1.7 billion, by Chapter 233 of 2022. This bill does 
not affect the cap on bond principal; it only authorizes the issuance of bonds within the 
existing limit for specific capital projects. 
 
The fiscal 2027 CIP as introduced proposes $50.0 million in ARBs in fiscal 2027 and 
similar amounts each year from fiscal 2028 through 2031. The proposed amount of debt is 
consistent with the Capital Debt Affordability Committee recommendation for fiscal 2027. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  USM revenues and expenditures from bond proceeds increase by 
$50.0 million in fiscal 2027. The revenues and expenditures are included in the  
fiscal 2027 capital budget as introduced. Beginning in fiscal 2028, USM expenditures to 
pay debt service on the ARBs increase by an estimated $4.2 million annually for 20 years.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 2, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 769/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  University System of Maryland – Academic Facilities Bonding 
Authority 
 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB769  
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Samantha Norris, University System of Maryland 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill authorizes the issuance of debt for ongoing capital and facilities renewal 
construction projects. Projects are authorized by the State.   
 

END OF PAGE 3