START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 792 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 792 
(Senator Lam) 
Finance 
 
 
Hospitals - Immigration Enforcement Action - Policy Requirement 
 
 
This bill requires the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), in consultation 
with the Attorney General and the Maryland Hospital Association (MHA), to develop a 
model policy for hospitals addressing how a hospital must respond to immigration 
enforcement actions at the hospital, with consideration of patient privacy and the safety of 
patients, guests, and staff. By October 1, 2026, HSCRC must publish the model policy on 
its website. A hospital must adopt a policy describing the protocol of the hospital by the 
earlier of (1) January 1, 2027, or (2) three months after HSCRC publishes the model policy. 
A hospital must conspicuously post copies of the policy on the hospital’s website and 
provide annual training to all hospital staff members. The bill does not apply to a hospital 
operated by a unit of State or local government required to implement a policy consistent 
with the guidance of the Attorney General, as specified. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2026. HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by as 
much as $200,000 in FY 2027 for consultant services, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
200,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($200,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local governmental operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 792/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  HSCRC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department 
of Health established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, 
provide access to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in 
the State. HSCRC was responsible for implementing the Total Cost of Care Model, the 
successor to the Maryland All-Payer Model Contract and will implement the Achieving 
Healthcare Efficiency through Accountable Design (AHEAD) Model from 2026 to 2034 
to continue statewide efforts to improve health care quality and control costs. 
 
Immigration Enforcement   
 
While immigration is controlled by federal law, the U.S. Immigration, Customs, and 
Enforcement Division (ICE) and Department of Homeland Security have initiated 
numerous programs that involve state and local law enforcement agencies as allies and 
additional resources. For example, the Criminal Alien Program (CAP) supports ICE 
Enforcement and Removal Operations in executing its mission through the arrest and 
removal of undocumented immigrants who threaten the safety of the nation’s communities 
and the integrity of U.S. immigration laws. CAP focuses on the identification, arrest, and 
removal of incarcerated undocumented immigrants at federal, state, and local levels, as 
well as at-large criminal undocumented immigrants.  
 
Federal law does not mandate that state and local law enforcement agencies become 
involved in immigration efforts. However, federal law does prohibit a state or local 
government from prohibiting or in any way restricting any government entity or official 
from sending to or receiving from ICE information regarding the citizenship or 
immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual. It also prohibits restrictions on 
any of the following with respect to information regarding the immigration status, lawful 
or unlawful, of any individual:  (1) sending such information to, or requesting or receiving 
such information from, ICE; (2) maintaining such information; or (3) exchanging such 
information with any other federal, state, or local government authority. 
 
Immigration Enforcement in Sensitive Locations  
 
Chapter 718 of 2025 requires (1) a federal law enforcement officer to notify specified 
individuals regarding a federal immigration enforcement action at a “sensitive location” 
and (2) a public school, a public library, or a unit of the Executive Branch of State or local 
government that operates at a sensitive location to deny access to any portion of the 
sensitive location that is not accessible to the general public to any individual seeking to 
enforce federal immigration law, unless the individual presents a valid judicial warrant or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 792/ Page 3 
exigent circumstances exist (without applicability to a State or local correctional facility or 
a detention facility in a District Court or circuit court location).  
 
Attorney General Guidance:  Chapter 718 also requires the Attorney General to develop 
and publish guidance that informs the public and relevant State agencies about:  
 
 
delineating between immigration enforcement within the public portions of 
sensitive locations and the nonpublic or private portions of sensitive locations; 
 
verifying the identity of immigration enforcement agents and validating 
immigration enforcement documentation seeking specific individuals; 
 
limiting liability exposure for State, local, and private institutions and the 
participation of the employees of those institutions in immigration enforcement at 
sensitive locations;  
 
facilitating relationships between federal law enforcement officers and State and 
local officials and law enforcement officers in order to conduct immigration 
enforcement activities through the least dangerous and disruptive means; and 
 
complying with existing legal obligations and limitations on State and local agencies 
while maintaining public safety and accessibility to those agencies. 
 
Private entities are encouraged to adopt policies consistent with the guidance developed by 
the Attorney General if the private entities provide services related to (1) physical or mental 
health; (2) education; (3) shelter care; or (4) access to justice.  
 
The required guidance and policies are not subject to the Administrative Procedure Act 
under Title 10, Subtitles 1, 2, and 3 of the State Government Article.  
 
Governmental Entity Procedures:  Pursuant to Chapter 718, each public school, public 
library, and unit of the Executive Branch of State or local government that operates a 
sensitive location must implement a policy consistent with the guidance issued by the 
Attorney General.  
 
By July 1, 2026, each governmental entity must (1) in consultation with the Department of 
Information Technology, develop and publish procedures that prevent the sale and 
redisclosure of personal records and geolocation data provided or made available by the 
governmental entity in a way that harms the privacy of residents of the State and (2) submit 
a copy of the procedures developed to the General Assembly. The procedures must 
specifically address:  
 
 
any possible contractual limitations on the sale or redisclosure of personal records 
or geolocation data that a governmental entity may place on a person who receives 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 792/ Page 4 
personal records or geolocation data that are provided or made available by the 
governmental entity;  
 
considerations regarding (1) the threat to privacy posed by data brokers who utilize 
personal records or geolocation data for commercial purposes; (2) the risk that 
personal records or geolocation data may be used for purposes other than the 
purposes for which the personal records or geolocation data were developed or 
collected; and (3) geolocation, genetic, and other sensitive data; and  
 
any other considerations necessary to (1) protect the privacy of residents of the 
State; (2) discourage the development of a secondary commercial market for 
personal records or geolocation data that are provided or made available by a 
governmental entity; and (3) limit a person who receives personal records or 
geolocation data that are provided or made available by a governmental entity from 
selling or redisclosing the data with other persons. 
 
“Sensitive location” means:  
 
 
a public school;  
 
a public library;  
 
a health care facility operated by a unit of State or local government;  
 
a facility operated by the Comptroller; 
 
a courthouse; or  
 
any other location that (1) provides State-funded services related to physical or 
mental health, education, shelter care, or access to justice and (2) as determined by 
the Attorney General, requires special consideration for immigration enforcement 
activities. 
 
In January 2025, the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) released immigration 
enforcement guidance for Maryland health care providers.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires HSCRC, in consultation with the Attorney General 
and MHA, to develop a model policy addressing how a hospital must respond to 
immigration enforcement actions at the hospital. By October 1, 2026, HSCRC must public 
the model policy on its website. 
 
HSCRC advises that commission staff do not possess the expertise required to develop a 
model immigration enforcement policy and that consultant services are required to meet 
the bill’s requirements. Therefore, HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by as much 
as $200,000 in fiscal 2027 only for consultant services to develop the model policy. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes, however, that consultant services may be 
less than estimated above, as the bill requires HSCRC to consult with MHA and the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 792/ Page 5 
Attorney General. As mentioned above, in January 2025, OAG released immigration 
enforcement guidance for Maryland health care providers. Although this guidance may not 
specifically meet the bill’s requirements for the model policy, HSCRC can likely utilize 
the expertise of OAG and MHA and limit the consultant services needed. 
 
Additional Comments:  HSCRC advises that the development of a model immigration 
enforcement policy may take between 12 to 18 months, and it is unlikely that the policy 
will be developed by the bill’s October 1, 2026 deadline.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5