START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 784 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 784 
(Senator Jackson) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Financial Institutions - Consumer Credit - Application of Licensing 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill repeals a provision that exempts, under specified conditions, a person that acquires 
a mortgage, a mortgage loan, or an installment loan from licensure as a consumer lender 
under Title 11 of the Financial Institutions Article. It is the intent of the General Assembly 
that the bill be construed as a clarifying corrective measure to repeal a provision of law 
erroneously enacted by Chapter 118 of 2025. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 118, among other things, established that Title 11 
of the Financial Institutions Article, (which governs licensing requirements for various 
types of consumer lenders) generally does not apply to a person that acquires or is assigned 
(in whole or in part):  (1) a mortgage, if the person does not otherwise make mortgages;  
(2) a mortgage loan (as defined in the Maryland Mortgage Lender Law), if the person does 
not otherwise engage in the mortgage lending business; or (3) an installment loan, if the 
person relies on another person to service or collect on the loan and does not otherwise 
make installment loans. The bill repeals this provision. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 784/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 13, 2026 
 
caw/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2