START OF PAGE 1
SB0776/963526/1

BY: Judicial Proceedings Committee

AMENDMENTS TO SENATE BILL 776
(First Reading File Bill)

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1, in the sponsor line, strike “Senator Smith” and substitute “Senators
Smith, Charles, Folden, Henson, James, Love, McKay, Muse, Sydnor,
Waldstreicher, and West”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 3, in line 24, strike “AND”; after line 24, insert:

“(14) THE SECRETARY OF HUMAN SERVICES, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(15) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, OR THE
SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE; AND”;

in line 25, strike “(14)” and substitute “(16)”; in the same line, strike “UP TO”; and in
line 27, strike “AT LEAST”.

On page 4, in lines 1, 4, and 6, in each instance, strike “AT LEAST”; and strike
beginning with “ANY” in line 8 down through “APPROPRIATE” in line 9 and substitute
“TWO INDIVIDUALS WITH EXPERIENCE IN CIVIL RIGHTS ADVOCACY AND
LITIGATION”.

AMENDMENT NO. 3
On page 7, in line 3, strike “THE” and substitute “SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS
(2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE”; and after line 6, insert:
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
SB0776/963526/01 Judicial Proceedings Committee
Amendments to SB 776
Page 2 of 2

“(3) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND CONSISTENT WITH STATE
AND FEDERAL LAW, THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL PROCURE
GOODS AND SERVICES FROM MARYLAND INSTITUTIONS AND HISTORICALLY
BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES IN THE STATE.”.

AMENDMENT NO. 4
On page 7, strike beginning with “PRINCIPAL” in line 28 down through
“INVESTIGATOR” in line 29 and substitute “COMMISSION”.
END OF PAGE 2