START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 743 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 743 
(Senator James) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Workgroup to Study State Laws on Electric Bicycles - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup to Study State Laws on Electric Bicycles, staffed by 
the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT). The workgroup must (1) review 
current State rules of the road for electric bicycles and make recommendations for revisions 
to improve public safety and address identified safety concerns; (2) review academic 
studies and government data on injury rates and general safety concerns of electric bicycle 
riders, other vehicle operators, and pedestrians, as specified; and (3) consider the 
significance and role of other micro-mobility devices with respect to public safety. The 
workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by January 1, 2028. A member of the workgroup may not receive 
compensation as a workgroup member but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under 
standard State travel regulations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates 
January 1, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOT can staff the workgroup with existing budgeted resources. Any 
expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 743/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An “electric bicycle” means a vehicle that: 
 
 
is designed to be operated by human power with the assistance of an electric motor; 
 
is equipped with fully operable pedals; 
 
has two or three wheels; 
 
has a motor with a rating of 750 watts or less; and 
 
meets certain requirements related to the electric motor providing assistance when 
the bicycle reaches specified speed levels. 
 
Electric bicycles are excluded from various definitions, including “motor vehicle” and 
“off-highway recreational vehicle,” and are exempt from State vehicle titling and 
registration requirements. 
 
There are currently three classes of electric bicycles: 
 
 
a Class 1 electric bicycle is equipped with a motor that provides assistance only 
when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches 
a speed of 20 miles per hour (MPH); 
 
a Class 2 electric bicycle is equipped with a motor that provides assistance whether 
or not the rider is pedaling the bicycle and ceases to provide assistance when the 
bicycle reaches a speed of 20 MPH; and 
 
a Class 3 electric bicycle is equipped with a motor that provides assistance only 
when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches 
a speed of 28 MPH. 
 
Generally, electric bicycles may be operated where bicycles are allowed to travel, including 
bike lanes. However, a local authority or State agency with jurisdiction over a bicycle path 
may prohibit the operation of Class 1 or Class 2 electric bicycles on the bicycle path. A 
Class 3 electric bicycle may not be operated on a bicycle path unless (1) the bicycle path 
is within or adjacent to a highway right-of-way or (2) allowed by a local authority or State 
agency with jurisdiction over the bicycle path. 
 
A local authority or State agency with jurisdiction over a trail may regulate the use of 
electric bicycles of any class on a trail designated as nonmotorized if the trail has a natural 
surface tread made by clearing and grading native soil with no added surfacing materials. 
 
A person younger than age 16 may not operate a Class 3 electric bicycle on a public 
highway. A person younger than age 16 may, however, ride as a passenger on a Class 3 
electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 743/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
 
me/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3