START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 737 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 737 
(Senator Benson) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Juvenile Law - Probation and Treatment Services - Required Disposition 
(Parental Accountability Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the juvenile court to place a child not ordered to be held in secure 
confinement on probation if the court determines the child has more than once 
(1) committed a delinquent act that, if committed by an adult, would constitute a crime of 
violence under § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article, or a crime of violence with a 
dangerous weapon; (2) used a firearm in the commission of a crime in violation of § 4-204 
of the Criminal Law Article; or (3) is found to be a child in need of supervision (CINS) 
due to the child’s habitual truancy. As part of the probation, the court must order (1) the 
Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) to adopt a treatment service plan and (2) order the 
child’s parent, guardian, or custodian to participate in rehabilitative services that are in the 
best interest of the child or family. If a child’s parent, guardian, or custodian fails to 
participate in the treatment service plan or meet with the juvenile counselor, the court must 
order them to do so.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase for the Office of the Public 
Defender (OPD) depending on actual workloads under the bill, as discussed below. The 
bill may affect overall DJS expenditures, as discussed below. Otherwise, the bill is not 
expected to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 737/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Adjudication and Disposition Hearings – Generally 
 
Generally, after a petition or citation has been filed with the juvenile court, and unless 
jurisdiction has been waived, the court must hold an adjudicatory hearing. Before a child 
is adjudicated delinquent, the allegations in the petition or citation that the child has 
committed a delinquent act must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.  
 
After an adjudicatory hearing, the court must hold a separate disposition hearing, unless 
the petition or citation is dismissed or unless such hearing is waived in writing by all 
parties. In making a disposition, the court may: 
 
 
place the child (1) on probation; (2) under supervision in the child’s own home; or 
(3) in the custody or under the guardianship of a relative or other fit person, upon 
terms the court deems appropriate, including community detention; 
 
commit the child to the custody or under the guardianship of DJS, the Maryland 
Department of Health, or a public or licensed private agency on terms that the court 
considers appropriate to meet specified priorities; or 
 
order the child, parents, guardian, or custodian of the child to participate in 
rehabilitative services that are in the best interest of the child and the family. 
 
A child may not be committed to DJS for out-of-home placement if the most serious 
offense is (1) possession of cannabis, as specified; (2) an offense that would be a 
misdemeanor if committed by an adult, unless the offense involves a firearm; (3) a 
technical violation of probation; or (4) a first-time violation for making a false statement, 
report, or complaint of an emergency or crime pursuant to § 9-501.1 of the Criminal Law 
Article. 
 
In addition to these dispositions, the court may adopt a treatment service plan, as described 
below.  
 
Treatment Service Plans  
 
A “treatment service plan” means a plan recommended at a disposition hearing or a 
disposition review hearing by DJS to the court proposing specific assistance, guidance, 
treatment, or rehabilitation of a child. In making a treatment service plan (the plan), a 
juvenile counselor must meet with the child who is subject to the plan and the child’s 
parent, guardian, or legal custodian to discuss the plan. If a child’s parent, guardian, or 
legal custodian is unable or refuses to meet with the juvenile counselor, the plan must 
indicate the inability or refusal to meet, and the reason for it, if known. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 737/ Page 3 
At a minimum, the plan must include (1) the recommended level of supervision for the 
child; (2) specific goals for the child and family to meet, along with timelines for meeting 
those goals; (3) a statement of any condition that the child’s parent, guardian, or legal 
custodian must change in order to alleviate any risks to the child; (4) a statement of the 
services to be provided to the child and the child’s family; and (5) any other information 
that may be necessary to make a disposition consistent with the child’s best interests and 
the protection of the public interest. 
 
If the court adopts a treatment service plan, DJS must certify in writing to the court within 
25 days after the date of disposition whether implementation of the plan has occurred and 
explain its attempts to ensure implementation. For applicable plans, implementation of the 
plan only occurs when the supervision, mentoring, mediation, monitoring, or placement 
required in the plan occurs. Specified procedures apply if a plan is not implemented within 
this 25-day timeframe. 
 
Crimes of Violence – § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article  
 
Section 14-101(a) of the Criminal Law Article defines a “crime of violence” as  
(1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) kidnapping; (4) manslaughter, except 
involuntary manslaughter; (5) mayhem; (6) maiming; (7) murder; (8) rape; (9) robbery;  
(10) carjacking (including armed carjacking); (11) first- and second-degree sexual 
offenses; (12) use of a firearm in the commission of a felony or other crime of violence, 
except possession with intent to distribute a controlled dangerous substance; (13) child 
abuse in the first degree; (14) sexual abuse of a minor under specified circumstances;  
(15) home invasion; (16) felony sex trafficking and forced marriage; (17) an attempt to 
commit crimes (1) through (16); (18) continuing course of certain sexual conduct with a 
child; (19) assault in the first degree; and (20) assault with intent to murder, rape, rob, or 
commit a sexual offense in the first or second degree. 
 
Use of a Handgun or Antique Firearm in the Commission of a Crime – §4-204 of the 
Criminal Law Article 
 
Pursuant to Section 4-204 of the Criminal Law Article, a person may not use a firearm in 
the commission of a crime of violence under § 5-101 of the Public Safety Article or any 
felony whether the firearm is operable or inoperable at the time of the crime. “Firearm” 
means (1) a weapon that expels, is designed to expel, or may readily be converted to expel 
a projectile by the action of an explosive or (2) the frame or receiver of such a weapon. 
Firearm includes an antique firearm, handgun, rifle, shotgun, short-barreled rifle, 
short-barreled shotgun, starter gun, or any other firearm, whether loaded or unloaded. 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment of up to 20 years, in 
addition to any other penalty imposed for the crime of violence or felony.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 737/ Page 4 
Crimes of Violence – § 5-101 of the Public Safety Article  
 
Under § 5-101(c) of the Public Safety Article, a “crime of violence” is defined as  
(1) abduction; (2) arson in the first degree; (3) assault in the first or second degree;  
(4) burglary in the first, second, or third degree; (5) carjacking and armed carjacking;  
(6) escape in the first degree; (7) kidnapping; (8) voluntary manslaughter; (9) maiming;  
(10) mayhem; (11) murder in the first or second degree; (12) rape in the first or  
second degree; (13) robbery; (14) robbery with a dangerous weapon; (15) sexual offense 
in the first, second, or third degree; (16) home invasion; (17) a felony offense under Title 3, 
Subtitle 11 of the Criminal Law Article; (18) an attempt to commit any of the crimes listed 
in (1) through (17); and (19) assault with intent to commit any of the crimes listed in  
(1) through (17) or a crime punishable by imprisonment for more than 1 year. 
 
Child in Need of Supervision and Truancy 
 
A “child in need of supervision” is a child who requires guidance, treatment, or 
rehabilitation and (1) is required by law to attend school and is habitually truant; (2) is 
habitually disobedient, ungovernable, and beyond the control of the person having custody 
of him; (3) deports himself so as to injure or endanger himself or others; or (4) has 
committed an offense applicable only to children.  
 
Under § 7-301 of the Education Article, subject to limited exceptions, each child who 
resides in the State and is age 5 or older and younger than age 18 must attend a public 
school regularly during the entire school year. A child who is required by law to attend 
school and is habitually truant can be designated a CINS.  
 
Current law (Title 3, Subtitle 8C of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article) also sets 
forth specific procedures for addressing truancy in jurisdictions in which a Truancy 
Reduction Pilot Program (TRPP) has been established. In a county in which a TRPP has 
been established, an authorized school official may file with the juvenile court a petition 
alleging that a child who is required to attend school failed to do so without lawful excuse, 
as specified. Circuit Administrative Judges of the First, Second, Third, and Seventh circuits 
may establish TRPPs in specified counties within their judicial circuits. Dorchester, 
Frederick, Harford, Kent, Prince George’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester 
counties are currently authorized to have TRPPs.  
 
State Expenditures:  The bill (1) requires probation in applicable cases; (2) requires 
probation in the applicable cases to include a treatment service plan; and (3) requires a 
court to order a child’s parent, guardian, or custodian to participate in the treatment service 
plan or meet with the juvenile counselor if they fail to do so. Data is not readily available 
on the full pool of affected cases. The bill’s effect on State expenditures depends on the 
number of applicable cases, the scope of increased services, changes to the DJS committed 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 737/ Page 5 
population, and judicial action regarding parental noncompliance. Data is not readily 
available on the full pool of affected cases, and the bill’s effect on State expenditures can 
only be determined with actual experience under the bill.  
 
Department of Juvenile Services 
 
After repeated requests by the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) for information 
on the fiscal and operational impact of the bill, DJS indicated that it requires 
eight additional case managers to implement the bill statewide, at a cost of $589,682 in 
fiscal 2027 and increasing to $783,006 by fiscal 2031. DJS did not provide any explanation 
as to how it developed this estimate. DLS did not have sufficient time to independently 
evaluate and verify this need for additional personnel. Furthermore, DJS did not address 
the bill’s potential effect on commitment-related expenditures. The bill requires probation 
in cases that may result in commitment under existing statute. According to the DJS Data 
Resource Guide, crimes of violence represented 44.4% of commitment dispositions in 
fiscal 2025. Information is not available on how many of these commitment dispositions 
involved juveniles with a previous delinquency disposition for a crime of violence.  
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
OPD advises that it requires 5 positions (3 juvenile attorneys, 1 social worker, and  
1 administrative employee – with associated annual expenditures of approximately 
$530,000 per full fiscal year) and $552,000 in annual panel attorney fees to effectively 
provide representation as required under the bill. OPD bases its estimate on an assumed 
increase of 700-1100 juvenile matters per year (400-500 matters attributed to crimes of 
violence or handgun violations and 300-600 matters attributed to CINS findings on 
habitual truancy). The magnitude of the need for additional OPD resources depends on 
(1) extended OPD representation of children generated by the bill’s requirement that 
children meeting specified criteria be placed on probation and (2) panel attorney 
representation of parents facing contempt of court for noncompliance with treatment 
service plans. While acknowledging that OPD expenditures may increase, DLS advises 
that the additional resources required can only be determined with actual experience under 
the bill and may not be of the magnitude indicated by OPD. As noted above, the bill applies 
to children who have had repeated findings of delinquency for specified serious offenses 
or repeated CINS findings for habitual truancy.  
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary advises that it can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 737/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 75 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
 
jg/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6