START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 865 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 865 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Finance 
Judiciary 
 
Workgroup on the Affordability of Private Passenger Automobile Insurance – 
Extension and Alteration of Membership and Duties 
 
 
This bill expands the duties of the Maryland Insurance Administration’s (MIA’s) 
workgroup on private passenger automobile insurance affordability to include (1) the 
development of concrete legislative recommendations to reduce premiums, including 
specific recommendations regarding the use of territorial rating and other rating factors that 
may contribute to disparate impacts, as specified, and (2) in developing its 
recommendations, considering the impact of any modifications or alternative rating 
approaches on rates across the State. The bill extends the termination date of the workgroup 
by one year to June 30, 2027, and alters the membership of the workgroup, as specified. 
The workgroup must submit an updated report of its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and General Assembly by January 1, 2027. The bill takes effect June 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Insurance in the State is regulated by MIA, an independent agency headed 
by the Insurance Commissioner, whom the Governor appoints with the advice and consent 
of the Senate. The administration licenses, examines, and audits insurance companies 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 865/ Page 2 
operating in the State; reviews rates and policies; collects premium and retaliatory taxes; 
licenses producers; investigates fraud as well as consumer complaints regarding insurance 
and health plan coverage; and educates the public on insurance matters. Chapter 395 
of 2025 requires MIA to establish a workgroup to study:   
 
 
the affordability of private passenger automobile insurance in the State, including 
factors that contribute to premium rate increases and trends in rate increases; 
 
policy options to provide greater transparency regarding automobile insurance 
premiums and to increase the affordability of automobile insurance in the State; 
 
ways in which “affordability” has been defined in the context of the establishment 
of private passenger automobile insurance premium rates; 
 
methodologies by which affordability can be considered in establishing private 
passenger automobile insurance rates consistent with ratemaking principles codified 
in the Insurance Article; and 
 
the current financial status of private passenger automobile insurers in the State and 
potential options to address excess profits. 
 
The workgroup terminates June 30, 2026. The final report of the workgroup was released 
in December 2025 and can be found on MIA’s website here. 
 
State Expenditures:  MIA advises that to support the workgroup under Chapter 395, it 
contracted with an actuary to assist with some of the complex analyses that may be needed 
to fulfill the requirements of the Act. MIA advises that it can likely handle the additional 
responsibilities established for the workgroup by the bill using existing budgeted resources 
with assistance from the National Association of Insurance Commissioners; however, to 
the extent that additional analyses are required from the actuary, special fund expenditures 
for MIA increase, likely minimally, to expand the scope of the contract. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 865/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/rld 
 
Analysis by:  Kayvon Samadani 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3