START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 869 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 869 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Economic Development - Maryland Workforce Launch Pilot Program - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Workforce Launch Pilot Program in the Department of 
Commerce (Commerce) to provide customized, no-cost workforce training as a business 
attraction tool to recruit strategic industries and qualified business entities to the State. 
Commerce must partner with no more than two community colleges to deliver training 
services and must distribute funds to a partner community college to cover the direct costs 
of developing and delivering the training. The bill specifies that any curriculum, manuals, 
or instructional materials developed under the program are owned by the community 
college. A related reporting requirement is established. The bill terminates  
September 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $71,900 in FY 2027 for 
Commerce to hire one contractual employee to administer the program; future years reflect 
annualization, inflation, ongoing costs, and termination of the contractual employee upon 
submission of the required report. Under one set of assumptions, general fund expenditures 
increase by another $500,000 annually in both FY 2027 and 2028 to provide funding to 
partner community colleges (including potentially Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC)) to cover training costs under the program. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Higher Ed Rev. 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$571,900 
$581,700 
$42,600 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
- 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($571,900) 
($581,700) 
($42,600) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 869/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local community college revenues and expenditures increase to the extent 
they are selected as program partners and receive State funding, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal, as discussed below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions  
 
“Qualified business entity” means a business entity that (1) does not have a physical 
location in the State; (2) is in active negotiations with Commerce to establish a location in 
Maryland from outside the State; and (3) enters into an agreement with Commerce to 
participate in the program. 
 
“Strategic industry” means an industry sector identified by Commerce in the State’s 
economic strategic plan.  
 
Maryland Workforce Launch Pilot Program – Requirements 
 
For each qualified business entity that receives assistance under the program, Commerce 
must establish performance metrics, including the number of full-time jobs created and the 
salary the entity is providing to trainees. The program agreement must include a provision 
requiring the qualified business entity to reimburse Commerce for the cost of the training 
services if the entity fails to meet the established performance metrics. 
 
By December 31, 2028, Commerce must submit a report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the effectiveness of the program, including (1) revenue generated by 
the qualified business entities; (2) jobs created; and (3) recommendations for statewide 
expansion. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Partnership for Workforce Quality Program 
 
Purpose:  The purpose of the Partnership for Workforce Quality (PWQ) Program, 
administered by Commerce, is to provide training services to:  
 
 
improve the competitiveness and productivity of the State’s workforce and business 
community; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 869/ Page 3 
 
upgrade employee skills, or train new employees, for new technologies or 
production processes; and 
 
assist employers located in the State in promoting employment stability. 
 
Eligibility:  In order to receive assistance under the program, a Maryland-based employer 
must request training assistance in job-specific skills to train new employees or upgrade or 
retain existing Maryland-based employees, as specified. Priority must be given to 
employers that are manufacturers or threatened by the presence of increased foreign or 
domestic competition. 
 
Business Assistance Services:  The program must provide business assistance services that, 
among other things, (1) determine whether the employer’s specific needs are best met by 
training, other types of assistance, or a combination of services; (2) identify or develop 
appropriate curricula; and (3) determine the most cost-effective approach to meeting 
training needs. The program may provide business assistance services at no cost to the 
employer. 
 
Training:  Grants may be awarded for job-specific training assistance to an eligible 
business, community college, private career school, State-accredited training agency, trade 
association, or union-sponsored training program. Training must be approved by the 
employer, and job-specific training may not exceed one year. 
 
Partnership for Workforce Quality Fund:  The PWQ Fund is a special fund managed and 
supervised by the Secretary of Commerce. The fund consists of money appropriated in the 
State budget to the fund, money made available to the fund through federal programs, 
private contributions, an application or other fee paid to the program in connection with 
processing a request for financial assistance, and any other money made available to the 
fund. Investment earnings are credited to the fund.  
 
Commerce may use money in the fund for grants to defray the cost of workforce training 
and administrative, actuarial, legal, and technical services for the program. 
 
The Governor must include in the State budget for each fiscal year an appropriation of  
at least $1.0 million for the program. 
 
Use of Program Money:  Program money may be used for costs associated with the direct 
delivery of instruction, including curriculum development, course materials, and 
instructors’ salaries and expenses for training. 
 
At least 60% of the money available to the program must be reserved for employers with 
150 or fewer employees based in the State. Up to 20% of available program funding may 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 869/ Page 4 
be provided to an employer with more than 500 employees based in the State, under 
specified conditions.  
 
The program may not contribute more than 50% of direct training costs for job-specific 
training assistance. Program money may not be used for capital equipment for an employer 
or trainee wages. An employer may not receive more than $200,000 per year from the 
program. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  
 
Commerce 
 
Commerce advises that recent staff retirements have reduced the agency’s capacity to 
administer additional programs; therefore, creating a new position to manage and oversee 
the program is necessary. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by at least $71,869 in 
fiscal 2027, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date, and by at least 
$81,731 in fiscal 2028. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual full-time 
finance specialist within the Office of Finance Programs to administer the program. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
General fund expenditures increase further to provide funding to partner community 
colleges to develop and deliver customized workforce training for participating businesses. 
Under one set of assumptions, reflected below, general fund expenditures increase by 
another $500,000 annually in both fiscal 2027 and 2028 to support training delivered 
through the pilot program. This estimate assumes training costs of approximately 
$6,000 per trainee, based on costs observed in the existing PWQ Program (only half of 
which is paid by the State). Under this assumption, the annual funding level could support 
training for approximately 80 trainees per year. Actual expenditures under the pilot 
program depend on future appropriations and the number of participating businesses and 
trainees.  
 
 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Contractual Position (New) 
1.0 
0.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits (Total) 
$62,728 
$78,926 
Community College Funding 
500,000 
500,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
     9,141 
     2,805 
Total Commerce Expenditures 
$571,869 
$581,731 
 
The fiscal 2029 estimate ($42,617) reflects a salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover, annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, and termination of the 
contractual position on December 31, 2028, when the report analyzing the effectiveness of 
the program must be completed.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 869/ Page 5 
This analysis assumes there is no funding for partner community colleges in fiscal 2029, 
as that year is assumed to be used to analyze the funding distributed in fiscal 2027 and 
2028. However, the timing of program implementation is uncertain, as it is not known how 
quickly Commerce can establish relationships with qualified business entities outside the 
State or partner community colleges. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
This estimate also does not reflect any potential reimbursements to Commerce from 
qualified business entities for the cost of the training services if any such entities fail to 
meet the performance metrics established under the bill. 
 
Baltimore City Community College and Local Community Colleges 
 
BCCC and local community college revenues and expenditures increase to the extent 
community colleges are selected as program partners and receive State funding to provide 
training services. The bill requires Commerce to partner with no more than two community 
colleges to deliver training services (as discussed in further detail below). The magnitude 
of the fiscal impact depends on participation levels and whether State funding fully covers 
training costs. However, under one set of assumptions, a selected community college’s 
revenues and expenditures may increase by approximately $6,000 per trainee. If 
one community college receives half of the assumed annual funding for the program, that 
college’s revenues and expenditures increase by approximately $250,000 in that year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The pilot program is for businesses outside of Maryland that 
choose to relocate to the State; therefore, it does not affect existing small businesses. 
Nevertheless, to the extent the program successfully attracts new business entities, small 
businesses in the same geographic area may benefit from an increase in economic activity.  
 
Additional Comments:  Commerce advises that the bill’s restriction on the number of 
partner community colleges may pose a challenge in terms of ensuring they are 
geographically convenient to the location chosen by a qualified business entity.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 869/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Baltimore City Community College; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
Third Reader - March 20, 2026 
 
jg/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Toni Heo 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6