START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 823 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 823 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Correctional Services - Maryland Parole Commission - Members 
 
   
This bill alters the appointing authority and method of appointment for members of the 
Maryland Parole Commission (MPC). Specifically, the bill repeals the requirement that 
the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, with the approval of the Governor 
and the advice and consent of the Senate, appoint MPC members and instead requires the 
Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint MPC members from 
among nominees chosen by a panel consisting of specified members. The panel must 
submit to the Governor the names of at least three qualified nominees for each 
commissioner vacancy to be filled. The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
(GOCPP) must provide staffing for the panel. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $64,900 in FY 2027; future years 
reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
64,900 
74,600 
78,200 
81,800 
85,400 
Net Effect 
($64,900) 
($74,600) 
($78,200) 
($81,800) 
($85,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal or none. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 823/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MPC is composed of 10 commissioners who are appointed for  
six-year terms by the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, with the 
approval of the Governor and the advice and consent of the Senate. Each commissioner 
must be appointed without regard to political affiliation, be a resident of the State, and have 
training and experience in law, sociology, psychology, psychiatry, education, social work, 
or criminology. Each commissioner must devote full time to the duties of MPC and may 
not have any other employment that conflicts with such devotion. The Secretary, with the 
approval of the Governor, also appoints the chairperson of the commission from among its 
members.  
 
If a commissioner is unable to perform the commissioner’s duties because of sickness, 
incapacity, or disqualification, the Secretary may appoint a hearing examiner to MPC to 
perform those duties until the commissioner is able to resume those duties or until a new 
commissioner is appointed and qualifies.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $64,900 in fiscal 2027, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one program coordinator within GOCPP to provide staffing for the panel (i.e., to 
handle scheduling, research, and general administrative duties). It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$55,759 
Other Operating Expenses 
    9,141 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$64,900 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the finances of the State entities required to 
serve on the panel. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 823/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and 
Policy; Maryland State Department of Education; Office of the Public Defender; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2026 
Third Reader - March 23, 2026 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3