START OF PAGE 1
SB0841/873621/1

BY: Senator Watson

AMENDMENTS TO SENATE BILL 841, AS AMENDED

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 4 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments (SB0841/423325/1), in Amendment No. 1, after line 11, insert:

“BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article - Financial Institutions
Section 12-401(a) and (i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2025 Supplement)”

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 23 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, in Amendment No. 2, after line 16, insert:

“Article – Financial Institutions

12–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(i) “Executive officer” means a president, vice president, senior officer
responsible for business operations, chief financial officer, or any other individual who
performs similar functions.”.

On page 56 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, in line 7 of Amendment No. 2, strike “EMPLOYEE” and substitute
“EXECUTIVE OFFICER”; in the same line, strike “EMPLOYEE’S” and substitute
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
SB0841/873621/01 Watson
Amendments to SB 841
Page 2 of 2

“EXECUTIVE OFFICER’S”; and in line 20, strike “EMPLOYEE” and substitute
“EXECUTIVE OFFICER”.

On page 57 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, in line 2 of Amendment No. 2, strike “EMPLOYEE’S” and substitute
“EXECUTIVE OFFICER’S”.

On pages 57 and 58 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the
Environment Amendments, in Amendment No. 2, strike in their entirety the lines
beginning with line 15 on page 57 through line 9 on page 58, inclusive, and substitute:

“(4) “EXECUTIVE OFFICER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 12–401
OF THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS ARTICLE.”;

and in line 20, after “AN” insert “EXECUTIVE”.
END OF PAGE 2