START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 898 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 898 
(Senator McCray) 
Finance 
 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Registered Behavior Technicians – 
Reimbursement 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to provide reimbursement 
for applied behavior analysis (ABA) services provided by a “registered behavior 
technician” (RBT) to Medicaid recipients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). MDH 
may not require as a condition of reimbursement that an individual receive a certification 
from the Behavior Analyst Certification Board (BACB) or another credentialing entity to 
provide ABA services as an RBT. However, MDH may require that an RBT obtain and 
maintain a current certification within 150 days after the individual begins providing ABA 
services to Medicaid recipients. MDH must adopt regulations necessary to carry out the 
bill. The bill must be construed to apply prospectively only. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can likely conduct administrative oversight of RBTs to verify 
certification as permitted under the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Registered behavior technician” means a paraprofessional who delivers 
ABA services that are provided to individuals with ASD under the supervision of a licensed 
psychologist, a board certified behavior analyst-doctoral (BCBA-D), or a board certified 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 898/ Page 2 
behavior analyst (BCBA). “Board certified behavior analyst” means a licensed 
professional who renders and provides direction for ABA services that are provided to 
individuals with ASD and has obtained a BCBA certification. “Board certified behavior 
analyst-doctoral” means a licensed professional who renders and provides direction for 
ABA treatments that are provided to individuals with ASD and has obtained a BCBA 
certification with a doctoral-level credential. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.09.28.01) define “applied behavior 
analysis” as the design, implementation, and evaluation of environmental modifications 
using behavioral stimuli and consequences to produce socially significant improvements 
in human behavior. ABA includes the direct observations, measurement, and functional 
analysis of the relations between environment and behavior. 
 
“Registered behavior technician” means a paraprofessional certified by BACB who 
delivers ABA services that are provided to participants with ASD under the supervision of 
a licensed psychologist or a licensed behavior analyst. 
 
Under 
State 
Board 
of 
Professional 
Counselors 
and 
Therapists 
regulations 
(COMAR 10.58.16.02), “registered behavior technician” means an individual who (1) is 
credentialed as an RBT by BACB or a successor organization and (2) practices behavior 
analysis under the close, ongoing supervision of a licensed behavior analyst in accordance 
with requirements set by BACB. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH currently provides reimbursement for ABA services delivered 
to Medicaid participants by RBTs certified by BACB. MDH regulations similarly define 
RBTs as personnel supervised by a licensed psychologist, a BCBA-D, or a BCBA. MDH 
currently permits a 90-day grace period for new RBT providers to achieve certification. 
 
The bill permits MDH to require that an RBT obtain and maintain a current certification 
within 150 days after providing ABA services to Medicaid recipients. This will require 
ongoing administrative oversight of RBTs to confirm they have obtained the required 
certification. Any increase in Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal 
funds) associated with this oversight is assumed to be minimal and is likely absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. 
 
As of February 2026, Maryland had 1,223 certified behavior technicians (BTs). Currently, 
the sole prerequisites for a BT to qualify for the 90-day grace period are a high school 
diploma or a General Educational Development certificate. MDH analysis indicates that 
only 28% of BTs attain RBT certification by the conclusion of the 90-day grace period. 
Consequently, a substantial number of providers are receiving reimbursement for therapy 
services in which they lack full training. Increasing the grace period to 150 days is likely 
to exacerbate this challenge. MDH advises that its preference is to exclusively enroll fully 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 898/ Page 3 
certified RBTs to ensure an appropriate standard of care and streamline the oversight and 
administrative processes. 
 
Small Business Effect:  RBTs who work for small business health care providers may 
provide ABA services for up to 150 days before obtaining certification. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 9, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3