START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 814 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 814 
(Senator Hayes) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Economic Matters 
 
Residential Property - Service Agreement - Defunct Service Providers 
 
 
This bill establishes that a service agreement (or any part of a service agreement) entered 
into before June 1, 2023, may not be effective for more than two years or (1) purport to run 
with the land or bind subsequent bona fide purchasers; (2) purport to create a lien, 
encumbrance, or security interest on the residential property of a party to the service 
agreement; or (3) allow the service provider to assign or transfer the right to provide 
services under the agreement to another person without notice or the consent of a party to 
the agreement. Any agreement that violates these restrictions is void and unenforceable. 
However, the bill is applicable only to agreements with a service provider that has forfeited 
the right of the provider to conduct business in the State and, on or after June 1, 2026, is 
defunct and considered not in good standing with the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation. The bill also establishes a related cause of action and authority to seek certain 
relief if an agreement in violation of the bill’s prohibitions is recorded, as specified. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If an agreement that violates the bill’s provisions is recorded, any person 
with an interest in the residential property that is subject to a lien arising from the agreement 
may bring an action in the circuit court in which the property is located for a determination 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 814/ Page 2 
that the service agreement is void and unenforceable. The person may seek compensatory 
damages and reasonable attorney’s fees and costs. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Service agreement” means an agreement where a service provider agrees to provide an 
individual services for (1) the maintenance of residential property that the individual owns 
or (2) the purchase or sale of residential property. A service agreement includes any 
memorandum, notice, agreement, or similar document that is used by a service provider to 
cause a service agreement to be recorded.  
 
“Service provider” means a person that provides services to an individual through a service 
agreement for (1) the maintenance of residential property that the individual owns or (2) the 
purchase or sale of residential property. Service provider includes any person acting as an 
agent or designee of a service provider. 
 
Prohibition on Service Agreements  
 
Chapter 525 of 2023 prohibits a service agreement (or any part of a service agreement) 
from (1) being effective for more than one year; (2) purporting to run with the land or bind 
subsequent bona fide purchasers; (3) purporting to create a lien, encumbrance, or security 
interest on the residential property of a party to the service agreement; or (4) allowing the 
service provider to assign or transfer the right to provide services under the service 
agreement to another person without notice or the consent of a party to the service 
agreement. 
 
Any service agreement that violated these restrictions is void and unenforceable; use of 
such a service agreement by a service provider is also an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade 
practice and subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions within the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act. The provisions of Chapter 525 do not prevent an 
individual from pursuing any other remedy provided by law. 
 
However, the provisions of Chapter 525 do not apply to, among other things: 
 
 
a home warranty or similar product that covers the cost of maintenance of a major 
home system such as plumbing, electrical, or heating, ventilating, and 
air-conditioning; 
 
an insurance contract; 
 
an agreement relating to the sale or rental of personal property; or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 814/ Page 3 
 
water, sewer, electrical, telephone, cable, or other regulated utility providers. 
 
Chapter 525 prohibits a service provider from submitting a service agreement that is in 
violation of the prohibitions above to the clerk of a circuit court or a State or local agency 
for recording. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction subject to 
imprisonment up to six months and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3