START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 877 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 877 
(Senator Attar) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Baltimore City - Stop Sign Monitoring Systems Pilot Program - Mt. Washington 
Neighborhood 
 
 
This bill authorizes, for three years, the use of stop sign monitoring systems on State and 
local highways located in a school zone in the Mount Washington neighborhood in the 
41st Legislative District in Baltimore City to record violations of State law requiring 
obedience to stop signs. Existing statutory provisions that apply for other stop sign 
monitoring systems used in the State generally apply for systems placed in accordance with 
the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates June 30, 2029.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase beginning as early as FY 2027 and likely 
only through FY 2030 to the extent that additional stop sign monitoring system violations 
are contested under the bill, as discussed below. General fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $5,900 in FY 2027 only for one-time programming costs for the Judiciary. 
  
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for Baltimore City increase beginning as early 
as FY 2027 and likely only through FY 2030 to the extent that the city installs stop sign 
monitoring systems, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes the use of stop sign monitoring systems on State and 
local highways in school zones in the Mount Washington neighborhood in the 
41st Legislative District in Baltimore City. Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 877/ Page 2 
a citation from a police officer at the time, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject 
to a civil penalty of up to $40 if the motor vehicle is recorded by a stop sign monitoring 
system during commission of the violation. 
 
Existing statutory provisions that govern the use of stop sign monitoring systems in the 
State, including the provisions of Chapter 571 of 2025 that require the Baltimore City 
Department of Transportation to report to the Governor and General Assembly about its 
stop sign monitoring system program by December 1, 2027, generally apply to the systems 
implemented under the bill. However, similar to requirements in Chapter 571 regarding the 
distribution of fine revenues from violations in Baltimore City, the bill requires 50% of the 
revenues from the fines collected by Baltimore City or the District Court as a result of the 
stop sign monitoring systems implemented under the bill to be distributed to the local 
management board for Baltimore City and used only to provide youth programming and 
services for youth living in or attending a school located in the 41st Legislative District. 
 
For the remaining funds, similar to most other local automated enforcement system 
programs in the State, citation revenues may be used to recover the costs of implementing 
and administering the program and any remaining balance may be used solely for public 
safety purposes, including pedestrian or highway safety programs. However, for any  
fiscal year in which the balance remaining after the costs of implementing and 
administering the systems is greater than 10% of the total revenues of the county for the 
fiscal year, the county must remit any funds that exceed 10% of the total revenues to the 
Comptroller. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Automated Enforcement Systems – Generally 
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, stop sign monitoring 
systems, school bus monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone 
speed control systems. Generally, pursuant to § 21-809(d)(5) of the Transportation Article, 
a person who receives a citation, may:   
 
 
pay the civil penalty, in accordance with the instructions on the citation; or  
 
elect to stand trial in the District Court for the alleged violation.  
 
With specified exceptions, penalty revenues from automated enforcement systems, 
including speed monitoring systems, must be paid (1) to the administering State agency or 
local jurisdiction, in an uncontested case and (2) directly to the District Court (and 
consequently the general fund) in a case that is contested in District Court. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 877/ Page 3 
Stop Sign Monitoring Systems in Baltimore City – Distribution to Local Management 
Boards 
 
As referenced above, Chapter 571 of 2025 authorizes the use of stop sign monitoring 
systems in certain school zones in Baltimore City (those in the 45th and 46th legislative 
districts). From the fines collected by Baltimore City or the District Court as a result of 
violations enforced by a stop sign monitoring system in the city under Chapter 571,  
50% must be distributed to the local management board for Baltimore City and used only 
for providing youth programming and services for youth living in or attending a school 
located in the 45th or 46th legislative district, depending on the district in which the system 
was located. 
 
Required Stops When Approaching a Stop Sign  
 
Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle 
approaching a stop sign at an intersection must:   
 
 
stop at the near side of the intersection at a clearly marked stop line;  
 
stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no clearly marked stop line, 
before entering any crosswalk; and  
 
stop at the near side of an intersection and, if there is no crosswalk, at the nearest 
point before entering the intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic 
approaching on the intersecting roadway.  
 
A violation of any of these requirements is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The 
prepayment penalty is $90 with one point assessed against the license. If the violation 
contributes to an accident, the prepayment penalty is $130 and three points must be 
assessed against the license. 
 
Required Report on Stop Sign Monitoring Systems 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 571 of 2025, by December 1, 2027, the Baltimore City Department of 
Transportation must report to the Governor and General Assembly on:   
 
 
the time period during which stop sign monitoring systems were in use in the local 
jurisdiction and the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of violations 
recorded over the reported time period, by location and date (through  
October 1, 2027);  
 
the costs associated with implementing and operating stop sign monitoring systems 
and the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations;  
 
appropriate locations for the deployment of stop sign monitoring systems;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 877/ Page 4 
 
the performance and reliability of stop sign monitoring systems used by the local 
jurisdiction; and  
 
the effectiveness of stop sign monitoring systems in reducing violations, crashes, 
and pedestrian injuries in the local jurisdiction and in areas where the systems were 
implemented and used. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the District Court collects fines for citations issued 
under the bill, general fund revenues increase beginning as early as fiscal 2027 and likely 
only through fiscal 2030 (although the bill terminates June 30, 2029, it is assumed that 
associated impacts continue for a brief period as issued citations are processed and paid). 
Any such impact depends on the extent to which Baltimore City elects to deploy the 
systems authorized under the bill and whether citations are contested (and, therefore, paid 
into the general fund upon a guilty disposition). However, the impact on general fund 
revenues is likely minimal.  
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by approximately $5,938 in 
fiscal 2027 only for one-time programming costs. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for Baltimore City are affected as follows 
beginning as early as fiscal 2027 (and likely only through fiscal 2030) to the extent that 
Baltimore City chooses to implement a stop sign monitoring system program pursuant to 
the bill’s authorization:   
 
 
expenditures increase to install the devices and required signs and for other 
administrative expenses that may be incurred for the operation of the program  
(e.g., mailing or contractual costs);  
 
revenues increase as citations are issued and penalty revenues are paid to the 
local jurisdiction; and  
 
expenditures further increase as the penalty revenues are used for authorized 
purposes. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 877/ Page 5 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Judiciary 
(Administrative 
Office 
of 
the 
Courts); 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2026 
 
me/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5