START OF PAGE 1
SB0841/813629/1

BY: Senator Jennings

AMENDMENTS TO SENATE BILL 841, AS AMENDED

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments (SB0841/423325/1), in the fifth line from the bottom of Amendment No. 1,
after “organization;” insert “requiring the Commission or, at the Commission’s direction,
a person applying for a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the
construction of any transmission line to provide certain notices to certain landowners
regarding the construction; establishing that if the Commission makes a certain finding,
a certain public hearing is invalidated or the Commission may order a new hearing
under certain circumstances;”.

On page 5 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, in line 18 of Amendment No. 1, after “7–103,” insert “7–204,”.

On page 6 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, in line 1 of Amendment No. 1, after “Section” insert “3–106,”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 44 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, after the fifth line from the bottom of Amendment No. 2, insert:

“3–106.

(a) If a person timely files, the person may apply to intervene in a proceeding
before the Commission.

(b) The Commission shall grant leave to intervene unless the Commission
concludes that:
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
SB0841/813629/01 Jennings
Amendments to SB 841
Page 2 of 4

(1) the parties to the proceeding adequately represent the interest of
the person seeking to intervene; or

(2) the issues that the person seeks to raise are irrelevant or
immaterial.

(c) (1) An intervenor has all the rights of a party to a proceeding.

(2) In a proceeding before the Commission, an individual who is an
intervenor may represent himself or herself.”.

On page 60 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, after the first line from the bottom of Amendment No. 2, insert:

“7–204.

(a) IN THIS SECTION, “CONSTRUCTION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–207 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, at least 30
days before a hearing, a public service company shall provide to each owner of land and
each owner of adjacent land, by certified mail, written notice of intent to run a line or
similar transmission device over, on, or under the land.

(2) AT THE SAME TIME A PERSON APPLIES FOR A CERTIFICATE OF
PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A
TRANSMISSION LINE UNDER § 7–207 OR § 7–208 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE, OR DIRECT THE PERSON APPLYING FOR A
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY TO PROVIDE, BY
CERTIFIED MAIL, NOTICE OF INTENT TO RUN A LINE OR SIMILAR TRANSMISSION
DEVICE OVER, ON, OR UNDER THE LAND TO:
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SB0841/813629/01 Jennings
Amendments to SB 841
Page 3 of 4

(I) EACH OWNER OF LAND THAT ABUTS THE PROPERTY
WHERE THE CONSTRUCTION IS PLANNED; AND

(II) FOR CONSTRUCTION OF AN OVERHEAD TRANSMISSION
LINE, EACH OWNER OF LAND AND EACH OWNER OF ADJACENT LAND.

(3) NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL ADVISE
THE RECIPIENT OF:

(I) ANY APPLICABLE RIGHT TO FILE AS AN INTERVENOR IN
THE PROCEEDING IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 3–106 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(II) THE PROCESS FOR FILING AS AN INTERVENOR IN THE
PROCEEDING, INCLUDING THE METHOD FOR FILING AND THE LOCATION WHERE
THE FILING IS REQUIRED TO BE SUBMITTED;

(III) THE DATE AND TIME BY WHICH THE RECIPIENT IS
REQUIRED TO FILE AS AN INTERVENOR IN ORDER TO BE CONSIDERED TIMELY;

AND

(IV) CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE COMMISSION AND THE

WEBSITE WHERE THE RECIPIENT MAY OBTAIN ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
REGARDING INTERVENTION RIGHTS AND PROCEDURES.

[(2)] (C) The public service company shall determine the property
owners from the current tax assessment records of the political subdivision in which the
property is located.

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
SB0841/813629/01 Jennings
Amendments to SB 841
Page 4 of 4

[(b) Unless the failure is willful or deliberate, the failure of a public service
company to provide notice does not invalidate a public hearing or require that another
hearing take place.]

(D) IF THE COMMISSION FINDS THAT A PERSON DIRECTED TO PROVIDE
NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(2) OF THIS SECTION FAILS TO PROVIDE NOTICE
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION:

(1) THE PUBLIC HEARING IS INVALIDATED AND ANOTHER
HEARING MUST TAKE PLACE IF THE FAILURE IS WILLFUL OR DELIBERATE; OR

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY, WITHIN ITS DISCRETION, REQUIRE
ANOTHER HEARING TO TAKE PLACE IF THE FAILURE IS NOT WILLFUL OR
DELIBERATE.”.
END OF PAGE 4