START OF PAGE 1
SB0841/353523/1

BY: Senator Ready

AMENDMENTS TO SENATE BILL 841, AS AMENDED

AMENDMENT NO. 1
On page 1 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments (SB0841/423325/1), in line 22 of Amendment No. 1, after “necessity;”
insert “requiring the Commission to establish and review certain electric system
metrics; requiring electric companies to submit a certain electric system utilization
improvement plan to the Commission at certain times;”.

On page 5 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, in line 13 of Amendment No. 1, after “7–216.1(d),” insert “7–219.1,”.

AMENDMENT NO. 2
On page 89 of the Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment
Amendments, after line 10 of Amendment No. 2, insert:

“7–219.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
MEANINGS INDICATED.

(2) “METRICS” MEANS MEASURES USED TO ASSESS THE
EFFICIENCY AND PERFORMANCE OF ELECTRIC SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE.

(3) “THROUGHPUT” MEANS THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY,
MEASURED IN KILOWATT–HOURS, THAT PASSES THROUGH THE ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OVER A
SPECIFIED PERIOD OF TIME.
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
SB0841/353523/01 Ready
Amendments to SB 841
Page 2 of 4

(4) “UTILIZATION” MEANS THE EXTENT TO WHICH ELECTRIC

SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE IS BEING USED TO MEET THE NEEDS OF RATEPAYERS
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR.

(B) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2027, THE PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION, BY ORDER OR REGULATION, SHALL ESTABLISH ELECTRIC SYSTEM
UTILIZATION METRICS THAT PROVIDE SUFFICIENTLY DETAILED AND
TRANSPARENT INFORMATION TO ENABLE THE COMMISSION TO ASSESS THE
EFFICIENCY AND PERFORMANCE OF EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY’S ELECTRIC
SYSTEM INFRASTRUCTURE.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL DETERMINE HOW METRICS SHALL BE
CALCULATED AND REPORTED TO ENSURE THE SECURITY OF THE ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS, INCLUDING THROUGH THE
AGGREGATION AND ANONYMIZATION OF DATA AND THE USE OF
CONFIDENTIALITY DESIGNATIONS.

(D) METRICS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) INCLUDE:

(I) TOTAL THROUGHPUT IN RELATION TO TOTAL POTENTIAL
THROUGHPUT;

(II) PEAK LOAD IN RELATION TO LOAD LIMITS;

(III) THE DURATION OF PEAK LOAD PERIODS; AND
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
SB0841/353523/01 Ready
Amendments to SB 841
Page 3 of 4

(IV) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THE COMMISSION
CONSIDERS NECESSARY; AND

(2) BE CALCULATED WITH SUFFICIENT TIME AND LOCATION
DETAIL TO ASSESS ELECTRIC SYSTEM UTILIZATION AT LEAST:

(I) SEASONALLY;

(II) SYSTEM–WIDE; AND

(III) AT THE FEEDER, SUBSTATION, AND TRANSMISSION LINE
LEVEL.

(E) ON OR BEFORE APRIL 1, 2027, AND ON OR BEFORE APRIL 1 EACH
YEAR THEREAFTER, THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION SHALL:

(1) REVIEW AND ASSESS EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY’S ELECTRIC
SYSTEM UTILIZATION METRICS; AND

(2) ESTABLISH TARGETED IMPROVEMENTS IN UTILIZATION THAT
IMPROVE RATEPAYER AFFORDABILITY WHILE CONSIDERING LOAD GROWTH,
RATE IMPACTS, AND OTHER STATE POLICY GOALS.

(F) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2027, AND ON OR BEFORE
OCTOBER 1 EVERY 3 YEARS THEREAFTER, EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL
SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSION AN ELECTRIC SYSTEM UTILIZATION IMPROVEMENT
PLAN DESIGNED TO:

(Over)
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
SB0841/353523/01 Ready
Amendments to SB 841
Page 4 of 4

(I) ACHIEVE THE TARGET IMPROVEMENTS IN ELECTRIC
SYSTEM UTILIZATION ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION; AND

(II) GENERATE BENEFITS THROUGH THE REALIZATION OF
ADDITIONAL VALUE FROM EXISTING ASSETS FOR PARTICIPATING CUSTOMERS,
UTILITIES, AND ALL RATEPAYERS.

(2) EACH ELECTRIC SYSTEM UTILIZATION IMPROVEMENT PLAN

SHALL INCLUDE COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGIES THAT ADDRESS
ELECTRIC SYSTEM NEEDS, IMPROVE ELECTRIC SYSTEM UTILIZATION AND
RATEPAYER AFFORDABILITY, AND MAY INCLUDE:

(I) FRONT–OF–THE–METER RESOURCES;

(II) BEHIND–THE–METER RESOURCES; AND

(III) ENABLING TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENTS.”.
END OF PAGE 4