START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 841 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 841 
(Senators Feldman and Ferguson) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
 
Maryland Energy Administration - Renewable Energy Generation Projects - 
Alternative Compliance Fee Auctions 
 
 
This bill repeals existing uses of revenues in the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) 
generated from alternative compliance payments (ACPs) (under the State’s Renewable 
Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS)) and instead requires the Maryland Energy 
Administration (MEA), in consultation with the Public Service Commission (PSC), to 
auction these revenues to renewable energy generation project developers through 
competitive bidding, awarding funding through contracts with the lowest-bidding 
developers. The funding must be used to support renewable energy generation projects that 
establish amounts of new renewable energy generation capacity in the State that are 
sufficient, when added to existing capacity, to allow electricity suppliers to satisfy the RPS 
in a given year. MEA must (1) conduct the auctions annually, beginning January 1, 2027; 
(2) adopt regulations to carry out the bill; and (3) comply with specified reporting 
requirements. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No direct net effect on SEIF expenditures; however, beginning in FY 2027, 
a portion of SEIF expenditures (expenditures of ACP revenues) are redirected to the 
auctions. To the extent the bill results in reduced ACPs in future years, SEIF revenues, and 
corresponding expenditures, decrease over time. 
 
Local Effect:  Local governments may be affected, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 841/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Beginning January 1, 2027, MEA must conduct, in consultation with PSC, 
an annual, competitive, low-bid alternative compliance fee auction (auction of ACP 
revenues) to award contracts to eligible bidders to fund projects for the development of 
renewable energy generation in the State. MEA, in consultation with PSC, must adopt 
implementing regulations. 
 
All proceeds from ACPs accrued in SEIF must be made available each year for each 
auction (the bill repeals all existing provisions authorizing or requiring the use of ACPs 
accrued in SEIF for other purposes). If the capacity target (discussed below) for an auction 
can be met at a cost below the allocated funding, MEA may carry forward any funding to 
the next auction or apply the funds for any additional megawatts of renewable energy 
generation that have been offered under the auction.  
 
Auction Planning 
 
Each year, MEA and PSC must set the capacity target for the amount of renewable energy 
generation required for that year. “Capacity target” means a calculation of the amount of 
renewable energy generation needed in a given year to satisfy the RPS for a specific year, 
minus the amount already procured from other sources. “Renewable energy” means energy 
generated from geothermal energy generating systems, offshore wind energy generating 
systems, or solar energy generating systems.  
 
In determining the capacity target for each auction, MEA and PSC must use a transparent 
methodology, including (1) renewable energy credit (REC) shortfalls from the prior year; 
(2) anticipated growth in renewable energy over time; (3) projected ACP revenues; 
(4) modeled expected energy clearing prices; and (5) trends in renewable energy generation 
in the State.  
 
For each auction, MEA must procure projects for the generation of renewable energy in a 
quantity that meets or exceeds any REC shortfalls in the prior year. MEA and PSC may set 
a minimum level of megawatts required from each type of renewable energy source in the 
auction or specific procurement thresholds for all types of renewable energy sources 
collectively.  
 
MEA, in consultation with PSC, must develop and conduct the auctions in a manner that 
is cost effective and maintains and promotes the development of renewable energy in the 
State. The competitive auction process may require MEA to solicit a series of bids from 
renewable energy project developers for the development of renewable energy generation 
projects that are needed to meet electricity demand in a cost-effective manner. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 841/ Page 3 
Competitive Bidding and Award Process 
 
To be eligible to submit a bid, a person must be a renewable energy generation project 
developer, and MEA, in consultation with PSC, must set eligibility requirements for 
bidders, including requiring each bidder to (1) provide proof of financial integrity; (2) post 
a bond or other similar instrument; (3) agree to be subject to all applicable taxes; and 
(4) comply with any other requirements MEA determines to be in the public interest. 
 
Eligible bidders must submit competitive bids by specifying the actual amount of 
megawatts to be generated by the renewable energy generating project and a price per 
megawatt that would be required from the auction. MEA must rank the bids received from 
lowest to highest cost per megawatt and award funds derived from ACPs to the lowest bid 
or bids. MEA must award bids until the capacity target for the auction is reached. The 
bidder who submits the lowest responsive bid for developing a renewable energy 
generation project must be awarded the amount of funds to build the renewable energy 
generation project. MEA may refuse to accept some or all of the bids made in a competitive 
auction in accordance with standards that it adopts. 
 
Project Administration and Enforcement 
 
MEA must set delivery deadlines, including specified milestones, for each renewable 
energy project that is awarded funding from an auction. If a developer is delayed in 
reaching their delivery goals due to interconnection or permitting challenges, MEA may 
grant an extension if the developer provides documentation of the challenge or delay. 
Additionally, MEA must establish a method of collection against any developer awarded a 
contract through the auction process to recapture any funds received as a result of 
(1) misappropriation, overpayment, or fraud or (2) failure to meet milestones or delivery 
dates. 
 
Disclosure and Reporting Requirements 
 
Within 90 days after all contracts for renewable energy generation projects are executed, 
MEA must publicly disclose the names of each successful bidder and the megawatts to be 
delivered by the development of the renewable energy generation project.  
 
By July 1, 2027, and each July 1 thereafter, MEA and PSC must report to the 
General Assembly on the administration of each auction, including:  (1) the amount of 
megawatts procured through the auction; (2) the cost per megawatt of renewable energy 
allocated in the auction; (3) the number of renewable energy credits created as a result of 
the auction; and (4) any other information MEA and PSC consider relevant.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 841/ Page 4 
Current Law:   
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard  
 
Maryland’s RPS was enacted in 2004 to facilitate a gradual transition to renewable sources 
of energy. The RPS establishes eligibility tiers (Tier 1 and Tier 2) and includes carve-outs 
for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. The RPS requires that renewable sources generate 
specified percentages of Maryland’s electricity supply each year. Utilities and other 
electricity suppliers must submit RECs equal to these percentages in each year or else pay 
an ACP equivalent to the shortfall.  
 
For 2026, the requirements are 38.0% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 8.0% from 
solar and 0.5% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. For 
more information on Maryland’s RPS, see the Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
MEA administers SEIF, which, among other revenue sources, receives funds from the sale 
of carbon dioxide emissions allowances under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and 
ACP revenues through the RPS. Additionally, SEIF will receive a portion of corporate 
income tax revenues from qualified data centers that are operational on or after  
January 1, 2026. 
 
Nonsolar ACP revenues may be used to support the creation of new renewable energy 
sources in the State that are owned by or directly benefit low- to moderate-income, 
overburdened, or underserved communities. Solar ACP revenues must be used to support 
the creation of new solar energy sources in the State that are owned by or directly benefit 
those communities or low- to moderate-income households. In fiscal 2026 only, up to 
$100.0 million of ACP revenues may be used for solar development on State government 
property and local government clean energy projects. Additionally, through the end of 
fiscal 2027, at least 20% of ACP revenues resulting from solar energy requirements under 
the RPS must be used to provide grants to support the installation of new solar energy 
generating systems under the Customer-Sited Solar Program (discussed below). Up to 
10% of the solar ACP revenues are credited to an administrative expense account for costs 
related to the administration of SEIF. Finally, ACP revenues may be used to provide grants 
to electric companies to be refunded or credited to each residential distribution customer 
based on the customer’s consumption of electricity supply that is subject to the RPS. 
 
Customer-Sited Solar Program  
 
Chapter 595 of 2024 established the Customer-Sited Solar Program within MEA to 
(1) increase deployment of customer-sited solar energy generating systems and (2) provide 
grants to eligible customer-generators that have installed solar energy generating systems 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 841/ Page 5 
with or without energy storage. At least 20% of ACP revenues resulting from solar energy 
requirements under the RPS must be used to provide grants to support the installation of 
new solar energy generating systems under the program. The program may provide a grant 
to an income-verified eligible customer-generator with a low- to moderate-income, in an 
amount equal to $750 per kilowatt of nameplate capacity for a solar energy generating 
system, up to a maximum of $7,500 per system. The program terminates June 30, 2027.  
 
“Low- to moderate-income” means a household with an annual household income at or 
below 150% of the median income for the State. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that the bill does not have a direct, net effect 
on SEIF expenditures, since it only redirects a portion of SEIF spending (spending of ACP 
revenues in SEIF) toward funding of contracts to support renewable energy projects under 
the auction process established by the bill. MEA advises that it can administer the auction 
process with existing resources and staff, including staff currently administering 
ACP-funded programs that will end due to the redirection of ACP funding under the bill. 
 
Over time, to the extent the bill increases renewable energy generation capacity in the State 
in comparison to renewable energy generation capacity in the absence of the bill, REC 
shortfalls decline, resulting in a decrease in ACPs and SEIF revenues. The timing or 
magnitude of such a decrease, however, cannot reliably estimated. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the bill, beginning in fiscal 2027, redirects ACP 
revenues in SEIF away from planned renewable and clean energy deployment programs or 
initiatives from which local governments otherwise receive funding, local government 
revenues and expenditures decrease. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent the bill’s redirection of SEIF expenditures increases 
the overall volume of renewable energy generation development, small businesses engaged 
in related construction and maintenance activities may benefit from increased demand for 
their goods or services. Presumably, some small businesses may also be negatively 
affected, to the extent the bill shifts the type or scale of renewable energy generation 
projects that are funded by ACP revenues away from projects that a given small business 
has the ability, or opportunity, to support. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Legislative Services notes that the 
Governor’s fiscal 2027 budget plan (reflected in the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced and 
the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2026 (Senate Bill 284/House Bill 392) as 
introduced) allocates ACP revenues in SEIF toward various purposes in fiscal 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 841/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Energy Administration; Public Service Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2026 
 
jg/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 841/ Page 7 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Electric 
companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy credits 
(RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each year 
or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. 
Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely through RECs, with 
negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that has not been the 
case more recently. Generally, the Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for 
purposes related to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2026, the requirements are 38.0% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 8.0% from solar 
and 0.50% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 
14.5% from solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 841/ Page 8 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a five-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the  
Generation Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by  
PJM Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of 
RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water‑heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; thermal energy from a thermal biomass system; and raw or treated 
wastewater used as a heat source or sink for heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large 
hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from Tier 1 
beginning in 2022, although some black liquor RECs remain eligible through the duration 
of certain contracts. Chapters 625 and 626 of 2025 removed waste-to-energy and 
refuse-derived fuel from RPS eligibility. The exclusion generally applies to all RPS 
compliance years starting on or after January 1, 2025, except for a facility owned by a 
public instrumentality of the State (i.e., Montgomery County), which applies beginning 
July 1, 2026. 
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $616.9 million in 2024:  $254.7 million 
for 7.0 million RECs and $362.3 million in ACPs. This continues a multi-year trend of 
increasing overall compliance costs, reliance on ACPs, and REC prices. Of note,  
2024 continues the trend of 2023 that ACPs have been used in a significant way for general  
Tier 1 compliance. In fact, 2024 had the fewest RECs retired since 2014. ACP prices were 
in many instances less expensive than REC prices and, as a result, suppliers chose to pay 
the ACP rather than retire RECs. Compliance costs and REC prices for the most recent 
five-year period are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 841/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2020-2024 
 
 
2020 
2021 
2022 
2023 
2024 
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
RECs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$99.8  
$187.3  
$246.5  
$124.9  
$90.1  
Tier 1 Solar 
122.9 
144.4 
101.4 
109.6 
150.4 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
0.1 
2.2 
Tier 2  
0.4 
1.0 
4.4 
9.3 
12.0 
RECs Subtotal 
$223.1  
$332.7  
$352.3  
$243.8  
$254.7  
ACPs 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1  
$0.0  
$0.2  
$0.7  
$262.4  
$319.4  
Tier 1 Solar 
0.0 
76.9 
85.9 
56.0 
37.2 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
1.6 
4.4 
Tier 2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
1.3 
ACPs Subtotal 
$0.1  
$77.1  
$86.6  
$320.4  
$362.3 
Total 
$223.2  
$409.8  
$438.9  
$564.2  
$616.9  
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 
$8.24  
$14.36  
$17.80  
$24.61 
$27.09  
Tier 1 Solar 
$66.10 
$72.59 
$57.80 
$56.67 
$58.56 
Tier 1 Geothermal 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
$94.47 
$94.04 
Tier 2 
$1.06 
$6.45 
$7.42 
$10.50 
$11.16 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
n/a:  not applicable 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The post-2022 geothermal system carve-out became 
effective in 2023. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Approximately 45% of RECs used for compliance in 2024 came from in-state resources, 
up from 35% in 2023. RECs derived from three fuel types, solar (43.4%), black liquor 
(16.2%), and wind (15.1%), were the predominant sources of Tier 1 compliance in 2024. 
Maryland facilities generated approximately 5.7 million RECs in 2024:  1.5 million Tier 1 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 841/ Page 10 
nonsolar RECs, 2.4 million Tier 1 SRECs, and 1.8 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can 
be used for compliance in both Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are 
geographic and energy source restrictions. 
 
Related Studies and Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2024, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
PPRP’s supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a 
goal of 100% by 2040 can be found here. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also issued an RPS report in 2025, which can be 
found here. The report contains additional detail on the program, significant statutory 
changes, and visualizations of planned and actual RPS percentage requirements over time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10