START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 876 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 876 
(Senator Attar) 
Finance 
 
 
Recovery Residences - Certification - Requirement 
 
   
This bill requires that a recovery residence, beginning January 1, 2027, be certified by a 
credentialing entity approved by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) before 
operating in the State. The bill explicitly exempts a recovery residence from the 
requirement to be licensed before program services may be provided. The bill also updates 
reporting requirements for the credentialing entity such that it must submit an updated list 
of certified recovery residences to MDH as necessary. MDH must maintain a list of each 
credentialing entity and certified recovery residence on its website. The bill repeals the 
requirement that the list indicate whether the owner of a recovery residence has received a 
valid certificate of compliance. The bill also makes clarifying and conforming changes.    
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $323,000 beginning in FY 2027 
for staff to handle the certification of additional recovery residences, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
323,000 
377,800 
395,500 
413,500 
431,500 
Net Effect 
($323,000) 
($377,800) 
($395,500) 
($413,500) 
($431,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 876/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A recovery residence is a service that provides alcohol- and illicit‑drug‑free 
housing to individuals with substance-related disorders or addictive disorders (including 
those that co-occur with mental disorders) and does not include clinical treatment services. 
 
While a behavioral health program must generally be licensed by the Secretary to operate 
in the State, the Secretary may exempt recovery residences if the organization holds 
meetings or provides support services but does not provide any type of treatment. 
 
MDH designated the Behavioral Health Administration as the approved credentialing 
entity for recovery residences. The Maryland Certification of Recovery Residences 
oversees the application, certification, recertification, monitoring, and inspection of 
recovery residences to improve the quality of services. Maryland RecoveryNet partners 
with service providers across the State to fund access to recovery support services for 
individuals seeking treatment for substance use and co-occurring disorders.  
 
MDH must publish a list of each recovery residence operating in each county of the State 
on its website with indicators as to whether the owner of a recovery residence has received 
a valid certificate of compliance.  
 
A certificate of compliance is valid for one year from the date of issuance. The 
credentialing entity may revoke the certificate of compliance if the credentialing entity 
finds that the recovery residence is not in compliance with requirements.   
 
State Expenditures:  MDH advises that, as of January 2026, there are 278 certified 
recovery residences in the State. As of September 2025, MDH has identified 215 sober 
living facilities that were not certified as recovery residences by MDH and likely would 
need to become certified to operate under the bill. Therefore, MDH advises that it would 
require 15 additional staff to conduct inspections and site visits and investigate complaints. 
Additionally, to the extent newly certified residences seek funding through RecoveryNet, 
staff would be responsible for additional administrative work related to funding. Under 
these assumptions, MDH general fund expenditures would increase by nearly $1.2 million 
in fiscal 2027. 
 
However, MDH advises that it currently has three investigators and one program manager 
who handle the existing 278 certified recovery residences. Therefore, assuming the number 
of recovery residences seeking certification under the bill would approximately double, 
MDH would likely require four additional staff members. 
 
Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $323,029 in fiscal 2027, which accounts 
for the bill’s October 1, 2026 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 876/ Page 3 
three investigators and one program manager to conduct site visits and inspections and 
investigate complaints related to new recovery residences seeking certification. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$286,466 
Operating Expenses 
36,563 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$323,029 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
To the extent that a significant number of newly certified recovery residences seek 
RecoveryNet funding, and to the extent that the number of recovery residences seeking 
certification grows significantly in the out-years, additional staff may be required.  
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that recovery residences are small businesses, they 
must be certified to operate in the State as of January 1, 2027. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill takes effect October 1, 2026, and requires all recovery 
residences to be certified by January 1, 2027 (three months later). This timeframe is likely 
not feasible for MDH to hire additional staff and certify an estimated 215 additional 
facilities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3