START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 815 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 815 
(Senator Hayes) 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
 
Correctional Services – Maryland Correctional Enterprises – Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), in 
collaboration with an institution of higher education in the State, to (1) provide a 
comprehensive report on correctional industry programs in Maine, Ohio, Kansas,  
and California and (2) make recommendations regarding ways to improve 
Maryland Correctional Enterprises (MCE) to achieve successful reentry outcomes. By 
December 1, 2026, DPSCS must submit an interim report of its progress to the Governor 
and the General Assembly. By December 1, 2027, DPSCS must submit a final report of its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2026, and terminates December 31, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in general fund expenditures in FY 2027 and 
2028, as discussed below. Higher education revenues and expenditures may be affected, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Correctional Enterprises:  MCE provides work and job training for incarcerated 
individuals in State correctional facilities. MCE produces goods and supplies services at a 
cost that does not exceed the prevailing average market price. These goods and services 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 815/ Page 2 
are used by local, State, and federal agencies. These goods are also available for use by 
charitable, civic, educational, fraternal, or religious organizations. 
 
Management Council:  The MCE Management Council is responsible for advising MCE 
on its specific proposals to establish new industries and improve the quality and quantity 
of job training programs and recommending the establishment and maintenance of 
industrial plants and service centers, as specified. In addition, the council must: 
 
 
review the operation of MCE programs to determine (1) whether there is undue 
competition with private enterprise and recommend necessary adjustments to 
prevent undue competition and (2) whether there is any negative impact on workers 
in the State, including wage depression or job displacement; 
 
review the standards for goods and services and the pricing schedules as 
recommended by the Chief Executive Officer of MCE; 
 
review the occupational health and safety record of programs and other working 
conditions of incarcerated individuals in MCE programs; 
 
review the success of MCE in (1) meeting the employability development needs of 
incarcerated individuals and (2) coordinating work programs with other 
rehabilitative programs; 
 
solicit and review information pertaining to concerns of participating incarcerated 
individuals; 
 
recommend changes as necessary to meet the goals and objectives of MCE; 
 
solicit ideas, proposals, and suggestions from business representatives, nonprofit 
organizations, government entities, and members of the public as to how MCE could 
enhance the work experience of incarcerated individuals and increase the ability of 
incarcerated individuals to obtain gainful employment after release; 
 
review and recommend opportunities with private sector employers to expand the 
Prison Industries Enhancement Program; 
 
review and identify ways to improve the business practices of MCE in its sales, 
marketing, inventory, warehousing, and product line operations; 
 
monitor customer satisfaction with price, quality, delivery, and after delivery 
service; and 
 
review and comment on MCE operating and capital budgets, including cash 
forecasts. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DPSCS estimates that the projected cost to contract with an institution 
of higher education to conduct the evaluation necessary to complete the comprehensive 
report ranges from $150,000 to $200,000; however, DPSCS did not provide any 
information on how it developed this estimate. Regardless, the Department of Legislative 
Services acknowledges that DPSCS likely does not have sufficient staff to complete the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 815/ Page 3 
required report and estimates that general fund expenditures increase, potentially 
significantly, in fiscal 2027 and 2028 for DPSCS to contract with an institution of higher 
education to complete the required report. 
 
It is unclear if DPSCS would contract with a public institution of higher education or a 
private institution of higher education under the bill; thus, the extent to which any public 
institutions of higher education may be affected is unknown. To the extent a public 
institution of higher education is selected for collaboration, any payment by DPSCS is 
received and expended as higher education revenues and expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2026 
 
caw/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3