START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 859 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 859 
(Senator Hettleman)(By Request - Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
State Personnel - State Fiscal Leadership Capacity 
 
   
This bill authorizes, at the request of an appointing authority, the Secretary of Budget and 
Management to grant an exemption to the State pay plan to assist in recruiting and retaining 
a chief financial officer (CFO) for a unit of the Executive Branch of State government that 
receives at least $2.0 billion in State and federal funding and employs a CFO. For these 
units, the bill establishes minimum qualifications for CFOs, which must provide the 
Comptroller’s Office with all necessary entries of the unit’s financial information at the 
close of the fiscal year for an Annual Comprehensive Financial Report (CFR). CFOs must 
ensure that each entry is adequate and accurately recorded and must certify to the 
Comptroller on the adequacy and accuracy of the information as specified. Additionally, 
CFOs must provide the Comptroller’s General Accounting Division the information 
necessary to prepare the CFR and Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards, along with 
a letter attesting to the information’s accuracy and completeness. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (general and special funds) may increase to the extent 
that appointing authorities of specified units of the Executive Branch request and receive 
an exemption from the State pay plan to pay higher wages to CFOs beginning in FY 2027. 
The FY 2027 budget as introduced includes $2.0 million in the Dedicated Purpose Account 
(DPA) that may be used for this purpose. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 859/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Within the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), there are two pay 
plans:  the Standard Pay Plan and the Executive Pay Plan. The purpose of the pay plans is 
to provide employees in positions that involve comparable effort, knowledge, 
responsibilities, skills, and working conditions with comparable pay according to the 
relative value of services performed. The Standard Pay Plan includes all positions in SPMS 
and all other positions for which the Secretary of Budget and Management has authority to 
administer pay. The Executive Pay Plan includes each permanent position in the 
Executive Branch, including each permanent position in the Governor’s Office, that is not 
included in the Standard Pay Plan and has a pay rate equal to or exceeding the lowest 
pay rate in the Executive Pay Plan.  
 
Pay rates in the Standard Pay Plan or Executive Pay Plan may be set by a series of 
pay grades (or executive pay grades) and steps within each grade, fixed rates, or minimum 
and maximum amounts. When setting or amending a pay rate, the Secretary of Budget and 
Management must consider the prevailing pay rates for comparable services in private and 
public employment, experience, living costs, benefits, and the financial condition and 
policies of the State. A pay rate is subject to any limitations included in the State budget.  
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may increase pay rates for a specific class under 
the Standard Pay Plan with the approval of the Governor in order to recruit or retain 
competent personnel or to ensure that pay rates adequately compensate for the effort, 
knowledge, responsibility, skills, and working conditions of employees in that class. If an 
amendment to the pay plan affects a position in the Executive Branch that is listed in the 
budget bill, the amendment is contingent on the approval of the Board of Public Works. 
An amendment to the Standard Pay Plan may not take effect unless sufficient money is 
available in the budget to cover the resulting pay rates. 
 
Each budget bill must contain a separate section that includes the proposed salary schedule 
for the Executive Pay Plan and a listing of the job classification and title of each position 
in the Executive Pay Plan, including the proposed salary grade for each position, and is 
subject to the General Assembly’s approval. 
 
State Expenditures:  A unit of the Executive Branch of State government that receives at 
least $2.0 billion in State and federal funding and employs a CFO can likely meet the bill’s 
reporting requirements with existing resources. However, State expenditures may increase 
to the extent that appointing authorities of those units of the Executive Branch request and 
receive an exemption from the State pay plan to pay higher wages to CFOs beginning in 
fiscal 2027. The fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes $2.0 million in DPA that may 
be used for this purpose. Based on the fiscal 2027 operating and capital budgets as 
introduced, affected agencies may include, but are not necessarily limited to, the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 859/ Page 3 
Maryland Department of Health, the Maryland State Department of Education, the 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), the Department of Human Services, and 
the University System of Maryland (USM).  
 
Additional Comment:  The Department of Legislative Services notes that MDOT and 
USM each operate under independent personnel management systems that are not subject 
to the authority of the Secretary of Budget and Management. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; University System of 
Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2026 
 
me/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3