START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 972 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 972 
(Senator Hayes) 
Finance 
 
 
Baltimore City - 40th Alcoholic Beverages District - Class B Beer, Wine, and 
Liquor Licenses 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue, in the 
40th alcoholic beverages district, a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license for a restaurant 
on the odd side of the 1000 block of West Baltimore Street if (1) the applicant executes a 
memorandum of understanding with the Hollins Roundhouse Association; (2) the applicant 
does not transfer the license to a different location or to another person; and (3) the board 
waives the minimum seating requirement of 75 individuals. The bill also authorizes the 
board to issue, in the 40th alcoholic beverages district, a Class B beer, wine, and liquor 
license for a restaurant on the even side of the 800 block of North Charles Street if (1) the 
applicant executes a memorandum of understanding with the Mount Vernon-Belvedere 
Association and (2) the board waives the minimum seating requirement of 75 individuals. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the board may not issue a new alcoholic beverages license in 
the 40th alcoholic beverages district. However, the board may issue a Class B beer, wine, 
and liquor license to a restaurant in the 40th alcoholic beverages district if the restaurant  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 972/ Page 2 
(1) has a minimum capital investment, not including the cost of land and buildings, of 
$200,000 for restaurant facilities and (2) has a minimum seating capacity of 75 individuals. 
The annual license fee is $2,060. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2