START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 927 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 927 
(Senator Hayes, et al.) 
Finance 
 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Related Event Promoter's Permit 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue a related 
event promoter’s permit that authorizes a “related event promoter” or participating license 
holder to conduct a social event related to and around the same time and location as the 
Kappa Alpha Psi Conclave. The bill specifies requirements, restrictions, fees, and penalties 
applicable to the permit and authorizes the board to adopt regulations establishing 
requirements for conducting and providing public notice of a specified related event. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2026, and terminates December 31, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
 
Local Effect:  The Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners can likely handle 
monitoring and enforcement with existing resources. Baltimore City revenues may 
increase minimally in FY 2027 through 2028 from application and permit fees to the extent 
permits are issued under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:            
 
Definitions 
 
“Related event” means an event related to the Kappa Alpha Psi Conclave in which (1) a 
license holder participates in a coordinated promotion with a third-party promoter to sell 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 927/ Page 2 
or provide alcoholic beverages during a specified time and (2) at least 75 individuals are 
reasonably anticipated to participate. It includes an event for which tickets are sold to the 
public, either in advance or at the door, or a cover charge is imposed, including a concert, 
an entertainment event, a happy hour, or a party. 
 
“Related event promoter” means an individual, a for-profit organization, or a nonprofit 
organization that promotes an event related to the Kappa Alpha Psi Conclave.  
 
Application Process 
 
A related event promoter or participating license holder on behalf of a related event 
promoter must apply for a permit from the board before the related event promoter may 
publicize, sell tickets for, organize, operate, produce, or stage a related event. A holder of 
a State caterer’s license must obtain a Class C per diem beer, beer and wine, or beer, wine, 
and liquor license from the board before the holder may act as a participating license holder 
at a related event.  
 
The board may grant a permit to an applicant who submits an application at least 30 days 
before the date of the related event. Before being granted the permit, an applicant must  
(1) obtain written consent from a designee of Visit Baltimore and (2) if required, based on 
the type of premises to be used, obtain a special event permit from the Baltimore City 
Department of Transportation and provide a copy of the special event permit to the board. 
An applicant must also provide a completed application that (1) is dated and notarized;  
(2) lists each premises for which the related event will be held; and (3) includes any other 
document that the board requires. An individual need not be a resident of or registered 
voter in Baltimore City to be eligible for the permit. 
 
Within 7 days of receipt of a permit application, the board must grant or deny the permit 
or request additional information from the applicant. A permit may not be altered within 
14 days before the scheduled related event. 
 
Permit Fees 
 
The application fee for a permit is $50. The permit fee is payable when the permit is granted 
and is either $500 or $1,500, contingent on whether the Baltimore City Fire Marshal 
determines that the maximum capacity of the proposed event location is less than 
300 people or if the capacity is 300 or more people, respectively.  
 
Penalties for Violations 
 
For the offense of publicizing, selling tickets, or imposing a cover charge for, organizing, 
operating, producing, facilitating, or staging a related event with the knowledge or reason 
to know that a related event promoter’s permit has not been obtained, the board must 
impose a fine of at least $1,000 and up to $3,000 or suspend the license or both.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 927/ Page 3 
For a violation of the bill’s requirement that a State caterer’s licensee obtain a Class C 
per diem license before acting as a participating license older at a related event, the 
Executive Director of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission must impose a fine 
of at least $1,000 and up to $3,000 and/or suspend the State caterer’s license.  
 
Current Law:  State law authorizes local boards of license commissioners to issue special 
alcoholic beverages licenses for use during specified periods. Chapter 764 of 2019 
authorized the board to issue a related event promoter’s permit for social events related to 
and around the same time and location as the CIAA Basketball Tournament.  
Chapter 391 of 2023 extended the termination date of the related event promoter’s permit 
to June 30, 2025, and updated the application process and certain definitions associated 
with the permit.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc. 2027 Conclave is set to be 
held in Baltimore City in July 2027. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2026 
 
jg/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Beatrice F. Amoateng 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3