START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 933 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 933 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Judiciary Department - Commission on Judicial Disabilities - Temporary 
Appointment 
 
 
This bill proposes a constitutional amendment that, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election, authorizes the chair of the Commission on Judicial Disabilities to take 
specified actions in the event of a member’s recusal or disqualification, or the expiration 
of a member’s term without a replacement. Specifically, the chair may (1) recall a former 
member to serve as a temporary substitute member or (2) request that the Governor appoint 
a temporary substitute member or extend a current member’s term. On request of the chair 
of the commission, the Governor may appoint a temporary substitute member for a 
specified period of time or extend a current member’s term until a replacement is 
appointed. Any temporary substitute member is subject to the same qualifications that were 
applicable to the member for whom the substitute is temporarily appointed, may not have 
been rejected by the Senate for appointment to the commission, and if the member is a 
judge or an attorney, must be a member in good standing of the Maryland Bar. The bill 
also withdraws and repeals Chapters 848 and 849 of 2025, which proposed a similar 
constitutional amendment, as discussed below.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the constitutional amendment is approved by the voters, the Commission 
on Judicial Disabilities experiences operational efficiencies; there is otherwise no material 
impact on State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 933/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities – Generally 
 
As authorized under §§ 4A and 4B of Article IV of the Maryland Constitution, the 
Commission on Judicial Disabilities investigates complaints against judges in the 
State courts and recommends disciplinary action to the Supreme Court of Maryland, as 
appropriate. 
 
Membership:  The commission is composed of 11 members who are appointed by the 
Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate. Of the members, in addition to being 
residents of the State: 
 
 
3 must be judges, as specified; 
 
3 must be appointed from those persons who are admitted to practice law in the 
State, as specified; and 
 
5 must represent the public and not be active or retired judges, not be a person 
admitted to practice law in the State, and not have a financial relationship with or 
receive compensation from a judge or a person admitted to practice law in the State. 
 
Terms and Compensation:  The term of office of each member is four years beginning on 
January 1 following the expiration of the member’s predecessor’s term. A member may 
not serve more than two four‐year terms, or for more than a total of ten years if appointed 
to fill a vacancy. 
 
Following the expiration of a member’s term, other than an automatic termination 
(disqualification) as specified in the Maryland Constitution, the commission may conduct 
business in the ordinary course with that member continuing to serve, until such time as 
the Governor appoints a replacement. 
 
A member of the commission may not receive compensation for the member’s services but 
is entitled to reimbursement for any expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of 
the member’s duties. 
 
Recusal by a Member:  Under Maryland Rule 18‐411, a member of the commission must 
not participate as a member in any discussion, disposition, or proceeding in which (1) the 
member is a complainant; (2) the member’s disability, impairment, or sanctionable conduct 
is in issue; (3) the member’s impartiality might reasonably be questioned; (4) the member 
has personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts involved in the proceeding; or (5) the 
recusal of a judicial member would otherwise be required by the Maryland Code of 
Judicial Conduct. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 933/ Page 3 
Disqualification of a Member:  Under the Maryland Constitution, a member’s membership 
automatically terminates, as applicable, if the member (1) who is appointed from among 
judges in the State ceases to be a judge; (2) who is appointed from among those admitted 
to the practice of law becomes a judge; (3) who is representing the public becomes a judge 
or is admitted to the practice of law in the State or has a financial relationship with or 
receives compensation from a judge or a person admitted to practice law in the State; or 
(4) ceases to be a resident of the State. 
 
Vacancies:  Any vacancies on the commission must be filled for the unexpired term by the 
Governor in the same manner as for making of appointments to the commission and subject 
to the same qualifications which were applicable to the person causing the vacancy. 
 
Quorum in a Proceeding:  Under Maryland Rule 18‐411, a majority of the members of the 
commission constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, as long as at least 
one judge, one attorney, and one public member are present. If, by reason of vacancies or 
recusals, the quorum in a particular proceeding does not include at least one judge, 
one attorney, and one public member, the Supreme Court of Maryland, only with the 
written consent of the judge who is the subject of the proceeding, may designate a judge, 
including a senior judge, an attorney, or a member of the public to serve as a substitute 
member of the commission for purposes of a quorum in that proceeding. 
 
Chapters 848 and 849 of 2025 
 
Chapters 848 and 849 (repealed and withdrawn under the bill) proposed a constitutional 
amendment nearly identical to the one proposed by the bill. However, the Acts did not 
include the prohibition related to a temporary substitute member’s inability to serve if the 
member was rejected by the Senate for appointment to the commission.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 619 and HB 788 of 2025, which were enacted as Chapters 849 and 
848. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 933/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2026 
Third Reader - March 21, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4