START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 980 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 980 
(Senator Salling) 
Budget and Taxation 
 
 
Property Tax - Credit for Dwelling House of Disabled Veterans and Surviving 
Spouses - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters a local option property tax credit for specified disabled veterans and 
surviving spouses beginning in fiscal 2027 by (1) altering the maximum income eligibility 
requirement; and (2) providing a higher property tax credit for disabled veterans with a 
service-connected disability rating of between 70% and 75%. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2026, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2027 to the 
extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit; and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit and existing recipients receiving a higher property tax credit. Local expenditures 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, county and municipal governments are 
authorized to grant a property tax credit against the county or municipal property tax 
imposed on a dwelling house of a disabled veteran. In order to qualify for the property tax 
credit, the disabled veteran’s federal adjusted gross income (FAGI) for the immediately 
preceding taxable year cannot exceed $100,000. The amount of the property tax credit is 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 980/ Page 2 
based on the disabled veteran’s level of service-connected disability. The bill alters the 
FAGI limit by specifying that FAGI may not exceed (1) $100,000 if a disabled veteran is 
filing an individual income tax return and (2) $200,000 if filing a joint income tax return. 
 
Under current law, the optional property tax credit is equal to:   
 
 
50% of the county or municipal property tax for a service-connected disability rating 
of at least 75% but not more than 99%; or 
 
25% of the county or municipal property tax for a service-connected disability rating 
of at least 50% but not more than 74%. 
 
The bill increases the property tax credit for disabled veterans with a service-connected 
disability rating of between 70% and 75% by making the following changes:   
 
 
50% of the county or municipal property tax for a service-connected disability rating 
of at least 70% but not more than 99%; or 
 
25% of the county or municipal property tax for a service-connected disability rating 
of at least 50% but not more than 69%. 
 
Under current law, a disabled veteran must apply for the property tax credit by providing 
to the county or municipality (1) a copy of the disabled veteran’s discharge certificate from 
active military, naval, or air service and (2) a certification of the disabled veteran’s 
disability from the Veterans Administration (VA). The disabled veteran’s certificate of 
disability may not be inspected by individuals other than the disabled veteran or appropriate 
employees of the county or municipality.  
 
Under current law, a disabled veteran is defined as an individual who is honorably 
discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active military, naval, or air 
service as defined in 38 U.S.C. § 101. In addition, the individual must have been declared 
by the VA to have:  (1) a permanent service-connected disability of at least 50% that results 
from blindness or any other disabling cause that is reasonably certain to continue for the 
life of the veteran and was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the veteran; or (2) a 
nonpermanent service-connected disability of 100% that results from blindness or any 
other disabling cause that was not caused or incurred by misconduct.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 
to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit, and the changes to existing 
eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for the property 
tax credit and existing recipients receiving a higher property tax credit. The amount of the 
revenue decrease depends on several factors including:  (1) the number of eligible veterans 
and surviving spouses in each jurisdiction that become eligible for the tax credit due to the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 980/ Page 3 
higher income eligibility threshold; (2) the number of existing tax credit recipients with a 
service-connected disability rating of between 70% and 75%; (3) the assessed value of each 
eligible dwelling; and (4) local property tax rates. 
 
Currently, only three counties (Anne Arundel, Frederick, and Montgomery) have 
authorized this property tax credit. 
 
As a point of reference, there are approximately 331,900 veterans in Maryland, of which 
23% have a service-connected disability rating of at least 50%, as shown in Exhibit 1. 
Approximately 30,700 disabled veterans are currently receiving a property tax exemption 
due to a 100% service-connected disability. Therefore, approximately 45,500 disabled 
veterans would be eligible for this property tax credit, assuming they meet the income 
eligibility threshold established by the bill. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Level of Service-Connected Disability Rating for Maryland Veterans 
2024 
 
 
Number 
Percent of Total 
Total 
331,906 
100.0% 
No service-connected disability 
218,849 
65.9% 
Service-connected disability 
113,057 
34.1% 
0 percent 
3,399 
1.0% 
10 or 20 percent 
17,760 
5.4% 
30 or 40 percent 
12,354 
3.7% 
50 or 60 percent 
13,184 
4.0% 
70 percent or higher 
63,024 
19.0% 
Rating not reported 
3,336 
1.0% 
 
Source:  American Community Survey, U.S. Census Bureau 
 
 
Additional information on local property tax credits and exemptions is provided in the 
Guide to Local Government Taxing Authority. Information on local property tax rates and 
revenues can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report. A copy of both reports is 
available on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
Additional Comments:  The following is a brief summary of the existing State and local 
property tax exemption for disabled veterans with a 100% service-connected disability 
rating. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 980/ Page 4 
Property Tax Exemption for Disabled Veterans and Surviving Spouses 
 
The real property owned by disabled veterans, as their legal residence, is exempt from 
taxation if specified requirements are met. A disabled veteran is an individual who is 
honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service in any 
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. To qualify for the tax exemption, the disabled veteran 
must have a 100% service-connected disability rating. Real property owned by the 
surviving spouse of a disabled veteran and the surviving spouse of an individual who died 
in the line of duty while in active military, naval, or air service of the United States is 
exempt from taxation. In addition, a home owned by the surviving spouse of a veteran of 
the U.S. Armed Forces who receives Dependency and Indemnity Compensation from the 
VA is eligible for a property tax exemption under specified circumstances. 
 
A disabled veteran or a surviving spouse of a disabled veteran must apply for a property 
tax exemption by providing to the Supervisor of Assessments (1) a copy of the disabled 
veteran’s discharge certificate from active military, naval, or air service and (2) on the form 
provided by the department, a certification of the disabled veteran’s disability from the VA 
or a rating decision of the disabled veteran’s disability from the VA that includes the 
effective date of the rating decision. The disabled veteran’s certificate of disability may not 
be inspected by individuals other than (1) the disabled veteran or (2) appropriate employees 
of the State, a county, or a municipality. 
 
Fiscal Impact of Current Exemption 
 
For fiscal 2026, 32,299 property owners are receiving a property tax exemption for being 
a disabled veteran (30,697), a surviving spouse (1,556), or a disabled active-duty service 
member (46), and the assessment for these properties is approximately $15.3 billion. The 
average exemption is $400,315, and the associated State revenue loss from these 
exemptions totaled approximately $17.2 million, based on a $0.112 State property tax rate. 
All State property tax revenues are credited to a special fund, the Annuity Bond Fund, 
dedicated exclusively to paying the debt service on State GO bonds. Local governments 
generally have the authority to set their own property tax rates. Based on the average 
combined county-municipal property tax rate, the projected local revenue loss from the 
current exemption could total approximately $190 million. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 980/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5