START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 917 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 917 
(Senator Mautz) 
Finance 
Health 
 
Health Occupations - Practice of Audiology - Definition 
 
 
This bill clarifies the definition of “practice audiology” to include the conducting of health 
screenings and the ordering and performing of in-office, nonradiographic scanning or 
imaging of the external auditory canal related to the auditory or vestibular conditions in 
the human ear.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, 
Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists can update regulations as necessary 
with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual must be licensed by the State Board of Examiners for 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music 
Therapists to practice audiology in Maryland. 
 
“Practice audiology” includes (1) the conducting of health screenings; (2) the removal of a 
foreign body and cerumen from the external auditory canal that is not impacted to the point 
that it requires anesthesia; (3) the ordering of cultures and bloodwork testing as it relates 
to the auditory or vestibular conditions in the human ear; (4) the ordering and performing 
of in-office, nonradiographic scanning or imaging of the external auditory canal; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 917/ Page 2 
(5) the ordering of radiographic imaging as it relates to the auditory or vestibular conditions 
in the human ear. It does not include (1) surgery using an instrument, including a laser, 
scalpel, needle, cautery, cryoprobe, or suture, in which human tissue is cut, burned, 
vaporized, removed, or otherwise permanently altered by mechanical means, laser, 
ionizing radiation, ultrasound, or other means; (2) osseo-integrated device surgery; 
(3) cochlear implant surgery; or (4) the preparation, operation, or performance of 
radiographic imaging.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2026 
Third Reader - March 17, 2026 
 
jg/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Eliana R. Prober 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2