START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 905 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 905 
(Senator Zucker, et al.) 
Finance 
 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Maryland Advanced 
Manufacturing Grant Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Advanced Manufacturing Grant Program and a related 
special fund, administered by the Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
(TEDCO). The purpose of the program is to support the growth of companies specializing 
in regenerative medicine and other advanced manufacturing. TEDCO, in consultation with 
the Maryland Stem Cell Research Commission, must establish eligibility criteria, grant 
application procedures and evaluation criteria, and grant award processes and amounts. 
TEDCO, in consultation with the commission, may adopt regulations necessary to carry 
out the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2026.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $5.8 million annually beginning in 
FY 2027 to capitalize the fund ($5.0 million) and for administrative costs ($0.8 million). 
Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase by $5.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2027, reflecting receipt of the capitalization funds and spending on grant 
awards. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
SF Revenue 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
GF Expenditure 
$5.8 
$5.8 
$5.8 
$5.8 
$5.8 
SF Expenditure 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
Net Effect 
($5.8) 
($5.8) 
($5.8) 
($5.8) 
($5.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 905/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Advanced Manufacturing Grant Program Fund 
 
The Maryland Advanced Manufacturing Grant Program Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund, 
the purpose of which is to provide grants for the program. TEDCO must administer the 
fund.  
 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, 
and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Any 
interest earnings of the fund must be credited to the fund. Expenditures from the fund may 
only be made in accordance with the State budget.  
 
Grant recipients may use grant proceeds only for (1) the acquisition, renovation, or 
construction of space for regenerative medicine or other advanced manufacturing;  
(2) infrastructure improvements necessary to support regenerative medicine or other 
advanced manufacturing; and (3) the equipment necessary for regenerative medicine or 
other advanced manufacturing.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation – Generally 
 
TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 
to enhance the transfer of technology from universities and federal laboratories to the 
private sector and foster the growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. 
TEDCO investments must meet statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a 
business to have and subsequently maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs 
typically assist companies based on a company’s stage of development, from early stage 
and technology transfer to growth stage.  
 
Equitech Growth Commission and Fund 
 
Chapters 461 and 462 of 2023 established the Equitech Growth Commission and a related 
special fund in TEDCO to support economic competitiveness and inclusive growth of 
emerging and advanced industries in the State through the creation of supporting 
infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that builds the strengths of the 
State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, investments, loans, or other financial 
assistance from the fund to public, nonprofit, or private entities in the State, including 
institutions of higher education and public-private partnerships. Awards must target 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 905/ Page 3 
workforce development and infrastructure that will attract and retain businesses in the 
State. Awards must be consistent with the 10-year goals in a strategic plan developed by 
the Equitech Growth Commission.  
 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $5.0 million to the fund, and the fiscal 2027 budget as introduced includes 
$5.0 million for the fund. While the mandated funding is temporary, the program is 
permanent.  
 
Maryland Stem Cell Research Commission and Fund  
 
The Stem Cell Research Commission is an independent commission that functions within 
TEDCO, with its members including individuals with experience in biotechnology, 
scientists, bioethicists, and individuals with expertise in biomedical ethics as it relates to 
religion. The commission is assisted in reviewing proposals for stem cell research by 
contracting with an independent scientific peer review committee composed of recognized 
experts in such research. The commission must, among other things, (1) develop criteria, 
standards, and requirements for the initial review of grant and loan applications by the 
commission; (2) establish procedures and guidelines to be used by the committee for the 
review, evaluation, ranking, and rating of research proposals for State-funded stem cell 
research; (3) establish procedures and guidelines to be used by the committee for the 
review, evaluation, ranking, and rating of research proposals for State-funded stem cell 
research; and (4) establish criteria, standards, and requirements for consideration of grant 
and loan applications based on the rankings and ratings of the committee.  
 
Administered by TEDCO, the Maryland Stem Cell Research Fund promotes stem cell 
research and cures through grants and loans to public and private entities in the State. 
Money in the fund may only be used to (1) award grants and loans for State-funded stem 
cell research, in accordance with recommendations from the commission; (2) award grants 
and loans for facilities, capital leases, and capital equipment where State-funded stem cell 
research is conducted, in accordance with the recommendations of the commission; and 
(3) pay the costs necessary to administer the fund. The fiscal 2026 budget includes  
$15.5 million in general funds for the fund.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $5.8 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2027, which reflects capitalization of the special fund in the amount of 
$5.0 million annually (to ensure a viable grant program) as well as approximately  
$800,000 annually in administrative costs for TEDCO. The administrative costs include 
(1) the salaries and fringe benefits associated with two new employees (a program manager 
and a program coordinator) to administer the program and fund; (2) specified legal fees 
and other costs; and (3) overhead (including marketing, accounting, reporting, auditing, 
etc.). TEDCO employees are not State employees. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 905/ Page 4 
Special fund revenues to the fund increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027, reflecting receipt of the capitalization funds. Special fund expenditures 
increase correspondingly; it is assumed that the full amount available to the fund is 
distributed as grants each year. TEDCO anticipates an average grant award of  
$250,000; thus, approximately 20 grants can be made each year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses involved in advanced manufacturing or 
regenerative medicine benefit to the extent they are awarded grants through the program. 
Small businesses that provide equipment, supplies, or services to grant recipients also 
benefit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2026 
 
caw/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4