START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 937 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 937 
(Senator Henson) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Economic Matters 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Residential Leases - Prospective Tenant Criminal History 
Records Check (Maryland Fair Chance Housing Act) 
 
 
This bill generally establishes certain restrictions on a landlord’s use of a prospective 
tenant’s criminal history records, in addition to other prohibitions. Among other provisions, 
the bill also (1) reduces, from seven years to three years, the applicable period of criminal 
history included in a reusable tenant screening report and (2) mandates the data collection 
and annual publication of related complaint information by the Office of Tenant and 
Landlord Affairs (OTLA) within the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD). In general, the bill’s provisions apply only to a landlord that 
manages or owns five or more residential rental units in the State. Violation of the bill is 
an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection 
Act (MCPA); violators of the bill’s provisions are also subject to a civil penalty of up to 
$500 for each violation. The bill’s provisions preempt and supersede any local law or 
ordinance comparable in subject matter.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $234,900 in FY 2027 for staff and 
one‐time programming costs. Future year expenditures reflect annualization, inflation, and 
elimination of one-time costs. The bill’s imposition of civil penalties may minimally 
increase general fund revenues (not reflected below). 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FY 2030 
FY 2031 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
234,900 
218,200 
228,300 
238,600 
249,000 
Net Effect 
($234,900) 
($218,200) 
($228,300) 
($238,600) 
($249,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 937/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not have a material impact on local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
A “conditional offer” is an offer to lease residential property to a prospective tenant, 
contingent upon a subsequent inquiry into the prospective tenant’s criminal history. 
 
Application 
 
The bill’s provisions apply only to a landlord that manages or owns five or more residential 
rental units in the State, including any residential rental units that the landlord owns or 
controls (1) in whole or in part; (2) directly or indirectly; or (3) through one or more legal 
entities. The bill’s provisions do not apply to owner-occupied residential rental units. 
 
Tenant History and Records Check – Generally 
 
The bill prohibits a landlord from (1) requiring a prospective tenant to submit to a drug or 
alcohol test or (2) requesting or requiring a prospective tenant to consent to the release of 
information about the individual from a program for the prevention and treatment of 
substance use disorders. 
 
A landlord that conducts a criminal history records check (CHRC) must do so for every 
prospective tenant. Before accepting an application fee, a landlord must provide a 
prospective tenant with written notice regarding the use of criminal history in leasing 
decisions. This notice must include a statement that a conviction for specified crimes may 
be considered only after a conditional offer is extended. The landlord must also provide 
the prospective tenant with information on the ability of the prospective tenant to provide 
evidence of inaccuracies in the criminal history records, evidence of rehabilitation, and any 
mitigating factors. Additionally, the landlord must notify the prospective tenant that an 
individualized assessment will be conducted. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 937/ Page 3 
Conditional Offer and Review 
 
Before extending a conditional offer to a prospective tenant, a landlord is prohibited from 
(1) requesting or requiring the prospective tenant to disclose in a housing application 
whether the tenant has a criminal history or has been accused of or charged with any crimes 
or (2) making any inquiry regarding the prospective tenant’s criminal history. However, 
before extending a conditional offer, a landlord may require information on and may reject 
a prospective tenant’s application on the ground of, whether a prospective tenant has been 
convicted of: 
 
 
manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, or producing methamphetamine on the 
premises of federally assisted housing (for a tenancy in federally assisted housing); 
 
a sexual offense under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article; 
 
child pornography under Criminal Law § 11-207; 
 
first-degree murder (Criminal Law § 2-201) or second-degree murder (Criminal 
Law § 2-204), if the conviction occurred within the 10 years immediately preceding 
the rental application; or 
 
human trafficking under Criminal Law § 3-1102. 
 
A landlord may also require information on (and reject an application based on) whether 
the prospective tenant is subject to a lifetime registration requirement under a state sex 
offender registration program or has ever been subject to a registration requirement under 
a state or federal sex offender registration program. 
 
In response to the results of a CHRC, a prospective tenant may provide, and a landlord 
must then consider, evidence of (1) any inaccuracies in the prospective tenant’s criminal 
history records; (2) rehabilitation; and (3) any other mitigating factors. 
 
After extending a conditional offer to a prospective tenant, a landlord may conduct a CHRC 
and consider any felony conviction under the Criminal Law Article if the conviction 
occurred within five years immediately preceding the rental application or any convictions 
listed above that the prospective tenant did not previously disclose as potential grounds for 
withdrawing the offer. 
 
A landlord may withdraw a conditional offer based on a prospective tenant’s CHRC only 
if the landlord determines the withdrawal is necessary to protect a substantial, legitimate, 
and nondiscriminatory interest. If a landlord withdraws a conditional offer, the landlord is 
required to provide the prospective tenant with written notice that includes the specific 
reason for the withdrawal and a statement that the prospective tenant may request a 
reassessment of the withdrawal by providing specified evidence, signed under the penalty 
of perjury, to the landlord. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 937/ Page 4 
A landlord’s reassessment of a rental application after a prospective tenant’s request for 
reassessment must consider (1) the nature and severity of the offense; (2) the applicant’s 
age at the time of the offense; (3) the time elapsed since the offense; (4) evidence of 
rehabilitation and good conduct; (5) the degree to which a recurrence of the offense would 
negatively impact the safety or property of other tenants; and (6) whether the offense 
occurred on the property previously rented or leased by the prospective tenant. 
 
Within 30 days of receiving notice of a conditional offer’s withdrawal, the prospective 
tenant may request a copy of all information the landlord considered, including criminal 
history records. The landlord must reply within 10 days to a timely request. 
 
Additional Provisions Regarding Landlords and the Use of Criminal History Records 
 
Unless required by federal law, landlords are prohibited from knowingly or intentionally 
publishing (or causing to be published) any advertisement that expressly states a policy of 
excluding prospective tenants based on arrest or conviction records. Additional 
prohibitions are specified in the bill, including, unless required by federal law, using a 
prospective tenant’s criminal history for a purpose inconsistent with the bill. 
 
A landlord’s decision regarding the leasing of a residential dwelling unit, whether based 
on an individual’s criminal history or the absence of a CHRC, may not constitute grounds 
for legal action against the landlord. 
 
Office of Tenant and Landlord Affairs 
 
The bill requires that OTLA develop and publish on its website a model notice for 
landlords. This model notice must include: 
 
 
language for advising prospective tenants of a conditional offer withdrawal or 
adverse housing action taken based on criminal history; and 
 
language that informs prospective tenants of the right to (1) request a copy of all 
information relied upon by the landlord (including criminal history records) and 
(2) file a complaint under the MCPA. 
 
OTLA must collect and maintain the following data on complaints filed under the bill:  the 
number of complaints; complainant demographics (including sex and race); landlord 
names associated with complaints; the number of complaint investigations conducted; and 
the disposition of each complaint. 
 
Annually, OTLA must publish and post on its website information regarding substantiated 
complaints resulting in civil penalties under the bill’s provisions. The information 
published may remain on the website for up to five years. The bill prohibits the publication 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 937/ Page 5 
of any identifying information about a landlord subject to a complaint if the landlord is in 
good faith compliance with requirements imposed under the bill. DHCD must adopt 
regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Reusable Tenant Screening Report 
 
Pursuant to §8-218 of the Real Property Article, a “reusable tenant screening report” is a 
report prepared within the previous 30 days by a consumer reporting agency at the request 
and expense of a prospective tenant and made directly available to a prospective landlord 
at no charge for use during the rental application process. A reusable tenant screening 
report must contain specified information, including – for each jurisdiction indicated as a 
prior residence of the prospective tenant, regardless of whether the residence is reported by 
the prospective tenant or by a consumer reporting agency preparing a consumer report – a 
comprehensive CHRC for all federal, state, and local charges against and convictions of 
the prospective tenant over the previous seven years. (The bill decreases the period from 
seven years to three years.) 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 937/ Page 6 
State Expenditures: 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
General fund expenditures increase for DHCD by $234,921 in fiscal 2027 for additional 
staff and to develop the database required under the bill; this estimate reflects the bill’s 
October 1, 2026 effective date. Such staff are necessary in order to bring anticipated 
enforcement actions against violators, promulgate regulations, and maintain the database 
required under the bill. This estimate therefore reflects the cost of hiring one assistant 
Attorney General and one community assistant, in addition to one‐time programming costs 
in fiscal 2027. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$166,639 
Operating Expenses 
18,282 
One-time Programming Costs 
    50,000 
Total FY 2027 State Expenditures 
$234,921 
 
Future years reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the termination of programming costs. 
 
Other Impacts Under the Bill 
 
The bill is not expected to materially affect the operations or finances of the Judiciary or 
the Office of the Attorney General. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small business 
landlords who are prohibited from taking specified actions and subject to certain penalties 
if noncompliant.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 514 of 2025.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 937/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2026 
Third Reader - March 30, 2026 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 30, 2026 
 
caw/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7