START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 932 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2026 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
First Reader 
Senate Bill 932 
(Senator Harris) 
Finance 
 
 
Consumer Protection - Social Media Platforms - Display of User Location 
 
 
This bill generally requires a person that operates a social media platform to display to a 
State user the “general geographical location” of each user whose account is visible to the 
State user on the social media platform. “General geographical location” means, at the time 
of access to a social media platform, the city and country derived from the Internet protocol 
address of the network connection through which a user’s device accesses the social media 
platform. A person that operates a social media platform may not display the general 
geographical location of a user who the person knows (or has reason to know) is a minor. 
Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland 
Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil penalty provisions, except 
provisions that allow a private right of action. Additionally, MCPA enforcement provisions 
that allow a person aggrieved by an order of the Consumer Protection Division of the Office 
of the Attorney General (OAG) to institute any appropriate proceedings considered 
necessary do not apply to violations of the bill.    
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on State finances or operations. OAG’s Consumer Protection Division can likely 
handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources, as discussed below. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 932/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Maryland Online Data Privacy Act (Title 14, Subtitle 47 of the Commercial Law Article)  
 
Chapters 454 and 455 of 2024 (the Maryland Online Data Privacy Act of 2024) establish 
new consumer protections and rights, as well as disclosure obligations, relating to online 
personal data controlled or processed by certain entities that conduct business in the State 
or provide services or products that are targeted to residents of the State. Violation of the 
Maryland Online Data Privacy Act is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under 
MCPA, subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
Under the Acts, a “controller” means a person that, alone or jointly with others, determines 
the purpose and means of processing personal data. “Personal data” means any information 
that is linked (or can be reasonably linked) to an identified or identifiable consumer. 
Among other requirements, a controller must limit the collection of personal data to what 
is reasonably necessary and proportionate to provide or maintain a specific product or 
service requested by the consumer to whom the data pertains. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 932/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  Although OAG advises that one full-time position is needed to 
evaluate whether social media companies are complying with the bill, the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment and notes that the bill 
significantly curtails the enforcement provisions of MCPA that apply to violations of the 
bill. For example, under the bill, MCPA’s criminal penalty provisions do not apply, and 
OAG will be unable to take related criminal enforcement actions. DLS further advises that 
without experience under the bill, it is unclear to what extent social media companies will 
be noncompliant and whether there will be a significant enough volume of related 
complaints to necessitate additional investigations and staff. To the extent OAG receives a 
significant number of complaints from consumers under the bill that it is unable to handle 
with existing staff, OAG may request additional resources through the annual budget 
process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 10, 2026 
 
jg/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3