START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 42 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 42 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Public Health Services and Protections - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) aligns State law with federal law prohibiting the sale of tobacco 
products to all individuals younger than 21; (2) authorizes the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) to reallocate projected unspent funds awarded to a county for cancer 
prevention, education, screening, and treatment programs to another county, as specified;  
(3) shifts responsibility for the cost of emergency medical treatment for an abused or 
neglected child from MDH to the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
(GOCPP); (4) repeals the requirement that the Secretary of Health appoint and convene an 
expert panel on child abuse and neglect; (5) alters requirements relating to the State Council 
on Child Abuse and Neglect (SCCAN); and (6) repeals a reporting requirement regarding 
specified counter-marketing and media efforts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
Local Effect:  Some counties may be impacted from grant funding being reallocated, as 
discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 42/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Aligning State and Federal Law Regarding Age Restrictions on the Sale of Tobacco 
Products/Paraphernalia and Electronic Smoking Devices 
 
Minimum Age:  Chapter 396 of 2019 generally raised the minimum age for an individual 
to purchase tobacco products from 18 to 21, with specified exceptions for active-duty 
military at least age 18 who present valid military identification. Federal legislation, 
effective December 20, 2019, raised the federal minimum age for the purchase of tobacco 
products from 18 to 21 without exceptions. 
 
The bill repeals the following exceptions relating to active-duty military ages 18 to 20: 
 
 
Under § 10-107 of the Criminal Law Article, a person who distributes tobacco 
products for commercial purposes may not distribute such products to an individual 
younger than 21, with an exception if the purchaser or recipient is an active-duty 
military member who is at least 18 years of age and presents valid military 
identification. 
 
 
Section 10-107 of the Criminal Law Article and § 24-307 of the Health-General 
Article prohibit a person who is not a distributor of tobacco products for commercial 
purposes from purchasing for or selling a tobacco product to an individual younger 
than 21 (or distributing tobacco paraphernalia to such an individual), with an 
exception if the individual is an active-duty military member who is at least 
18 years of age and presents valid military identification. 
 
 
Under § 24-305 of the Health-General Article, a person may not sell, distribute, or 
offer for sale an electronic smoking device to an individual younger than 21, with 
an exception if the purchaser or recipient is an active-duty military member who is 
at least 18 years of age and presents valid military identification. 
 
 
Section 1-1203 of the Local Government Article prohibits a person in Carroll, Cecil, 
Garrett, or St. Mary’s counties from distributing a tobacco product to an individual 
younger than 21, with an exception if the individual is an active-duty military 
member who is at least 18 years of age and presents valid military identification. A 
person in those counties is also prohibited from distributing cigarette rolling papers 
or a coupon redeemable for a tobacco product to an individual younger than 21, with 
an exception if the individual is an active-duty military member who is at least 
18 years of age and presents valid military identification. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 42/ Page 3 
Penalties and Fines:  Under current law, unless a specified exception applies, a person who 
violates one of the prohibitions set forth in § 10-107 of the Criminal Law Article or 
§ 24-305 of the Health-General Article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is 
subject to specified fines. For a violation of § 1-1203 of the Local Government Article, a 
violator is subject to specified civil penalties, which vary depending on the county. It is a 
defense for a person charged with such violations that they examined the purchaser’s or 
recipient’s government-issued identification (including a driver’s license) that positively 
identified the individual was at least 21 years old or at least 18 years of age and an 
active-duty member of the military. 
 
The bill repeals the defense that a person examined a purchaser or recipient’s 
government-issued identification that positively identified them as being at least 
18 years of age and an active-duty member of the military. 
 
Signage:  Under current law, cigarette business licensees, including retailers, are required 
to post a sign in a location that is clearly visible to consumers stating that “no person under 
the age of 21 may be sold tobacco products without military identification.” Under the bill, 
a posted sign must read “no person under the age of 21 may be sold tobacco products.” 
 
Authority to Reallocate Local Public Health Cancer Grants 
 
Under current law, as part of the local public health component of MDH’s Cancer 
Prevention, Education, Screening, and Treatment Program, MDH provides and administers 
grants to counties. Each year, MDH must distribute these grants based on specified 
allocation formulas. Any funds allocated to a county through a grant that are not spent by 
the end of the fiscal year revert to the Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF). The bill authorizes 
MDH to reallocate projected unspent funds awarded to a county to another county as 
needed during the fiscal year in order to address unmet county funding, as defined under 
the program. 
 
Responsibility for the Cost of Emergency Medical Treatment for Abused and Neglected 
Children 
 
Under § 5-712 of the Criminal Law Article, a provider must examine or treat any child to 
determine the nature and extent of any abuse or neglect to the child if brought to the 
provider under specified circumstances. If a provider examines a child and determines that 
emergency medical treatment is needed, the provider may treat the child. MDH must pay 
for any emergency medical treatment. The child’s parent or guardian is liable to MDH for 
the charges and must take any steps necessary to secure health benefits available for the 
child from a public or private benefit program. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 42/ Page 4 
The bill transfers responsibility for payment for emergency medical treatment for an 
abused or neglected child from MDH to GOCPP and makes a child’s parent or guardian 
liable to GOCPP (rather than MDH) for any charges for emergency medical treatment 
incurred on behalf of the child. 
 
Requirement to Convene an Expert Panel on Child Abuse and Neglect 
 
Under § 13-2205 of the Health-General Article, the Secretary of Health must appoint and 
convene an expert panel on child abuse and neglect relating to research and data collection 
at least once a year. The expert panel must assist the Secretary in reviewing the 
appropriateness of current procedural terminology codes and billing protocols for services 
provided regarding child abuse and neglect and determining how diagnosis and treatment 
data may be preserved to provide statistics on the extent of child abuse and neglect in the 
State. Each year, by December 1, the panel must submit a report containing specified data 
to the General Assembly. The bill repeals these requirements. 
 
State Council on Child Abuse and Neglect 
 
Under § 5-7A-06 of the Criminal Law Article, SCCAN is tasked with evaluating the extent 
to which State and local agencies are effectively discharging their child protection 
responsibilities. SCCAN must coordinate its activities with the State Citizens Review 
Board of Children, local citizen review panels, and child fatality review teams in order to 
avoid unnecessary duplication of effort. Under § 5-7A-09 of the Criminal Law Article, 
SCCAN must report and make recommendations annually to the Governor and the  
General Assembly on matters relating to the prevention, detection, prosecution, and 
treatment of child abuse and neglect, including policy and training needs. 
 
The bill requires SCCAN to additionally coordinate with the Child Abuse Medical 
Providers (Maryland CHAMP) Initiative and include information on activities of the 
Maryland CHAMP Initiative in its annual report to the Governor and General Assembly, 
including any data the initiative has collected on child abuse and neglect diagnoses and 
treatment. 
 
Tobacco Use Prevention and Cessation Program 
 
Under § 13-1013 of the Health-General Article, before spending funds allocated in the 
budget for the Tobacco Use Prevention and Cessation Program’s counter-marketing and 
media component, MDH must submit a specified report. Under § 7-317 of the State 
Finance and Procurement Article, MDH is also required to submit annual reports regarding 
all CRF activities. The bill repeals the reporting requirement regarding counter-marketing 
and media, which is duplicative of the annual CRF reporting requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 42/ Page 5 
Background:  MDH advises that the bill is intended to repeal or modify various outdated 
or obsolete provisions and requirements. Specifically, MDH notes that: 
 
 
repealing the carve-out that permits active-duty military personnel aged 18 to 20 to 
purchase tobacco products brings State law into compliance with federal law and 
reduces potential confusion for Maryland tobacco product sellers;  
 
transferring responsibility for the payment of claims for emergency medical 
treatment rendered to abused and neglected children from MDH to GOCPP aligns 
State law with existing practice, as GOCPP has been processing and paying these 
claims for several years;  
 
the requirement that the Secretary of Health convene an expert panel on child abuse 
and neglect has outlived its usefulness and repeal of the requirement allows the 
efforts of the Maryland CHAMP Initiative and SCCAN to be merged to best address 
issues facing abused and neglected children; and  
 
permitting MDH to reallocate a county’s projected unspent grant funds for cancer 
prevention, education, screening, and treatment programs to another county will 
maximize the effectiveness of each county in meeting demand for cancer resources 
statewide and reduce the amount of funds reverting to CRF. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures are affected to the 
extent that MDH reallocates projected unspent grant funds. Mid-year reallocation of funds 
(rather than allowing funds to revert to CRF at the end of the fiscal year) may negatively 
impact some counties while benefiting others. 
 
MDH advises that a significant number of counties, in fiscal 2019 through 2022, had 
unspent funds of 5% or more of their annual allocations. According to MDH, current 
practice is for counties to submit mid-fiscal year expenditure reports in January or 
February. Based on the mid-year expenditure reports, it is typically clear whether a county 
is likely to fully spend down its allocation or not. MDH advises that, under the bill, it would 
not reallocate any funding for cancer-related programs between counties until the mid-year 
expenditure reports are submitted. 
 
In fiscal 2018, only $2,278 of the approximately $25.1 million appropriated from CRF for 
cancer prevention, education, screening, and treatment services reverted to CRF. DLS 
advises that it could not obtain data for more recent fiscal years; therefore, DLS cannot 
provide an estimate of the extent to which local government grants may be affected by 
reallocation in fiscal 2025 and beyond rather than revert to CRF and be available for other 
purposes. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 42/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 220 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Carroll, 
Garrett, and St. Mary’s counties; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 42/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Public Health – Public Health Services and Protections – Revisions 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0042 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The Tobacco 21 
This element of the proposal will have no economic impact, although small businesses will no 
longer be able to service a small demographic of military customers between the ages of 18 and 
20 years old. 
 
CRF Funding 
This element of the proposal may have minimal impact on Maryland small businesses. Any 
projected unspent CPEST funding that is reallocated to another county may be used by that 
county to fund needed cancer services in its jurisdiction. Some of these services may be provided 
by small businesses, such as health care providers who are part of a small practice has no 
economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 7