START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 78 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 78 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Environmental Service) 
Appropriations and Environment and 
Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Environmental Service – Governance and Requirements 
 
   
This departmental bill makes changes to the governance and administrative requirements 
of the Maryland Environmental Service (MES). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances; MES experiences modest 
efficiencies from altered auditing and reporting requirements, delegation authority for the 
board secretary, and the ability to initially provide project proposals instead of contracts. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MES has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  MES is an instrumentality of the State and a 
self-supporting, not-for-profit public corporation that serves State, local, and federal 
agencies and the private sector through designing, planning, financing, constructing, 
operating, and monitoring projects for water and wastewater treatment, solid waste 
management, composting, recycling, dredged material management, hazardous materials 
cleanup, stormwater services, and renewable energy. The service operates more than 
200 water and wastewater treatment facilities as well as solid waste transfer stations, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 78/ Page 2 
material recycling facilities, and various other facilities. MES operates on a fee-for-service 
basis under contract.     
 
Definitions 
 
Current Law:  The definition of “municipality” for purposes of the MES statute means any 
county, municipality, sanitary district, State or local unit, or other public body or unit 
created or established by or pursuant to State or local law, ordinance, or resolution. 
 
The Bill:  The definition of “municipality” for purposes of the MES statute is expanded to 
include the District of Columbia, the United States, or any of its units. 
 
Delegation of Board Secretary Responsibilities 
 
Current Law:  The MES Board of Directors is composed of eight members, seven of which 
are voting members, as the executive director does not vote. Five members of the board 
constitute a quorum, and five affirmative votes are necessary for any action taken by the 
board. The board secretary may not authorize another individual to serve as deputy 
secretary, although the board treasurer may authorize an MES employee to serve as deputy 
treasurer, subject to approval of the board.   
 
The Bill:  The board secretary, with the approval of the board, may authorize an MES 
employee to serve as deputy secretary and perform the specified functions of the secretary, 
subject to any restrictions and conditions the secretary establishes.  
 
Contracts  
 
Current Law:  Any municipality or person may request that MES provide the water supply, 
wastewater purification, solid waste disposal, or energy projects, or any other authorized 
services, and may enter into contracts with MES for the purpose of MES providing any of 
the requested projects or services. As soon as possible after receipt of a duly authorized 
request, MES must draft a proposed contract specifying the type of project or services to 
be provided, whether or not a service district will be established, the boundaries and 
effective date of any service district, and the terms, conditions, and costs under which the 
project or services will be provided.   
 
The Bill:  MES is authorized to provide a proposal, instead of a proposed contract, to a 
municipality or person specifying the type of project or services to be provided and related 
terms, conditions, and costs. However, generally, MES is not obligated to provide a project 
or services to a municipality or person before a contract has been executed by the parties. 
Provisions related to MES execution of a contract are modified to remove the requirement 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 78/ Page 3 
that MES implement the contract terms “as soon as possible” and to instead require MES 
to act in accordance with the contract terms. 
 
Auditing and Reporting Requirements 
 
Current Law:  As soon as practical after the closing of the fiscal year, an audit must be 
made of the financial books, records, and accounts of MES, subject to specified 
requirements. Additionally, either as a separate part of the financial audit or as an 
individual audit, MES must obtain an audit that focuses on unauthorized spending, 
misallocated expenses, lack of conformity with State law or board policies, and other 
accounting errors. MES must provide an annual summary report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly within the first 90 days of each fiscal year. The report must set forth the 
complete operating and financial statement covering MES activities during the fiscal year, 
the salaries for each MES position, and a summary of energy activities undertaken. 
 
The Bill:  Deadlines for the required annual financial audit and annual summary report are 
standardized to November 15 each year. The requirement to provide an additional audit 
focusing on unauthorized spending, misallocated expenses, and lack of conformity with 
State law or board polices is repealed. The annual summary report is modified to include 
the completed financial audit instead of a similar requirement, and certain salary 
information is no longer explicitly required. 
 
Background:  MES advises that the bill strengthens its organizational structure and 
governing statute by allowing more flexibility and efficiencies while not sacrificing any of 
the changes made in the Maryland Environmental Service Reform Act of 2021 
(Chapter 72), which have been fully implemented. More specifically: 
 
 
The change to the definition of municipality clarifies and simplifies the MES statute 
so that all of the authorizations and requirements placed on MES apply equally to 
the entities with which it is authorized to contract. 
 
Delegating (part-time) board secretary responsibilities to a full-time MES employee 
authorizes the same type of delegation of authority as is allowed for the board 
treasurer.  
 
Allowing MES to provide a proposal, instead of a contract, for each project request 
reduces the administrative burden on MES, which is represented by the Office of 
the Attorney General. Often, a price quote or detailed proposal is more than 
sufficient to begin meaningful discussion. 
 
Setting specific dates for the two financial reporting requirements removes any 
ambiguity as to timing. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 78/ Page 4 
With respect to the statutory requirement for MES to obtain an audit that focuses on 
unauthorized spending and other related issues, MES obtained such an audit, which was 
completed in 2022 at a cost of $10,000. To the extent that audit was intended to be one time 
only, repealing the requirement is clarifying. If, however, the additional audit requirement 
was intended to be ongoing, minimal savings are realized. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.    
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 293 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland Environmental Service) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Maryland Department of 
Aging; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Juvenile Services; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Budget and Management; University System of Maryland; 
Baltimore City; Harford, Kent, Montgomery, Prince George’s, Washington, and Worcester 
counties; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services. 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 10, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 78/ Page 5 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Environmental Service – Governance and Requirements 
  
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 78 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jeff Tosi, Director of Government Affairs, MES 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X__¬¬ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5