START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 858

Chapter 858

(House Bill 5)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Law – Indecent Exposure Within the Presence of a Minor

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from committing the common law crime of indecent
exposure; prohibiting a person from, with prurient intent, committing the common
law crime of indecent exposure when the person knows or reasonably should know
that a minor is present and the minor is at least a certain age and is more than a
certain number of years younger than the person; and generally relating to indecent
exposure.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 11–107
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

11–107.

(a) In this section, “indecent exposure” includes engaging in an act of
masturbation in public, whether or not the person’s genitalia are exposed.

(B) A PERSON MAY NOT COMMIT THE COMMON LAW CRIME OF INDECENT
EXPOSURE.

(C) A PERSON MAY NOT WITH PRURIENT INTENT COMMIT THE COMMON LAW
CRIME OF INDECENT EXPOSURE WHEN THE PERSON KNOWS OR REASONABLY
SHOULD KNOW THAT A MINOR IS PRESENT AND THE MINOR IS:

(1) AT LEAST 2 YEARS OLD; AND

(2) MORE THAN 4 YEARS YOUNGER THAN THE PERSON.

[(b)] (D) (1) A person [convicted of indecent exposure] WHO VIOLATES
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION is guilty of a misdemeanor and ON CONVICTION is
subject to imprisonment not exceeding 3 years or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or both.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 858 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION IS
GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT
NOT EXCEEDING 5 YEARS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $10,000 OR BOTH.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2