START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 944

Chapter 944

(House Bill 92)

AN ACT concerning

Resources and Education for All Prisons (REAP) Act

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services
to assist incarcerated individuals in accessing certain federal education grants;
requiring the ~~Maryland~~ Department ~~of~~ ~~Labor~~ to set certain goals relating to
incarcerated individuals in certain education programs, establish certain tracking
systems relating to incarcerated individuals in certain education programs, and
forward certain data to the Maryland Higher Education Commission; ~~authorizing~~
requiring the Maryland Higher Education Commission to assist the ~~Maryland~~
Department ~~of~~ ~~Labor~~ in establishing certain tracking systems; and generally relating
to resources and education for incarcerated individuals.

BY adding to
Article – Correctional Services
Section 2–701 and 2–702 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 7. ~~Incarcerated~~
~~Individual~~ ~~Access~~ ~~to~~ Federal Pell Grants Access and Postsecondary Education
Program Tracking Systems”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Labor~~ ~~and~~ ~~Employment~~
~~Section~~ ~~11–903.1~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2016~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

SUBTITLE 7. INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL ACCESS TO FEDERAL PELL GRANTS
ACCESS AND POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAM TRACKING SYSTEMS.

2–701.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ASSIST INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN
ACCESSING FEDERAL PELL GRANTS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 944 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) IN ORDER TO ASSIST INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN ACCESSING
FEDERAL PELL GRANTS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT WITH INSTITUTIONS
OF HIGHER EDUCATION, INCLUDING:

(1) THE UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE ALL UNIVERSITY SYSTEM OF
MARYLAND INSTITUTIONS;

(2) MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY;

(3) ~~BOWIE~~ ~~STATE~~ ~~UNIVERSITY;~~

(4) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND GLOBAL CAMPUS;

~~(5)~~ ANNE ARUNDEL COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

~~(6)~~ (4) HAGERSTOWN COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

(7) (5) WOR–WIC COMMUNITY COLLEGE; AND

~~(8)~~ (6) GOUCHER COLLEGE.

2–702.

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Labor~~ ~~and~~ ~~Employment~~

~~11–903.1.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 1–101 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

(B) (A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY WITH RESPECT TO POSTSECONDARY
EDUCATION PROGRAMS IN A CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION IN THE DIVISION OF
CORRECTION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL
~~SERVICES.~~

~~(C)~~ (B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) SET GOALS FOR THE NUMBER OF INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN
POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 944

(2) ESTABLISH A TRACKING SYSTEM FOR THE NUMBER OF
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS;

(3) ESTABLISH A TRACKING SYSTEM FOR THE PROGRESS OF
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS,
INCLUDING THE NUMBER OF COLLEGE CREDITS THAT EACH INCARCERATED
INDIVIDUAL EARNS IN AN APPROVED COLLEGE PROGRAM; AND

(4) FORWARD, AT AN AGREED–ON INTERVAL, THE TRACKING DATA
FOR THE NUMBER OF COLLEGE CREDITS THAT EACH INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL
EARNS IN AN APPROVED COLLEGE PROGRAM TO THE MARYLAND HIGHER
EDUCATION COMMISSION.

(D) (C) THE MARYLAND HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION MAY SHALL
ASSIST THE DEPARTMENT IN CREATING THE TRACKING SYSTEMS UNDER
SUBSECTION (C) (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) (D) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION IN AN AMOUNT SUFFICIENT FOR THE
DEPARTMENT TO USE FOR MARKETING FOR POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
PROGRAMS TO INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS AND FOR THE TRACKING SYSTEMS FOR
POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION PROGRAMS.

(F) (E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT
THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3