START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 62 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 62 
(Delegate Simpson) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Employee Rights and Protections - Personnel Actions and Harassment - 
Investigation of Complaints 
 
   
This bill extends the timeframe for an investigation to be conducted and a written decision 
issued – from within 30 days to within 60 days – after a complaint alleging harassment or 
discrimination is received from an Executive Branch employee or an applicant for 
employment. The timeframe may be extended up to an additional 30 days if the employee 
or applicant who filed the complaint grants written authorization to the equal employment 
officer investigating the complaint. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. The Department of Budget and Management advises that many 
equal employment officers already request an extension of time on investigations. 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law governs both personnel actions by public-sector employers (such 
as State agencies and local governments) and private-sector employers through various 
rights granted to employees and prohibitions against certain activities and actions. For 
example, all employers are expressly prohibited from, among other things, (1) requesting 
or requiring genetic tests or genetic information as a condition of hiring or determining 
benefits; (2) failing or refusing to make a reasonable accommodation for the known 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 62/ Page 2 
disability of an otherwise qualified employee or an applicant for employment; and 
(3) engaging in harassment of an employee. “Harassment” includes sexual harassment and 
other unwelcome and offensive conduct, which need not be severe or pervasive, when 
(1) the conduct is based on race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, 
marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability and (2) affects someone’s 
working environment or employment, as specified. 
 
Specific to State employees in, and applicants to be employed by, the Executive Branch of 
State government, most employment and appointment decisions (with limited exceptions 
for certain special appointments) must be made without regard to the employee’s or 
applicant’s political affiliation, belief, or opinion. For a general employee, any other 
nonmerit factor is also prohibited from being considered; however, this prohibition does 
not apply for management positions and appointments. An employee or applicant may file, 
with the head of a principal unit, a written complaint that alleges a violation of this 
requirement; however, the complaint must be filed within one year after the complainant 
first knew of or reasonably should have known of the alleged violation that is the basis for 
the complaint. 
 
A State employee in, or an applicant to be employed by, the Executive Branch of State 
government, may file with the head of a principal unit a written complaint that alleges 
harassment by the employer; such a complaint must be filed within two years after the 
alleged violation that is the basis for the complaint. 
 
Within 30 days after a complaint is received, an equal employment officer, under the 
direction of the fair practices officer, must investigate the complaint and recommend a 
proposed decision to the head of the principal unit; the head of the principal unit must issue 
a written decision to the complainant and may grant any appropriate relief. Within 10 days 
after receiving a decision, a complainant may appeal the decision in writing to the Secretary 
of Budget and Management. Within 30 days after an appeal is received, the Secretary of 
Budget and Management (or designee) must either dismiss the complaint or take 
appropriate remedial action and issue to the parties a written decision that includes notice 
of any remedial action taken. 
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 133 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 62/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); University 
System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3