START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 88 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 88 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Education) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Immediate Vesting 
 
 
This departmental bill gives the State Superintendent of Schools immediate vesting rights 
in the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) plan in which the superintendent is a 
member. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill affects one SRPS member at a time, it has no discernible effect 
on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For most members of SRPS hired on or after July 1, 2011, vesting occurs 
after 10 years of active membership. Exceptions include members of the 
Judges’ Retirement System hired on or after July 1, 2012 (5 years), and the Legislative 
Pension Plan (8 years). In addition, individuals hired into any of the following positions 
are entitled to immediate vesting:   
 
 
the Secretary of a principal department of the Executive Branch; 
 
Executive Director of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 88/ Page 2 
 
Adjutant General of the Military Department; 
 
Chair of the State Board of Contract Appeals; 
 
Chair of the Public Service Commission; 
 
Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Commission; 
 
Chief Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings; 
 
Director of the Health Care Alternative Dispute Resolution Office; 
 
Director of the Maryland Energy Administration; 
 
Director of the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing; 
 
Director of the Office of Homeland Security; 
 
Director of the Office of Performance Improvement; 
 
Director of the State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
 
Director of the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
 
Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Community and Crime; 
 
Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and 
Victim Services; 
 
Executive Director of the State Retirement Agency; 
 
Insurance Commissioner of the Maryland Insurance Administration; 
 
Special Secretary of the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; 
 
State Archivist; and 
 
State Prosecutor of the State Prosecutor’s Office. 
 
Background:  Prior to 2022, State pension law granted immediate vesting rights to the 
Secretary of a principal department in State government and to the head of a department, 
office, or any other unit of State government serving at the pleasure of the Governor. This 
was done in recognition that political appointees who are heads of departments typically 
have short tenures in State government and, therefore, are unlikely to complete the 10 years 
necessary to vest if hired on or after July 1, 2011, (or even 5 years needed to vest if hired 
before that date). As the State Board of Education is considered the head of MSDE, the 
State Superintendent was never included in that definition. Chapter 353 of 2022 added 
agency heads appointed by the Governor for a fixed term to the list of individuals entitled 
to immediate vesting. As the State Superintendent is appointed by the State board and not 
by the Governor, an individual appointed to that position is still not eligible for immediate 
vesting. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 88/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 266 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Education) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 88/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Retirement and Pension System - Immediate Vesting 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0088 
 
PREPARED BY: 
MSDE 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4