START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 922

Chapter 922

(House Bill 84)

AN ACT concerning

Hospitals and Urgent Care Centers – Sepsis Protocol
(Lochlin’s Law)

FOR the purpose of requiring, on or before a certain date, each hospital and urgent care
center in the State to implement a certain protocol for the early recognition and
treatment of a patient with sepsis, severe sepsis, or septic shock; requiring hospitals
and urgent care centers to require periodic training in the implementation of the
protocol for certain staff; and generally relating to sepsis protocols in hospitals and
urgent care centers.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 19–310.4
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–310.4.

(A) (1) ON SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, EACH HOSPITAL AND URGENT CARE CENTER IN
THE STATE SHALL IMPLEMENT AN EVIDENCE–BASED PROTOCOL FOR THE EARLY
RECOGNITION AND TREATMENT OF A PATIENT WITH SEPSIS, SEVERE SEPSIS, OR
SEPTIC SHOCK THAT IS BASED ON GENERALLY ACCEPTABLE STANDARDS OF CARE.

(2) THE EVIDENCE–BASED PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTED FOR
HOSPITALS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL COMPLY WITH THE
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION SEPSIS GUIDELINES.

(3) A HOSPITAL THAT IS A SPECIALTY PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL SHALL
ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR THE SCREENING AND EARLY RECOGNITION OF A
PATIENT WITH SEPSIS, SEVERE SEPSIS, OR SEPTIC SHOCK, AND PROCEDURES TO
TRANSFER THE PATIENT TO THE APPROPRIATE SETTING.

(2) THE PROTOCOL SHALL:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 922 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) INCLUDE COMPONENTS SPECIFIC TO THE IDENTIFICATION,
CARE, AND TREATMENT OF ADULTS AND CHILDREN; AND

(II) FOR A HOSPITAL, CLEARLY IDENTIFY WHERE AND WHEN
~~THE~~ ~~COMPONENTS~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~DIFFER~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ADULTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CHILDREN~~ ~~SEEKING~~ ~~TREATMENT~~
IN THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT OR AS AN INPATIENT.

(3) THE COMPONENTS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A PROCESS FOR THE SCREENING AND EARLY RECOGNITION
OF A PATIENT WITH SEPSIS, SEVERE SEPSIS, OR SEPTIC SHOCK;

(II) A PROCESS TO IDENTIFY AND DOCUMENT INDIVIDUALS
APPROPRIATE FOR TREATMENT THROUGH SEPSIS PROTOCOLS, INCLUDING
~~EXPLICIT~~ ~~CRITERIA~~ ~~DEFINING~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~PATIENTS~~ ~~SHOULD~~ ~~BE~~ ~~EXCLUDED~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~
PROTOCOL, SUCH AS A PATIENT WITH CERTAIN CLINICAL CONDITIONS OR A PATIENT
WHO HAS CHOSEN PALLIATIVE CARE;

(III) GUIDELINES FOR HEMODYNAMIC SUPPORT WITH EXPLICIT
PHYSIOLOGIC AND TREATMENT GOALS, METHODOLOGY FOR INVASIVE OR
NONINVASIVE HEMODYNAMIC MONITORING, AND TIME FRAME GOALS;

(IV) FOR INFANTS AND CHILDREN, GUIDELINES FOR FLUID
RESUSCITATION CONSISTENT WITH CURRENT, EVIDENCE–BASED GUIDELINES FOR
~~SEVERE~~ ~~SEPSIS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SEPTIC~~ ~~SHOCK~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~DEFINED~~ ~~THERAPEUTIC~~ ~~GOALS~~ ~~FOR~~
~~CHILDREN;~~

(V) IDENTIFICATION OF THE INFECTIOUS SOURCE AND
DELIVERY OF EARLY BROAD–SPECTRUM ANTIBIOTICS WITH TIMELY REEVALUATION
TO ADJUST TO NARROW–SPECTRUM ANTIBIOTICS TARGETED TO IDENTIFIED
INFECTIOUS SOURCES; AND

(VI) CRITERIA FOR USE, BASED ON ACCEPTED EVIDENCE OF
VASOACTIVE AGENTS.

(B) A HOSPITAL THAT SUBMITS SEPSIS DATA TO THE CENTERS FOR
MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES HOSPITAL INPATIENT QUALITY REPORTING
PROGRAM IS PRESUMED TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION.

(C) EACH HOSPITAL AND URGENT CARE CENTER SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 922

(1) REQUIRE PERIODIC TRAINING IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
SEPSIS PROTOCOL REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR
PROFESSIONAL STAFF WITH DIRECT PATIENT CARE RESPONSIBILITIES AND, AS
APPROPRIATE, FOR STAFF WITH INDIRECT PATIENT CARE RESPONSIBILITIES,
INCLUDING LABORATORY AND PHARMACY STAFF; AND

(2) ENSURE THAT THE STAFF RECEIVE UPDATED TRAINING IF THE
HOSPITAL OR URGENT CARE CENTER MAKES A SUBSTANTIVE CHANGE TO THE
SEPSIS PROTOCOL.

(D) EACH HOSPITAL AND URGENT CARE CENTER SHALL COLLECT AND USE
~~QUALITY~~ ~~MEASURES~~ ~~RELATED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RECOGNITION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~SEVERE~~
SEPSIS FOR THE PURPOSE OF INTERNAL QUALITY IMPROVEMENT.

(E) ON REQUEST, A HOSPITAL OR AN URGENT CARE CENTER SHALL
PROVIDE THE PROTOCOL REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO
THE DEPARTMENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3