START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 554

Chapter 554

(House Bill 62)

AN ACT concerning

State Employee Rights and Protections – Personnel Actions and Harassment –
Investigation of Complaints

FOR the purpose of increasing the time period during which an investigation must be
conducted and a written decision must be issued regarding a certain complaint filed
by a certain applicant or employee alleging discrimination or harassment by an
employer; authorizing certain applicants and employees to provide written
authorization to increase by an additional number of days the time period during
which an investigation of a complaint and a written decision must be completed; and
generally relating to State employee rights and protections.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 5–211
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 5–212
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

5–211.

(a) An applicant or employee subject to this subtitle may file with the head of the
principal unit a written complaint:

(1) that alleges a violation of § 5–208 of this subtitle; or

(2) that alleges harassment in violation of § 20–606(a)(5) of the State
Government Article.

(b) A complaint under subsection (a)(1) of this section must be filed within 1 year
after the complainant first knew of or reasonably should have known of the alleged violation
that is the basis for the complaint.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 554 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) A complaint under subsection (a)(2) of this section must be filed within 2 years
after the alleged violation that is the basis for the complaint.

5–212.

(A) [Within 30] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
WITHIN 60 days after a complaint under § 5–211 of this subtitle is received:

(1) an equal employment officer, under the direction of the fair practices
officer, shall investigate the complaint and recommend a proposed decision to the head of
the principal unit; and

(2) the head of the principal unit shall issue a written decision to the
complainant and may grant any appropriate relief.

(B) THE TIME PERIOD UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION MAY BE
EXTENDED UP TO AN ADDITIONAL 30 DAYS IF THE APPLICANT OR EMPLOYEE WHO
FILED THE COMPLAINT PROVIDES WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION TO THE EQUAL
EMPLOYMENT OFFICER INVESTIGATING THE COMPLAINT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2