START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 45 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 45 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Sale, Barter, or Exchange of Mounted Specimens From 
Decedent's Estate 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes an exception to the existing prohibition against selling, 
offering for sale, bartering, or exchanging any game bird or mammal taken from the wild. 
Under the bill, the prohibition does not apply to a legally acquired mounted specimen of a 
game bird, excluding a migratory game bird, or game mammal, if the original owner is 
deceased and the specimen is part of the personal property of an owner whose estate is 
being liquidated or distributed. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Prohibition against Selling Game Birds or Mammals 
 
Generally, a person may not sell, offer for sale, barter, or exchange, at any time within the 
State, any game bird or mammal taken from the wild in the State or in another state, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 45/ Page 2 
territory, or country. However, the prohibition does not apply to the legally acquired  
(1) meat, pelt, carcass, or mounted specimen of any beaver, coyote, fisher, fox, mink, 
muskrat, nutria, opossum, otter, raccoon, skunk, or long-tailed weasel; (2) hide, hair, tail, 
or feet of deer, squirrel, or rabbit (excluding a mounted specimen); (3) feathers, skin, or 
feet of upland and forest game birds (excluding a mounted specimen); (4) unless prohibited 
by federal law, feathers of wetland game birds; or (5) antlers of deer legally acquired in 
another state and manufactured into an article of commerce in another state. 
 
Title 10 of the Natural Resources Article defines “game birds or mammals” as the species 
defined as forest game birds and mammals, fur-bearing mammals, upland game birds and 
mammals, and wetland games birds or any part, egg, offspring, or dead body of any of 
them. “Migratory game bird” means any wetland game bird, dove, or woodcock or any 
part, egg, offspring, or dead body of any of them. 
 
Property of a Deceased Person 
 
Under the Estates and Trusts Article, all property of a decedent (deceased person) is subject 
to the estates of decedents law, and upon the person’s death must pass directly to the 
personal representative (a fiduciary who settles and distributes the estate of the decedent in 
accordance with the terms of any will and the estates of decedents law) for administration 
and distribution. “Property” is all real and personal property of the decedent and any right or 
interest in the property, which does not pass, at the time of the decedent’s death, to another 
person by the terms of the instrument under which it is held, or by operation of law. 
 
Personal Representative’s Power to Liquidate and/or Distribute the Estate 
 
The personal representative has various statutory powers to administer the property of a 
decedent’s estate, including the power to sell property and distribute the cash proceeds to 
the heirs (persons who are entitled to property of a decedent that is not distributed by will) 
or legatees (persons who receive property under the terms of a will). Also, the personal 
representative may, subject to the terms of the will and the needs of administration, 
distribute property (including personal property) of an estate in kind, instead of in cash, to 
the heirs or legatees. 
 
Background:  DNR advises that mounted specimens associated with an estate currently 
can only be donated or disposed of and few places exist that will take them as a donation. 
According to DNR, the intent of the statute is to prohibit monetizing wildlife, to protect 
against poaching and exploitation; however, the department does not view the sale of 
mounted specimens under the bill’s exception as a major risk to the resource. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 45/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 284 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Register of Wills; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 45/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Natural Resources - Sale, Barter, or Exchange of Mounted Specimens 
From Decedent’s Estate 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0045 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Brian Eyler 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Auctioneers could benefit from this bill if they are allowed to sell taxidermy mounts on behalf of 
estates.  However, the impact would be minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4