START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 86 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 86 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public and Nonpublic Schools - Bronchodilators - Use, Availability, Training, 
and Policies 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in consultation with local 
boards of education, to establish a policy for public schools to authorize the school nurse 
and designated school personnel to administer a bronchodilator to a student who is 
determined (by an individual with specified training) to be, or is perceived to be, 
experiencing asthma-related symptoms or is perceived to be in respiratory distress. A 
bronchodilator may be administered to such a student regardless of whether the student has 
been diagnosed with asthma or reactive airway disease or has been prescribed a 
bronchodilator by a licensed health care practitioner. However, a bronchodilator may not 
be administered to a prekindergarten student without a prescription, as specified. The 
policy must require that bronchodilators and modes of delivery be stored in public schools 
to be used in emergency situations and include other specified elements. Likewise, the bill 
authorizes each nonpublic school to establish a policy that meets similar requirements. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $32,200 in FY 2025 for 
contractual support needed to develop a policy. The Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE) can consult with MDH and specified organizations to identify or 
develop required trainings, develop required forms, and receive required incident reports 
using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
32,200 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($32,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 86/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase minimally to implement required 
training. Local school systems can coordinate with MDH on the development of 
bronchodilator policies with existing resources. Further, due to the requirement to have a 
stock supply of bronchodilators and modes of administration available, annual school 
system and/or local health department (LHD) expenditures also increase, as discussed 
below. To the extent a school system applies for and receives grants as authorized under 
the bill, revenues increase and a portion of expenditures is defrayed. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. To the extent that nonpublic schools are small businesses, 
the bill authorizes, but does not require, the specified policy and related training and 
procedures. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Asthma, Respiratory Distress, and Anaphylaxis Identification Training 
 
MSDE, in consultation with MDH, the American Lung Association, and the Asthma and 
Allergy Foundation of America, must identify or develop training to identify the symptoms 
of asthma and respiratory distress, identify the symptoms of anaphylaxis, and distinguish 
between anaphylaxis and asthma or respiratory distress. The training must be provided to 
school nurses and voluntary school personnel who are designated by a school nurse and, in 
the clinical judgment of the school nurse, are appropriate recipients of the training. This 
training must be a paid professional development training. 
 
Bronchodilator Policy and Availability 
 
“School personnel” means individuals employed by a school (public or nonpublic, as 
relevant) or in the case of some public school health staff, by an LHD. “School personnel” 
includes part-time employees, teachers, and substitute teachers employed by the school at 
least seven days of each school year, registered nurse case managers, delegating nurses, 
and administrative staff. 
 
The policy must include (1) a paid professional development training for school nurses and 
other voluntary school personnel designated by a school nurse on the identification and 
differentiation of anaphylaxis and asthma and respiratory distress; (2) procedures for the 
emergency administration of a bronchodilator by a school nurse or designated school 
personnel; (3) procedures for recognizing the need to administer a bronchodilator and for 
administering a bronchodilator based on the severity of the symptoms being experienced 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 86/ Page 3 
by a student; (4) proper follow-up emergency procedures; (5) a provision requiring that 
bronchodilators and modes of delivery be stored in public schools to be used in an 
emergency situation; (6) a provision authorizing a local board to obtain a standing order 
for the administration of bronchodilators; and (7) a requirement that each public school 
develop and implement a method for notifying the parents or guardians of students of the 
school’s policy at the beginning of each school year. These elements are also required, as 
appropriate, for any policy voluntarily developed by nonpublic schools; however, 
nonpublic schools must also establish an ongoing process for oversight and monitoring by 
a licensed health care practitioner. 
 
An authorized licensed health care practitioner may provide bronchodilators to a school 
nurse or designated school personnel for use in accordance with the bill. Bronchodilators 
and modes of administration used by a school nurse or designated school personnel must 
be from a licensed pharmacy or manufacturer. A local board of education or public school 
(as well as a nonpublic school) may accept donated bronchodilators and modes of 
administration from a licensed pharmacy or manufacturer, and a local board (as well as a 
nonpublic school) may apply for grants to obtain funding for the purchase of 
bronchodilators and modes of administration. 
 
MSDE must develop and disseminate standard forms to record and report each incident 
requiring the use of a bronchodilator at a public school. A public school must notify the 
student’s parent or legal guardian of an incident requiring the use of a stock bronchodilator 
in accordance with the bill and make a record of the incident on this form and file the form 
in the student’s school medical record. Each public school must submit a report to MSDE 
on the number of incidents at the school or at a related school event that requires the use 
of a stock bronchodilator in accordance with the bill. 
 
Except for any willful or grossly negligent act, a school nurse or any other school personnel 
who responds in good faith to the asthma attack or respiratory distress in accordance with 
the bill may not be held personally liable for any act or omission in the course of responding 
to the child in distress. Except for any willful or grossly negligent act, a health care provider 
who prescribes or dispenses a bronchodilator used to treat a child in accordance with the 
bill also may not be held personally liable for any act or omission that occurs in the course 
of responding to the child in distress. 
 
Current Law:  With the assistance of LHDs, each local board of education must provide 
adequate school health services, instruction in health education, and a healthful school 
environment. MSDE and MDH must jointly develop public standards and guidelines for 
school health programs and offer assistance to the local boards of education and LHDs in 
their implementation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 86/ Page 4 
MSDE and MDH must jointly establish guidelines for public schools regarding emergency 
care for students with special health needs. The guidelines must include procedures for the 
emergency administration of medication and the proper follow-up emergency procedures, 
a description of parental or caregiver responsibilities, a description of school 
responsibilities, a description of student responsibilities that are age and condition 
appropriate, and any other issue that is relevant to the emergency medical care of students 
with special health needs. MSDE and MDH must provide technical assistance to schools 
to implement the guidelines established, train designated school personnel at the local 
level, and develop a process to monitor the implementation of the guidelines. MSDE’s 
Maryland State School Health Services updated guidelines for management of students 
with asthma provides local school systems and LHDs with information regarding the 
management of asthma and care coordination, including the responsibilities of school staff, 
administrators, parents and guardians, and students. 
 
Auto-injectable Epinephrine 
 
“Anaphylaxis” means a sudden, severe, and potentially life-threatening allergic reaction 
that occurs when an individual is exposed to an allergen. “Auto-injectable epinephrine” 
means a portable, disposable drug delivery device that contains a premeasured single dose 
of epinephrine that is used to treat anaphylaxis in an emergency situation. 
 
Each local board of education must establish a policy to authorize the school nurse and 
other school personnel to administer auto-injectable epinephrine, if available, to a student 
who is determined to be or perceived to be in anaphylaxis, regardless of whether the student 
(1) has been identified as having an anaphylactic allergy or (2) has a prescription for 
epinephrine from a licensed health care practitioner. The policy must also include training 
for school personnel on how to recognize the symptoms of anaphylaxis; procedures for the 
emergency administration of auto-injectable epinephrine; proper follow-up emergency 
procedures; and a provision authorizing a school nurse to obtain and store at a public school 
auto-injectable epinephrine to be used in an emergency situation. These elements are also 
required, as appropriate, for any policy voluntarily developed by nonpublic schools; 
however, nonpublic schools must also establish an ongoing process for oversight and 
monitoring by a licensed health care practitioner. 
 
Each public school must submit, on the form that MSDE requires, a report on each incident 
at the school or at a related school event that required the use of auto-injectable epinephrine. 
MSDE must develop and disseminate a standard form to report each incident requiring the 
use of auto-injectable epinephrine at a public school. Maryland’s revised guidelines for 
management of anaphylaxis in schools contain recommendations for minimum standards 
of care and current best practices for students with anaphylactic allergies. The guidelines 
specify the roles and responsibilities of parents/guardians, students, and staff and include 
guidelines for outreach to parents/guardians from schools. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 86/ Page 5 
State Expenditures:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $32,208 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. MDH 
has determined that one temporary contractual and one regular ongoing part-time position 
are needed to implement the bill. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises 
that the added responsibilities (that have a fiscal impact) due to this legislation are not 
permanent and, thus, may be performed by a contractual employee. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one part-time (50%) nurse consultant in fiscal 2025 only to support MDH 
in working with local boards of education to establish a bronchodilator policy, as specified. 
Once the policy is established, this analysis assumes that MDH can follow up with local 
boards of education as needed using existing resources. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and other operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$25,356 
Operating Expenses 
    6,852 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$32,208 
 
Future year expenditures reflect termination of the position in fiscal 2026 with the 
completion of the bronchodilator policy. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Local Expenditures:  LHDs provide school nurses in approximately 14 jurisdictions. 
Thus, LHD expenditures in those jurisdictions increase by a minimal amount for 
school nurses to attend specified paid professional development trainings. Local school 
system expenditures likewise increase for school nurses employed by local school systems 
and school staff designated by the school nurse to attend the specified paid professional 
development trainings. Estimates provided by local school systems ranged from 
$22 to $55 per hour of staff training. Costs will be less to the extent paid professional 
development training is already provided and can be replaced by the specified training 
identified/developed by MSDE. Additionally, in Washington County, a local hospital 
provides school nursing staff for public schools in the county. For Washington County, the 
local hospital may bear these training expenses. 
 
As required under the bill, annual local school system and/or LHD expenditures increase 
to stock bronchodilators and spacers in public schools to be used in an emergency situation. 
It is unknown what price local school systems will pay for stock bronchodilators and modes 
of administration, including spacers. According to Cost Helper, the cost to the general 
public for an albuterol rescue inhaler, which is one type of bronchodilator, is $30 to $60 
($5 to $50 with insurance). Other bronchodilators and administration systems, such as 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 86/ Page 6 
nebulizers, may cost more or less than that estimate. Nurses in local schools will need to 
decide what bronchodilators and administration systems are most appropriate to stock. 
Baltimore County Public Schools estimates a cost of $40,000 to stock bronchodilators and 
spacers. Prince George’s County Public Schools estimates a cost of $30,900 to stock 
bronchodilators and spacers for its 206 schools. St. Mary’s County Public Schools advises 
the bill will necessitate significant upfront costs to obtain new bronchodilator and spacer 
supplies with ongoing yearly costs of at least $8,500 to replace expired or used stock. 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools also indicates that the price for bronchodilators and 
spacers has increased by roughly 10% per year over the past two years. 
Montgomery County Public Schools estimates an annual cost of $31,650 to supply 
four bronchodilators and sufficient spacers for its 211 schools. 
 
Total costs are higher if school nurses determine that a greater stock supply of 
bronchodilators is necessary (which expire and must be replaced regularly). There may 
also be costs associated with the safe disposal of used and expired bronchodilators. To the 
extent local school systems currently have stock bronchodilators, licensed pharmacies or 
manufacturers donate supplies of bronchodilators, or local school systems secure grants for 
the purchase of bronchodilators and modes of administration, costs are mitigated. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MSDE advises that some nonpublic schools may not have a school 
nurse on site. Such schools that wish to implement a policy under the bill will need to 
coordinate with an off-site nurse consultant. However, because the bill authorizes, but does 
not require, nonpublic policy adoption, there is no direct effect on nonpublic schools. 
Nevertheless, to the extent a nonpublic school chooses to adopt a policy, it must have a 
stock supply of bronchodilators for use in emergency situations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 266 of 2023, HB 384 of 2022, and HB 609 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 180 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment.   
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 86/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 29, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7