START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 651

Chapter 651

(House Bill 38)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – ~~Off–Street~~ Motor Vehicle Off–Street Parking Requirements
Near Mass Transit Stations

FOR the purpose of prohibiting the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City from adopting
or enforcing a local law that requires the creation of new motor vehicle off–street
parking for a ~~residential~~ development that includes residential use and that is
located within a certain distance of a present or planned MARC, Baltimore MTA
Light Rail, ~~or~~ Red Line, or Metro station; and generally relating to requirements for
motor vehicle off–street parking for residential developments in Baltimore City.

BY adding to
Article – Land Use
Section 10–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 10–202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Land Use

10–104.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “RED LINE” MEANS A RAIL TRANSIT FACILITY USING
ONE OR MORE VEHICLES, REGARDLESS OF MODE, OPERATING IN TANDEM ON A
FIXED RAIL IN A COMBINATION OF AT–GRADE, ELEVATED, AND OR UNDERGROUND
CONFIGURATIONS THROUGH BALTIMORE CITY AND BALTIMORE COUNTY ALONG A
GENERALLY EAST–TO–WEST ALIGNMENT BETWEEN THE TERMINUS OF SECURITY
BOULEVARD ON THE WEST AND JOHNS HOPKINS BAYVIEW MEDICAL CENTER ON
THE EAST, CONNECTING AS APPROPRIATE TO OTHER FIXED–ROUTE TRANSIT
SERVICES.

(B) NOTWITHSTANDING § 10–202 OF THIS TITLE, THE MAYOR AND CITY
COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY MAY NOT ADOPT OR ENFORCE A LOCAL LAW THAT
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 651 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

REQUIRES THE CREATION OF NEW MOTOR VEHICLE OFF–STREET PARKING FOR A
~~RESIDENTIAL~~ DEVELOPMENT THAT INCLUDES RESIDENTIAL USE AND THAT IS
LOCATED WITHIN A 0.25–MILE RADIUS OF A PRESENT OR PLANNED:

(1) MARC STATION;

(2) BALTIMORE MTA LIGHT RAIL STATION; OR

(3) RED LINE STATION, REGARDLESS OF TRANSIT MODE; OR

(4) METRO STATION.

10–202.

To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the Mayor and
City Council of Baltimore City may regulate:

(1) the height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures;

(2) the percentage of a lot that may be occupied;

(3) off–street parking;

(4) the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces;

(5) population density; and

(6) the location and use of buildings, signs, structures, and land.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2