START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 96 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 96 
(Delegate T. Morgan) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health - Newborn Screening Program - Implementation of Testing 
 
 
This emergency bill repeals the requirement that the Secretary of Health and the State 
Advisory Council on Hereditary and Congenital Disorders (1) determine whether to 
approve the inclusion of a core condition in the State’s Newborn Screening Program within 
one year after the condition is added to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ 
(HHS) Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP) and (2) implement testing for any 
condition within one year after approval. The bill also repeals related provisions regarding 
the disapproval of conditions by the Advisory Council. Instead, the Maryland Department 
of Health (MDH) must implement testing for a core condition listed in RUSP within 
18 months after the core condition is added to RUSP, except as specified. MDH may test 
for a condition that is not listed in RUSP if recommended by the Advisory Council and 
approved by the Secretary. Uncodified language requires MDH to implement testing for 
infantile Krabbe disease within one year after HHS issues a final recommendation to add 
screening of the condition to RUSP, except as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in special fund expenditures for MDH’s 
Laboratories Administration to screen for additional conditions beginning as early as 
FY 2026. Special fund revenues increase correspondingly from fees beginning as early as 
FY 2026. Medicaid expenditures (50% general funds, 50% federal funds) may 
increase beginning as early as FY 2026, to pay its share of fees. Federal fund revenues 
increase accordingly. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 96/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDH must implement testing for a core condition listed in RUSP within 
18 months of its addition to RUSP. If MDH is unable to implement testing within this 
timeframe due to a delay in the procurement of necessary equipment or supplies, MDH 
must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee on the delay. Specifically, MDH must report on the reason for the 
delay and the anticipated timeline for implementation within 15 months of the core 
condition being added to RUSP and every 3 months thereafter until testing is implemented. 
 
MDH must implement testing for infantile Krabbe disease within one year after HHS issues 
its final recommendation to add screening of the condition to RUSP. If MDH is unable to 
implement testing within this timeframe due to a delay in the procurement of necessary 
equipment or supplies, MDH must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House 
Health and Government Operations Committee on the delay. The report must be made 
within nine months of infantile Krabbe disease being added to RUSP and include 
information on the equipment or supplies needed, the reason for the delay, and the 
anticipated timeline for implementation. Subsequently, MDH must continue to report to 
the committees every three months until testing is implemented. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Newborn Screening Program 
 
MDH’s Newborn Screening Program is a statewide system for screening all newborn 
infants in Maryland for certain hereditary and congenital disorders associated with severe 
problems of health or development (except when the parent or guardian of the newborn 
objects). The program was codified and centralized by Chapter 256 of 2008, which 
established the MDH public health laboratory as the sole laboratory in Maryland allowed 
to perform the screening tests. The system for newborn screening includes laboratory 
testing, reporting of test results, and follow-up activities to facilitate the rapid identification 
and treatment of an affected child. The laboratory is required to screen for 58 first-tier 
metabolic hereditary disorders on all screening specimens collected. These conditions are 
listed in Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.10.13.12). Second-tier tests can only be 
performed when requested by an individual authorized to request a medical laboratory test. 
 
MDH is required, in consultation with the Advisory Council, to establish fees for newborn 
screening that do not exceed an amount sufficient to cover the administrative, laboratory, 
and follow-up costs associated with the performance of screening tests. Fees are deposited 
into the Newborn Screening Program Fund, a special fund that is administered by the 
Secretary of Health to cover costs associated with performing newborn screening tests. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 96/ Page 3 
Recommended Uniform Screening Panel 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 265 and 266 of 2022, the Newborn Screening Program is required, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary and the Advisory Council, to screen for each core 
condition listed in the RUSP. The Secretary and the Advisory Council must determine 
whether to approve the inclusion of a condition in the State’s newborn screening panel 
within one year of any condition being added to RUSP. If inclusion for a condition is 
approved, MDH must implement testing for the condition within one year. If, however, the 
Secretary or Advisory Council do not approve the inclusion of a condition, MDH must 
publicly post and submit to the General Assembly a report that includes the Secretary’s 
justification for not approving the inclusion of the condition and the Advisory Council’s 
final vote regarding its inclusion. 
 
On January 30, 2024, the U.S. Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns 
and Children voted to recommend adding infantile Krabbe disease to HHS’s RUSP. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
According to MDH’s Laboratories Administration, all core conditions listed in RUSP are 
either currently included in the State’s Newborn Screening Program or testing for those 
conditions is in the process of being implemented (with full implementation anticipated by 
the end of calendar 2024). 
 
The bill eliminates the current approval process for adding core conditions to the State’s 
screening panel and instead requires implementation of testing for a core condition within 
18 months after the condition is added to RUSP. 
 
Testing for infantile Krabbe disease must be implemented within one year after HHS issues 
a final recommendation to add screening of the condition to RUSP. While the 
U.S. Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children voted to 
recommend adding Krabbe disease to RUSP, the date of final action by HHS is unknown 
at this time. 
 
Special Fund Expenditures 
 
The bill results in a potential significant increase in special fund expenditures for MDH in 
any year in which additional core conditions must be added to the State’s screening panel 
that otherwise would not have been added, beginning as early as fiscal 2026. However, any 
impact depends on several factors including whether the condition would have been added 
absent the bill, the type of condition and the equipment and staff time necessary to test for 
the condition, and how commonly the condition is detected. The timing of any increase in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 96/ Page 4 
special fund expenditures depends on when conditions are added to RUSP and 
subsequently added to the State’s screening panel. 
 
For context, to implement testing for infantile Krabbe disease, special fund expenditures 
increase by an estimated $850,000 for one-time equipment costs and approximately 
$750,000 in annual ongoing costs ($150,000 for equipment maintenance, $300,000 for 
supplies and reagents, and $300,000 for additional staff). These costs may have been 
incurred otherwise but are likely accelerated under the bill. 
 
Special Fund Revenues  
 
MDH is statutorily mandated to establish fees to recoup costs to provide newborn 
screening. Such fees may not exceed the administrative, laboratory, and follow-up costs 
associated with newborn screening testing in the State. Thus, to the extent that special fund 
expenditures increase, special fund revenues increase correspondingly from fee increases 
beginning as early as fiscal 2026. The timing and magnitude of any such potential fee 
increase would depend on when conditions are added, actual costs to implement additional 
screening, and whether then-current fee levels are sufficient to cover any increased 
expenditures.  
 
The Laboratories Administration advises that the State’s newborn screening fee – currently 
set at $106 per baby – has not been adjusted since 2015. Since that time, the Laboratories 
Administration has implemented new tests for five conditions, and it is currently 
implementing testing for additional conditions. The Laboratories Administration advises 
that it has submitted proposals to MDH to increase the newborn screening fee and that 
those proposals are currently under review. According to the Laboratories Administration, 
based on current revenues, it may lack sufficient funds to properly implement testing for 
infantile Krabbe disease or other conditions that are added to RUSP. 
 
Impact on Medicaid 
 
Medicaid covers approximately half of all births in Maryland. Thus, with the 
implementation of any increase in the newborn screening fee, Medicaid expenditures 
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) increase. In fiscal 2025, Medicaid is projected to 
cover approximately 32,175 births. Medicaid may also incur minimal additional 
expenditures as a result of any follow-up testing (repeat Tier 1 testing and Tier 2 and 3 
testing, as needed) for infantile Krabbe disease beginning as early as fiscal 2026. 
 
Additional Comments:  Krabbe leukodystrophy disease, also known as Krabbe disease or 
globoid cell leukodystrophy, is a severe neurological condition that results from the 
nervous system’s loss of myelin – the protective covering around nerve cells that ensures 
nerve signals are transmitted rapidly – and the presence of abnormal cells in the brain. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 96/ Page 5 
Affecting approximately 1 in 100,000 individuals in the United States, Krabbe disease is 
most prevalent among infants. Infantile Krabbe disease is particularly severe; infants with 
the disease rarely survive beyond age 2. Hunter’s Hope Foundation, an advocacy and 
research organization for Krabbe disease and related leukodystrophies, advises that the 
disease’s progression in infants and young children can be slowed through treatment. 
 
Twelve states currently screen newborns for Krabbe disease; however, that number is 
slated to rise with infantile Krabbe disease now recommended to be added to HHS’s RUSP. 
Approximately 12 states, including Maryland as discussed earlier in this analysis, have an 
RUSP alignment policy under state law. Many of those states may add Krabbe disease to 
their newborn screening programs in the coming months or years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 117 (Senator Bailey) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 24, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5