START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 39 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 39 
(Delegate R. Lewis) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Residential Service Agencies - Reimbursement - Personal Assistance Services 
(Homecare Worker Rights Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill specifies that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may reimburse a 
residential service agency (RSA) for personal assistance services only if the services are 
provided by an individual classified as an employee. The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming RSAs participating in Medicaid are staffed exclusively with 
employees by the bill’s effective date, there is no impact on Medicaid revenues or 
expenditures, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An RSA is an agency that employs or contracts with individuals to provide 
at least one home health care service for compensation to an unrelated sick or disabled 
individual. Some RSAs have nurses that provide skilled care and certified caregivers that 
provide assistance with activities of daily living. Other RSAs provide physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, or speech therapy, or durable medical equipment. RSAs are licensed 
by the Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) in MDH. As of January 2024, there were 
2,323 licensed RSAs in Maryland.   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 39/ Page 2 
Chapters 775 and 776 of 2021 required the Office of the Attorney General, in consultation 
with MDH and the Maryland Department of Labor to produce (and annually update) a 
guidance document concerning the application of employee protection laws to the use of 
personal care aides (PCAs) by RSAs. Per the document, RSAs sometimes wrongly classify 
PCAs as independent contractors rather than employees. This practice is illegal worker 
misclassification that can lead to costly investigations and lawsuits as well as severe tax 
consequences for RSAs. Misclassification also hurts PCAs by denying them important 
legal protections including unemployment benefits, workers’ compensation, sick leave, 
and the right to overtime pay and travel time pay. 
 
The Acts also require, as a condition of obtaining an initial license and every three years 
thereafter, that an RSA certify to MDH that an individual with authority over the RSA’s 
pay or employment practices (1) has read and understood the guidance document and 
(2) will comply with the relevant requirements of the Labor and Employment Article. 
 
Furthermore, the Acts require MDH to develop a form that includes a checkbox for each 
RSA receiving Medicaid reimbursement for the provision of home care or similar services 
by a PCA to indicate whether the RSA uses PCAs designated as independent contractors. 
This form is available on the OHCQ website and can be submitted electronically. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  RSAs enrolled in Medicaid provide personal assistance services, 
primarily to individuals receiving community long-term services and supports as an 
alternative to nursing home placement. In fiscal 2022, MDH reimbursed RSAs 
$394.4 million for personal assistance services provided to 14,230 Medicaid participants. 
 
Of the 2,323 licensed RSAs in Maryland, 1,348 (58%) have completed an RSA 
certification. Of those RSAs that have completed certification, 579 (43%) receive Medicaid 
reimbursement. The 579 Medicaid-enrolled RSAs reported employing a total of 
12,363 PCAs, of which 10,330 are employees and 2,033 are independent contractors. 
 
Under the bill, Medicaid will likely only reimburse an RSA for personal assistance services 
if the RSA is staffed exclusively with employees. Verifying that every claim was provided 
by an individual classified as an employee would be too administratively burdensome. 
However, MDH anticipates that all RSAs will likely shift to a 100% employee model 
before the bill’s delayed effective date of January 1, 2026. As a result, MDH does not 
anticipate a fiscal or operational impact on Medicaid operations.  
 
To the extent RSAs are unable to comply with the bill’s employee classification 
requirements, there will be an indeterminate impact on Medicaid operations beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to ensure RSAs that are not a 100% employee model are disenrolled as 
Medicaid providers. To the extent RSAs’ status in this regard changes frequently, 
reenrolling and revalidating providers will enhance this burden and cost. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 39/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  RSAs that participate in Medicaid, many of which are small 
businesses, incur additional costs to ensure that all PCAs are employees rather than 
independent contractors. Those RSAs that fail to comply with the bill will be disenrolled 
as Medicaid providers and no longer eligible for Medicaid reimbursement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 489 and SB 180 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 197 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - February 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3