START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 55 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 55 
(Delegate Pruski, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Commission on Veterans and Military Families 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Commission on Veterans and Military Families, staffed 
by the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA). The commission must (1) study 
and make recommendations for developing and implementing a statewide strategic plan to 
make Maryland the best state for veterans and military families, including legislative and 
budgetary recommendations; (2) consult with the Office of Military and Federal Affairs 
and the Maryland Military Installation Council in the Department of Commerce; and 
(3) identify key performance indicators to assess the quality of life for veterans and military 
families in Maryland relative to other states. By December 1, 2024, the commission must 
report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. A 
member of the commission may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement 
for expenses. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. MDVA general fund expenditures increase by $74,200 
in FY 2025 only for contractual support to staff the commission and complete the required 
report. Expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. No effect on revenues.     
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
74,200 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($74,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 55/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDVA delivers services and programs to assist Maryland veterans, their 
families, and survivors in obtaining State, federal, and local benefits provided by law in 
recognition for their service. MDVA assures the quality maintenance of veterans’ 
cemeteries and memorials to honor Maryland veterans. MDVA also manages 
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home, an assisted living and skilled nursing facility for veterans 
and their eligible spouses who are unable to care for themselves due to disability, advancing 
age, or who require nursing home care. Additionally, MDVA engages in public awareness 
and outreach to veterans, their families, and other stakeholders. 
 
The Maryland Veterans Commission advises the Secretary of Veterans Affairs on all 
matters pertaining to veterans’ issues. The commission, consisting of 29 voting members 
and honorary nonvoting members, meets quarterly. MDVA provides staff for the 
commission.    
 
State Expenditures:  MDVA advises that the department is unable to absorb additional 
duties and has determined that one temporary contractual staff member is needed to 
implement the bill. The Department of Legislative Services concurs.  
 
Thus, MDVA general fund expenditures increase by $74,237 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual administrative officer to staff the 
commission and produce the mandatory report, which includes identifying key 
performance indicators to compare quality of life for veterans and military families in 
Maryland relative to other states. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$66,711 
Operating Expenses 
7,526 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$74,237 
 
This estimate assumes that the contractual position is eliminated June 30, 2025, concurrent 
with the termination of the commission. To the extent that the commission is able to 
complete its work and submit its required report by December 1, 2024 (within six months 
of the bill’s effective date), the contractual position may terminate earlier, and expenditures 
may be reduced. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 55/ Page 3 
The Department of Commerce advises that the Office of Military and Federal Affairs and 
the Maryland Military Installation Council can consult with the commission within existing 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 88 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of 
Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3