START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 9

Chapter 9

(House Bill 55)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Commission on Veterans and Military Families

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Commission on Veterans and Military
Families to study developing and implementing a strategic plan to make Maryland
the best state for veterans and military families; and generally relating to the
Maryland Commission on Veterans and Military Families.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Commission on Veterans and Military Families.

(b) The Commission consists of the following members:

(1) the following members, appointed by the President of the Senate:

(i) a member of the Senate of Maryland who is also a member of the
Maryland Senate Veterans Caucus;

(ii) a former member of the Senate of Maryland who is also a former
member of the Maryland Senate Veterans Caucus; and

(iii) a representative of an organization that advocates on behalf of
veterans and military families;

(2) the following members, appointed by the Speaker of the House:

(i) a member of the House of Delegates who is also a member of the
Maryland House Veterans Caucus;

(ii) a former member of the House of Delegates who is also a former
member of the Maryland House Veterans Caucus; and

(iii) a representative of an organization that advocates on behalf of
veterans and military families;

(3) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or the Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Adjutant General, or the Adjutant General’s designee;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 9 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) the chair of the Maryland Veterans Commission, or the chair’s
designee;

(6) the chair of the Maryland Veterans’ Home Commission, or the chair’s
designee;

(7) the chair of the Maryland College Collaboration for Student Veterans
Commission, or the chair’s designee; and

(8) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

(i) a representative of an organization that advocates on behalf of
woman veterans; ~~and~~

(ii) a representative of the reserve component of any branch of the
armed forces of the United States, not including the National Guard;

(iii) an individual who is a military spouse or a representative of a
military spouse advocacy group;

(iv) an individual with experience in health care, whether somatic
health care or mental health care; and

(v) an individual with experience in workforce development.

(c) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or the Secretary’s designee, shall serve as
chair of the Commission.

(d) The Department of Veterans Affairs shall provide staff for the Commission.

(e) A member of the Commission:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Commission; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Commission shall:

(1) study and make recommendations for developing and implementing a
statewide strategic plan to make Maryland the best state for veterans and military families,
including legislative and budgetary recommendations;

(2) while forming the recommendations and drafting the study required
under item (1) of this subsection, consult with the Office of Military and Federal Affairs
and the Maryland Military Installation Council in the Department of Commerce; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 9

~~(2)~~ (3) identify key performance indicators that can be compared to
those of other states in order to assess the quality of life for veterans and military families
in Maryland relative to other states.

(g) On or before December 1, 2024, the Commission shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
30, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3