START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 81

Chapter 81

(House Bill 45)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Sale, Barter, or Exchange of Mounted Specimens From
Decedent’s Estate

FOR the purpose of authorizing the sale, barter, or exchange of a mounted specimen from
a decedent’s estate under certain circumstances; and generally relating to game
birds and game mammals.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–404(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–404(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–404.

(e) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection or §
10–512(a)(2)(ii) of this title, a person may not sell, offer for sale, barter, or exchange, at any
time within the State any game bird or game mammal taken from the wild, in the State or
in another state, territory, or country.

(2) The prohibitions of paragraph (1) of this subsection do not apply to the:

(i) Meat, pelt, carcass, or mounted specimen of any beaver, coyote,
fisher, fox, mink, muskrat, nutria, opossum, otter, raccoon, skunk, or long–tailed weasel
legally taken by the person;

(ii) Hide, hair, tail, or feet, excluding a mounted specimen of deer,
squirrel, or rabbit legally acquired;

(iii) Feathers, skin, or feet, excluding a mounted specimen of upland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 81 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

and forest game birds legally acquired;

(iv) Except as prohibited by federal law, feathers of wetland game
birds legally acquired; [or]

(v) Antlers of deer legally acquired in another state and
manufactured into an article of commerce in another state; OR

(VI) LEGALLY ACQUIRED MOUNTED SPECIMEN OF A GAME BIRD,
EXCLUDING A MIGRATORY GAME BIRD, OR GAME MAMMAL, IF THE ORIGINAL OWNER
IS DECEASED AND THE SPECIMEN IS PART OF THE PERSONAL PROPERTY OF AN
OWNER WHOSE ESTATE IS BEING LIQUIDATED OR DISTRIBUTED.

(g) Except as authorized under Subtitle 5 or Subtitle 9 of this title, a person may
not purchase, offer to purchase, barter, or exchange any game bird or game mammal or any
part of a game bird or game mammal if the sale, offer for sale, barter, or exchange is
prohibited by this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2