START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 90

Chapter 90

(House Bill 17)

AN ACT concerning

Charter Counties – Comprehensive Plans – Affirmatively Furthering Fair
Housing

FOR the purpose of altering requirements for the housing element of a charter county’s
comprehensive plan to include requirements related to affirmatively furthering fair
housing; and generally relating to the comprehensive plans of charter counties.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 1–405 and 1–406(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 1–407.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Land Use

1–405.

A charter county shall enact, adopt, amend, and execute a plan in accordance with
this part and Part III of this subtitle.

1–406.

(a) (1) The planning commission for a charter county shall include in the
comprehensive or general plan the visions under § 1–201 of this title and the following
elements:

(i) a development regulations element;

(ii) a housing element;

(iii) a sensitive areas element;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 90 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) a transportation element; and

(v) a water resources element.

1–407.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER FAIR HOUSING” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 2–401 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

[(2)] (3) “Area median income” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the
Housing and Community Development Article.

[(3)] (4) “Low–income housing” means housing that is affordable for a
household with an aggregate annual income that is below 60% of the area median income.

[(4)] (5) “Workforce housing” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the
Housing and Community Development Article.

(b) A housing element may include goals, objectives, policies, plans, and
standards.

(c) A housing element shall address the need for affordable housing within the
county, including:

(1) workforce housing; and

(2) low–income housing.

(D) (1) A COUNTY HAS A DUTY TO AFFIRMATIVELY FURTHER FAIR
HOUSING THROUGH THE COUNTY’S HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMS.

(2) THE HOUSING ELEMENT OF A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT IS
ENACTED OR AMENDED ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2025, SHALL INCLUDE AN
ASSESSMENT OF FAIR HOUSING TO ENSURE THAT THE COUNTY IS AFFIRMATIVELY
FURTHERING FAIR HOUSING.

(3) ON REQUEST OF A COUNTY, THE DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT, SHALL PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE PURPOSE OF
DEVELOPING THE HOUSING ELEMENT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 90

(4) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT REQUIRE A COUNTY TO TAKE, OR
PROHIBIT A COUNTY FROM TAKING, A SPECIFIC ACTION TO AFFIRMATIVELY
FURTHER FAIR HOUSING.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) A charter county that completed or revised an Assessment of Fair Housing
under the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development’s most recently
published Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule, or an analysis of impediments to
fair housing prior to the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Rule, shall incorporate the
Assessment of Fair Housing or analysis of impediments into the housing element of the
charter county’s comprehensive plan, by reference, as described under § 1–407.1 of the
Land Use Article, when the charter county amends its comprehensive plan.

(b) Subsection (a) of this section applies only to a comprehensive plan that is
amended on or after January 1, 2024.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3