START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 36 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 36 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Insurance - Protections After Loss or Damage to Property 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) extends the public adjuster contract cancelation period from 
3 business days to 10 business days; (2) limits the hours during which a public adjuster 
may solicit business; and (3) requires a public adjuster contract to include specific 
statements. A public adjuster who enters into a public adjuster contract during, or within 
72 hours after, the loss giving rise to an insurance claim must provide notice to the 
Insurance Commissioner, as specified. Additionally, the bill removes an existing limitation 
on protections against a fraudulent insurance act by contractors offering home repairs for 
damages to a private residence. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) can implement the bill’s 
changes using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government revenues or expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MIA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  A “public adjuster” is a person who, for compensation, 
(1) acts or aids, solely in relation to first-party claims arising under a policy of real or 
personal property, on behalf of the insured in negotiating for, or effecting the settlement 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 36/ Page 2 
of, a claim for loss or damage covered by an insurance policy; (2) unless marketing on 
behalf of a public adjuster, solicits for employment as a public adjuster for insurance 
claims; or (3) investigates or adjusts losses, or advises an insured about first-party claims 
arising out of an insurance policy that insures real or personal property for another person 
engaged as a public adjuster for the insured. 
 
Public Adjuster Contracts 
 
Under current law, among other requirements, a public adjuster contract must contain a 
statement that:  (1) the insured has the right to rescind or cancel the contract within 
three business days after the date the contract was signed; (2) the notice of rescission or 
cancellation must be in writing and mailed or delivered to the public adjuster at the address 
stated in the contract within that three-business-day period; and (3) if the insured exercises 
the right to rescind or cancel the contract, the public adjuster must, within 15 business days 
after the public adjuster receives the notice, return anything of value given by the insured 
under the contract. 
 
The bill extends the cancellation period from 3 business days to 10 business days and 
requires that a contract include a statement regarding the extended cancellation period. The 
bill also requires that a contract provide a notice to the insured that a public adjuster (or 
anyone acting on behalf of a public adjuster) may not solicit or attempt to solicit between 
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
 
Under the bill, a public adjuster that enters into a public adjuster contract during, or within  
72 hours after, the loss giving rise to an insurance claim must provide notice to the 
Commissioner that the public adjuster has entered into the contract. This notice must be 
provided, in a form and manner determined by the Commissioner, within one business day 
after the public adjuster enters into the contract. 
 
Fraudulent Insurance Act 
 
It is a fraudulent insurance act for a contractor offering home repair or remodeling services 
for damages to a private residence caused by weather, to directly or indirectly pay or 
otherwise compensate an insured, or offer or promise to pay or compensate an insured, 
with the intent to defraud an insurer, for any part of the insured’s deductible under the 
insured’s property or casualty insurance policy, if payment for the services will be made 
from the proceeds of the policy. 
 
The bill removes the limitation for damages caused by weather. Thus, a fraudulent act 
includes damages caused by any loss-producing event. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 36/ Page 3 
Background:  MIA advises that the State has long prohibited contractors from fraudulently 
inflating the costs of post-storm repair or restoration services to cover the amount that an 
insured would otherwise have to pay as part of any deductible under their insurance policy. 
The current prohibition only applies to losses caused by weather. Expanding this 
prohibition to include home repairs for damages caused by any loss-producing occurrence 
more fully protects consumers against individuals attempting to defraud insurers by 
inflating claims by the amount of the deductible. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 231 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 36/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Insurance – Protections After Loss or Damage to Property 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0036 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jamie Sexton 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
___ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
There is minimal economic impact on small businesses associated with this proposal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4