START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 953

Chapter 953

(House Bill 97)

AN ACT concerning

Baby Food – Toxic Heavy Metals – Testing and Labeling
(Rudy’s Law)

FOR the purpose of requiring, beginning on a certain date, manufacturers of baby food to
conduct certain testing on baby food for toxic heavy metals before packaging
individual units of baby food for sale or distribution in the State; requiring, beginning
on a certain date, manufacturers of baby food to include certain information related
to toxic heavy metals on the manufacturer’s website and on the baby food product
label; requiring a consumer to report baby food to the Maryland Department of
Health if the consumer believes, based on certain information, that the baby food is
being sold in the State with toxic heavy metals that exceed limits established by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration; and generally relating to baby food and toxic
heavy metals.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 21–330.4
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

21–330.4.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “BABY FOOD” MEANS FOOD PACKAGED IN A JAR, POUCH,
TUB, OR BOX SOLD SPECIFICALLY FOR BABIES AND CHILDREN UNDER THE AGE OF 2
YEARS.

(II) “BABY FOOD” DOES NOT INCLUDE INFANT FORMULA, AS
DEFINED IN 21 U.S.C. § 321(Z).

(3) “MANUFACTURER” INCLUDES A FOOD MANUFACTURER, FOOD
PROCESSOR, AND FOOD PACKER.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 953 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) “PRODUCTION AGGREGATE” MEANS A QUANTITY OF PRODUCT
THAT IS INTENDED TO HAVE UNIFORM COMPOSITION, CHARACTER, AND QUALITY
AND IS PRODUCED ACCORDING TO A MASTER MANUFACTURING ORDER.

(4) (5) “PROFICIENT LABORATORY” MEANS A LABORATORY THAT:

(I) IS ACCREDITED UNDER THE STANDARDS OF THE
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR STANDARDIZATION
STANDARDIZATION/INTERNATIONAL ELECTROTECHNICAL COMMISSION
17025:2017;

(II) USES AN ANALYTICAL METHOD AT LEAST AS SENSITIVE AS
THE ANALYTICAL METHOD DESCRIBED IN SECTION 4.7 OF THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION ELEMENTAL ANALYSIS MANUAL FOR FOOD AND RELATED
PRODUCTS; AND

(III) DEMONSTRATES PROFICIENCY IN QUANTIFYING EACH
TOXIC ELEMENT TO AT LEAST 6 MICROGRAMS OF THE TOXIC ELEMENT TO KILOGRAM
OF FOOD THROUGH AN INDEPENDENT PROFICIENCY TEST BY ACHIEVING A Z–SCORE
THAT IS LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO PLUS OR MINUS TWO.

(5) (6) “QR CODE” MEANS A MACHINE–READABLE CODE,
CONSISTING OF AN ARRAY OF SQUARES, USED FOR STORING AN INTERNET WEBSITE
IN ORDER TO ACCESS A WEBPAGE.

(7) “REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE” MEANS A SAMPLE THAT CONSISTS
OF A NUMBER OF UNITS THAT ARE DRAWN BASED ON RATIONAL CRITERIA, SUCH AS
RANDOM SAMPLING, AND INTENDED TO ENSURE THAT THE SAMPLE ACCURATELY
PORTRAYS THE MATERIAL BEING SAMPLED.

(6) (8) “TOXIC HEAVY METAL” MEANS ARSENIC, CADMIUM, LEAD,
OR MERCURY.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2025, A PERSON MAY NOT SELL, DISTRIBUTE, OR OFFER
FOR SALE BABY FOOD IN THE STATE THAT CONTAINS TOXIC HEAVY METALS THAT
EXCEED THE LIMITS ESTABLISHED BY THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION.

(2) A PERSON MAY SELL, DISTRIBUTE, OR OFFER FOR SALE BABY
FOOD MANUFACTURED BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026.

(B) (C) (1) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2025, EACH MANUFACTURER OF
BABY FOOD SHALL TEST A REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE OF EACH PRODUCTION

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 953

AGGREGATE OF THE MANUFACTURER’S FINAL BABY FOOD PRODUCT FOR EACH
TOXIC HEAVY METAL ~~BEFORE~~ ~~PACKAGING~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~UNITS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~BABY~~ ~~FOOD~~ ~~FOR~~
SALE OR DISTRIBUTION IN THE STATE.

(2) THE TESTING REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL BE CONDUCTED BY A PROFICIENT LABORATORY AT LEAST ONCE
PER MONTH.

(3) A MANUFACTURER MAY TEST THE FINAL BABY FOOD PRODUCT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BEFORE PACKAGING
INDIVIDUAL UNITS OF BABY FOOD FOR SALE OR DISTRIBUTION.

(C) (D) ON THE REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT, A MANUFACTURER OF
BABY FOOD SHALL PROVIDE THE RESULTS OF THE TESTING CONDUCTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION TO AN AUTHORIZED AGENT OF THE
DEPARTMENT.

(D) (E) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2026, EACH MANUFACTURER OF BABY
FOOD SHALL:

(1) MAKE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON THE MANUFACTURER’S WEBSITE
FOR EACH BABY FOOD PRODUCT SOLD, MANUFACTURED, DELIVERED, HELD, OR
OFFERED FOR SALE IN THE STATE:

(I) THE NAME AND LEVEL OF EACH TOXIC HEAVY METAL
PRESENT IN THE FINAL BABY FOOD PRODUCT AS DETERMINED BY THE TESTING
CONDUCTED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(II) SUFFICIENT INFORMATION, SUCH AS THE PRODUCT NAME,
UNIVERSAL PRODUCT CODE, OR LOT OR BATCH NUMBER, TO ENABLE CONSUMERS
TO IDENTIFY THE FINAL BABY FOOD PRODUCT; AND

(II) (III) A LINK TO THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION’S WEBSITE THAT INCLUDES THE MOST RECENT U.S. FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION GUIDANCE AND INFORMATION ABOUT THE HEALTH
EFFECTS OF THE TOXIC HEAVY METALS ON CHILDREN; AND

(2) INCLUDE IF THE BABY FOOD IS TESTED FOR A TOXIC HEAVY
METAL SUBJECT TO AN ACTION LEVEL, REGULATORY LIMIT, OR TOLERANCE
ESTABLISHED BY THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION UNDER 21 C.F.R. §
109, INCLUDE ON THE BABY FOOD PRODUCT LABEL:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 953 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE FOLLOWING STATEMENT: “FOR INFORMATION ABOUT
TOXIC HEAVY METAL TESTING ON THIS PRODUCT, SCAN THE QUICK RESPONSE (QR)
CODE.”; AND

(II) A QR CODE OR OTHER MACHINE–READABLE CODE THAT
ALLOWS CONSUMERS TO ACCESS ON THE MANUFACTURER’S WEBSITE OR THE BABY
FOOD PRODUCT INFORMATION PAGE:

(I) 1. THE TEST RESULTS FOR THE TOXIC HEAVY METALS;
~~OR~~ AND

(II) 2. A QR CODE OR OTHER MACHINE–READABLE CODE
THAT LINKS TO A PAGE ON THE MANUFACTURER’S WEBSITE CONTAINING THE TEST
RESULTS FOR THE TOXIC HEAVY METALS LINK TO THE WEBPAGE ON THE U.S. FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION WEBSITE THAT INCLUDES THE MOST RECENT
GUIDANCE AND INFORMATION ABOUT THE HEALTH EFFECTS OF THE TOXIC HEAVY
METAL ON CHILDREN.

(F) IF A CONSUMER BELIEVES, BASED ON INFORMATION GATHERED
THROUGH THE USE OF THE CODE INCLUDED ON THE BABY FOOD PRODUCT LABEL
UNDER SUBSECTION (E)(2) OF THIS SECTION, THAT BABY FOOD IS BEING SOLD IN
THE STATE WITH TOXIC HEAVY METALS THAT EXCEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED BY THE
U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION, THE CONSUMER SHALL REPORT THE BABY
FOOD TO THE DEPARTMENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4