START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 90 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 90 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Insurance - Hearing Representation 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the Insurance Commissioner to allow a small employer 
“business entity” to be represented by specified individuals other than an attorney at a 
hearing held by the Commissioner. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has determined 
that this bill has a meaningful impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “business entity” (defined as a corporation, partnership, limited liability 
company, or sole proprietorship) may authorize an officer of the corporation, a partner in 
the partnership, a member of the limited liability company, or specified designated 
employees to represent the business entity during a hearing at MIA or hearings held at the 
Office of Administrative Hearings on behalf of MIA. The business entity must provide 
proof to the Commissioner that it meets the definition of small employer. 
 
A business entity may not be represented by an authorized individual instead of an attorney 
for a hearing based on an assignment of the claim of another to the business entity. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 90/ Page 2 
A business entity may not contract with, hire, or employ another business entity to provide 
appearance services. 
 
If represented by a designated employee, the employee must provide a power of attorney 
sworn by the employer that certifies that the designated employee is an authorized agent of 
the business entity and may bind the business entity on matters before the Commissioner. 
 
Current Law:  “Small employer” means an employer that, during the preceding 
calendar year, employed an average of not more than 50 employees. 
 
Various persons under the purview of MIA, including insurance entities and professionals 
directly regulated by MIA and their customers, may be entitled to a hearing when MIA 
makes a decision that affects them. Generally, all hearings must be open to the public unless 
otherwise specified. The Commissioner must allow any party to a hearing to (1) appear in 
person; (2) be represented by counsel or, in the case of an insurer, a designee of the insurer, 
as specified; (3) be present while evidence is given; (4) have a reasonable opportunity to 
inspect all documentary evidence and to examine witnesses; and (5) present evidence. 
 
An insurer may be represented at a hearing before the Commissioner by a designee of the 
insurer who is employed by the insurer in claims, underwriting, or as otherwise provided 
by the Commissioner. However, all corporations, limited liability corporations, and 
partnerships must be represented by an attorney at any hearing before the Commissioner. 
 
Generally, under § 10-206 of the Business Occupations Article, before an individual may 
practice law in the State, the individual must be admitted to the Bar and meet any 
requirement that the Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) may set by 
rule. However, various exceptions are set forth in statute. For example, specified 
individuals may appear on behalf of a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, 
or business operated as a small proprietorship and represent the entity in a small claims 
action in the District Court (or a subsequent appeal) if the action or appeal is not based on 
an assignment to the business of the claim of another, as specified. 
 
Background:  MIA advises that the bill is intended to eliminate the need for small 
businesses to incur the expense of engaging counsel to represent their businesses in 
administrative proceedings before MIA. MIA has found that the cost of hiring an attorney 
can be a barrier for a small business that wishes to pursue an administrative complaint 
against an insurer and has witnessed small businesses abandon their hearing request due to 
this cost. The bill permits a small employer to appear without counsel when participating 
in most hearings before MIA using similar language to the current exemption afforded in 
small claims actions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 90/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 230 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 90/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Insurance - Hearing Representation 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 90 
 
PREPARED BY: Jamie Sexton 
 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___  
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
 
_X__   WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The bill would reduce the cost for a small employer to pursue a claim before the MIA. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4