START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 52 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 52 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Employees - Parental Bereavement Leave 
 
 
This bill entitles all State employees in the Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branches, 
including temporary employees, to use up to 10 days of paid parental bereavement leave 
within 60 days after the death of the employee’s child, who is at least six months old but 
younger than 27. An employee may use up to 60 days of paid parental bereavement leave 
within 60 days after the employee experiences a stillbirth or the death of the employee’s 
infant younger than six months of age. In either case, an employee must notify the 
employee’s appointing authority of the employee’s intention to use parental bereavement 
leave prior to taking leave. An employee’s appointing authority may not require an 
employee to use any other paid leave available to the employee. The Secretary of Budget 
and Management must adopt regulations governing parental bereavement leave. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or 
finances; however, in limited circumstances, agency expenditures may increase minimally 
to provide coverage for employees on leave, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 52/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Sick and Bereavement Leave in the State Personnel Management System 
 
State employees in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS), except temporary 
employees, currently accrue paid sick leave at the rate of 1.5 hours for every 26 hours 
worked in no overtime status. Employees earn a maximum of 15 days, or 120 hours, of 
sick leave each year. 
 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 17.04.11.06) allow an SPMS employee to charge a 
maximum of five working days, depending on need, to sick leave in the event of the death 
of the following:  spouse; children (including foster and stepchildren); parents, stepparents, 
or foster parents of the employee or spouse or others who took the place of parents; legal 
guardians of the employee or spouse; brothers and sisters of the employee or spouse; 
grandparents or grandchildren of the employee or spouse; and other relatives living as a 
member of the employee’s household. A maximum of one day of available sick leave may 
be used in the event of the death of other specified relatives. 
 
An employee may elect to receive up to three days of bereavement leave with pay, instead 
of using three of the five sick days that an employee is allowed to use, upon the death of 
the following members of the employee’s immediate family:  (1) spouse; (2) children, 
including foster and stepchildren; (3) parents, stepparents, or foster parents of the 
employee; (4) brothers and sisters of the employee; and (5) grandparents and grandchildren 
of the employee. 
 
If additional time is required by the employee, the supervisor must make reasonable efforts 
to arrange the employee’s work so that the employee may take other accrued leave for this 
purpose. 
 
Annual and Personal Leave in the State Personnel Management System 
 
Most employees in SPMS, except temporary employees, also earn annual and personal 
leave. Annual leave accruals are based on the employee’s years of service, which range 
from a maximum of 80 hours of annual leave each year for employees with less than 
five years of service to a maximum of 200 hours of annual leave each year for employees 
with at least 20 years of service. Annual leave may be used for any reason, upon supervisor 
approval. State employees in SPMS are generally entitled to six days, not to exceed 
48 hours, of personal leave with pay at the beginning of the first full pay period of the 
calendar year. If an employee begins employment on or after March 1, the number of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 52/ Page 3 
personal days is reduced, based on the employee’s start date. Personal leave may be used 
for any purpose, generally, after notice is given to the employee’s immediate supervisor. 
 
Leave policies are generally comparable across branches and personnel systems, with some 
variations. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding the State’s leave policy does not directly affect State 
expenditures for most State agencies, since regular employee salaries are already budgeted. 
Additionally, State agencies do not generally hire temporary employees when employees 
are on leave. 
 
However, in limited circumstances, an affected agency may incur coverage costs for 
overtime or a loss of productivity. Even so, any such cost, if realized, is likely to be minimal 
as fetal deaths and deaths under the age of 27 occur infrequently. The Maryland Vital 
Statistics 2021 Annual Report notes there were 479 fetal deaths and the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) estimates there were 1,533 deaths of individuals younger than 
age 27 in 2021 in Maryland. Based on those death rates and the percentage of State 
employees that make up Maryland’s working age population, DLS estimates that fewer 
than 90 State employees would be eligible for the leave granted under the bill annually. 
More than one-third of those employees would likely be eligible for up to 60 days of 
parental bereavement leave, with the remainder eligible for up to 10 days of parental 
bereavement leave. 
 
Agencies may need to train human resources employees on the parental bereavement leave 
policy, and units with independent personnel systems may need to make configuration 
changes to those systems, which they can likely do with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 109 (Senator Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); University 
System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 52/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4