START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 63 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 63 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Credit for Dwelling House of Disabled Veterans - Alterations 
 
   
This bill alters the eligibility criteria for a local option property tax credit for the dwelling 
house of specified disabled veterans to include individuals who have been declared by the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs to have a nonpermanent service-connected disability 
of 100% that results from blindness or any other disabling cause that was not caused or 
incurred by misconduct. Local governments, however, are authorized to limit eligibility for 
the property tax credit to the existing criteria established under current law. A veteran who 
qualifies for a specified property tax exemption is not eligible to receive the property tax 
credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
FY 2025 to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and the changes 
to existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming eligible for 
the property tax credit. Local expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 63/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
   
Real Property Tax Exemption for Disabled Veterans 
 
The real property owned by disabled veterans, as their legal residence, is exempt from 
taxation, if specified requirements are met. A disabled veteran is an individual who is 
honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active service in any 
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces. To qualify for the tax exemption, the disabled veteran 
must have a 100% service-connected disability rating. Real property owned by the 
surviving spouse of a disabled veteran and the surviving spouse of an individual who died 
in the line of duty while in active military, naval, or air service of the United States is 
exempt from taxation. In addition, a home owned by the surviving spouse of a veteran of 
the U.S. Armed Forces who receives Dependency and Indemnity Compensation from the  
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is eligible for a property tax exemption under 
specified circumstances. 
 
Local Property Tax Credit for Disabled Veterans 
 
County and municipal governments are authorized to grant a property tax credit against the 
county or municipal property tax imposed on a dwelling house of a disabled veteran. In 
order to qualify for the property tax credit, the disabled veteran’s federal adjusted gross 
income for the immediately preceding taxable year cannot exceed $100,000. Local 
governments are authorized to continue providing the property tax credit to the surviving 
spouse of the veteran. The amount of the property tax credit is based on the disabled 
veteran’s level of service-connected disability. 
 
The property tax credit is equal to:  
 
 
50% of the county or municipal property tax for a service-connected disability rating 
of at least 75% but not more than 99%; or 
 
25% of the county or municipal property tax for a service-connected disability rating 
of at least 50% but not more than 74%.  
 
A disabled veteran must apply for the property tax credit by providing to the county or 
municipality (1) a copy of the disabled veteran’s discharge certificate from active military, 
naval, or air service and (2) a certification of the disabled veteran’s disability from the 
Veterans Administration. The disabled veteran’s certificate of disability may not be 
inspected by individuals other than the disabled veteran or appropriate employees of the 
county or municipality. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 63/ Page 3 
A disabled veteran is defined as an individual who (1) is honorably discharged or released 
under honorable circumstances from active military, naval, or air service as defined in 
38 U.S.C. § 101 and (2) has been declared by the Veterans Administration to have a 
permanent service-connected disability of at least 50% that results from blindness or any 
other disabling cause that is reasonably certain to continue for the life of the veteran and 
was not caused or incurred by misconduct of the veteran. 
 
A dwelling house is defined as real property that is (1) the legal residence of a disabled 
veteran and is not occupied by more than two families and (2) includes the lot or curtilage 
and structures necessary to use the real property as a residence. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues may decrease beginning 
in fiscal 2025, to the extent that local jurisdictions grant the property tax credit and the 
changes to existing eligibility requirements result in additional individuals becoming 
eligible for the property tax credit. Depending on the jurisdiction, the revenue decrease 
may be significant. The amount of the revenue decrease depends on the number of eligible 
homeowners, the value of residential property tax assessments, and local property tax rates. 
However, since local governments are authorized to limit eligibility for the property tax 
credit to the existing criteria established under current law, any additional fiscal impact 
resulting from the legislation will be determined by the actions taken by the county or 
municipal governments in adopting the expanded tax credit eligibility.  
 
Anne Arundel and Frederick counties have authorized the property tax credit to disabled 
veterans and surviving spouses of disabled veterans. 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the County 
Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the Department 
of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 6 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Howard, and 
Garrett counties; Maryland Association of Counties; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; 
Maryland Municipal League; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 63/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4