START OF PAGE 1
  HB 30 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 30 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland 
Insurance Administration) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance – Conformity With Federal Law 
 
 
This departmental bill aligns Maryland health insurance law and regulations with existing 
federal rules and regulations, including consumer protection measures under the federal 
No Surprises Act (NSA). The bill alters the material errors that trigger special enrollment 
periods in the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP) Exchange and permits the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) to adopt an expanded open enrollment period 
and alternate effective dates of coverage. The bill requires that specified regulations 
adopted by the Insurance Commissioner be consistent with federal regulations in effect 
December 1, 2023, and updates the definition of “grandfathered plan.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any change in State activities does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration has determined that this 
bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions of Emergency Services and Emergency Medical Condition 
 
The bill revises the definition of “emergency services” and adds a definition of “emergency 
medical condition” under § 19-701 of the Health-General Article to reflect updated 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 30/ Page 2 
definitions in NSA. The bill also updates the definitions of “emergency medical condition” 
and “emergency services” under § 15-1A-14 of the Insurance Article, including specifying 
that “emergency medical condition” includes a mental health condition or substance use 
disorder; clarifying that services performed by a behavioral health crisis center are subject 
to the provisions of NSA; clarifying that certain additional items and services are not 
considered emergency services; and specifying that § 19-710(p) of the Health-General 
Article (which prohibits balance billing of health maintenance organization enrollees) 
applies to emergency services. 
 
Coverage of Emergency Services 
 
The bill clarifies that a carrier may not require prior authorization for emergency services. 
A carrier is prohibited from limiting what constitutes an emergency medical condition 
solely based on diagnosis codes. A carrier may not impose any other term or condition on 
coverage for emergency services except for the exclusion or coordination of benefits, a 
waiting period, and applicable cost sharing. A carrier must calculate and apply cost-sharing 
amounts for emergency services as specified in federal regulations. 
 
Application of Existing Insurance Provisions to All Grandfathered Plans 
 
The bill applies existing provisions of Maryland insurance law regarding choice/ 
designation of primary care providers (§ 15-1A-13 of the Insurance Article) and coverage 
of emergency services (§ 15-1A-14 of the Insurance Article) to all grandfathered plans 
consistent with federal regulations under NSA. 
 
Material Errors and Special Enrollment Periods 
 
The bill removes the requirement that an eligible employee or dependent must adequately 
demonstrate to MHBE that a material error influenced their decision to purchase a qualified 
health plan in order to trigger a special enrollment period. The bill also adds cost sharing 
as a material error that can trigger a special enrollment period. These provisions apply to 
SHOP Exchange benefit plans only. 
 
Maryland Regulations 
 
The bill requires that the following regulations adopted by the Insurance Commissioner be 
consistent with federal regulations that were in effect December 1, 2023 (rather than those 
that were in effect December 1, 2019):  (1) regulations regarding the criteria that a health 
benefit plan must meet to be considered a grandfathered plan; (2) regulations regarding the 
criteria that a health benefit plan must meet to be considered a health benefit plan that 
covers essential health benefits; and (3) regulations regarding medical loss ratio. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 30/ Page 3 
Annual Open Enrollment Period 
 
The bill authorizes MHBE to adopt an expanded open enrollment period and alternative 
effective dates of coverage if authorized by the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services. This provision reflects federal rules adopted in 2022 that extended the open 
enrollment period for federally facilitated exchanges to November 1 through January 15, 
and permitted state-based marketplaces the option to adopt expanded open enrollment 
periods and to adopt alternate effective dates for coverage. 
 
Definition of Grandfathered Plan 
 
The bill updates the definition of “grandfathered plan” to mean a health benefit plan that 
meets the criteria established under federal regulations and any corresponding federal rules 
and guidance as those provisions were in effect December 1, 2023 (rather than 2019). 
 
Appendix 1 provides a summary of the bill’s provisions by statutory citation and includes 
the federal regulatory citation/justification to which the bill’s changes seek to conform. 
 
Current Law:  NSA, enacted as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, 
requires health plans to cover surprise bills for emergency services, as well as 
out-of-network provider bills rendered at in-network hospitals and facilities. Balance 
billing is prohibited, with specified exceptions, and out-of-network providers may not send 
patients bills for excess charges. NSA permits access to an independent dispute resolution 
process for any surprise medical bill following a 30-day period when the plan and provider 
try to negotiate a payment amount. 
 
Background:  Since passage of the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act (ACA) in 2010, Maryland enacted legislation nearly annually through 2020 to conform 
with federal ACA requirements. In 2022, emergency legislation was enacted to conform 
with provisions of NSA. Since that time, additional federal regulatory changes have 
occurred; thus, the bill seeks to ensure that State law conforms with the most recent ACA 
and NSA rules and regulations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 217 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 30/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
HB 30/ Page 5 
Appendix 1 
Provisions of the Bill 
 
 
Section of Bill 
Summary 
Federal Citation/Justification 
§ 19-701 HG 
Revises the definition of “emergency services” and adds a 
definition of “emergency medical condition” to reflect updated 
definitions in the federal NSA. 
 
Keeps definitions consistent between the Health-General 
Article (which includes the primary definition of 
“emergency services” used in health maintenance 
organization contracts and as a cross-reference in other 
parts of Maryland law) and the Insurance Article. 
 
§ 15-1A-01 INS 
 
Updates the definition of “grandfathered plan” to reflect 
additional federal guidance in effect December 1, 2023. 
 
45 CFR § 147.140. 
§ 15-1A-03(a) INS 
Requires that Maryland regulations regarding the criteria to be 
a grandfathered plan be consistent with federal regulations as 
of December 1, 2023. 
 
The HHS Grandfathered Group Health Plans and 
Grandfathered Group Health Insurance Coverage Final 
Rule (85 FR 81097) amended requirements for plans to 
preserve 
their 
grandfathered 
status 
effective 
June 15, 2021. 
 
§ 15-1A-03(c) INS 
Applies existing statutory provisions regarding designation of 
primary care providers and coverage of emergency services to 
all grandfathered plans. 
 
NSA 
45 CFR § 149.110 
45 CFR § 149.310. 
 
§ 15-1A-04 INS 
Requires that Maryland regulations regarding a health benefit 
plan that covers essential health benefits be consistent with 
federal regulations as of December 1, 2023. 
 
The HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 
2023 Final Rule (87 FR 27390) clarified what is 
considered 
discriminatory 
plan 
design 
effective 
July 1, 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 30/ Page 6 
Section of Bill 
Summary 
Federal Citation/Justification 
§ 15-1A-14(a) INS 
Updates the definitions of “emergency medical condition” and 
“emergency services”; clarifies that services performed by a 
behavioral health crisis center are subject to NSA; clarifies that 
certain additional items and services are not emergency 
services; and clarifies that § 19-710(p) of the Health-General 
Article (which prohibits balance billing of health maintenance 
organization enrollees) applies to emergency services. 
 
NSA 
45 CFR § 149.110(c) 
45 CFR § 149.410(b). 
 
§ 15-1A-14(b) INS 
Clarifies that a carrier may not require prior authorization for 
emergency services; prohibits a carrier from limiting what 
constitutes an emergency medical condition solely based on 
diagnosis codes or imposing any other term or condition on 
coverage for emergency services, with specified exceptions. 
 
NSA 
45 CFR § 149.110(b). 
 
§ 15-1A-14(c) INS 
Requires a carrier to calculate and apply cost-sharing amounts 
and provide reimbursement for emergency care in accordance 
with federal regulations. 
 
NSA 
45 CFR § 149.110. 
 
§ 15-1A-16 INS 
Requires that Maryland regulations regarding medical loss 
ratio be consistent with federal regulations as of 
December 1, 2023. 
 
The HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 
2023 Final Rule (87 FR 27393) revised requirements 
relating to medical loss ratio effective July 1, 2022. 
 
§ 15-1208.2 INS 
Clarifies and revises material errors that trigger a special 
enrollment period in the SHOP Exchange. 
 
The HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 
2024 Final Rule (88 FR 25919) removed the burden of 
proof that a qualified individual/dependent adequately 
demonstrate a material error and added cost sharing to the 
list of material errors that can trigger a special enrollment 
period effective June 18, 2023. 
 
§ 15-1316 INS 
Authorizes the MHBE to adopt an expanded open enrollment 
period and alternate effective dates of coverage if authorized 
by HHS. 
 
The HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 
2022 Final Rule (86 FR 53503) permits state-based 
marketplaces to adopt expanded open enrollment periods. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 30/ Page 7 
CFR:  Code of Federal Regulations 
FR:  Federal Register 
HG:  Health-General Article 
HHS:  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
INS:  Insurance Article 
MHBE:  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 
NSA:  No Suprises Act 
SHOP:  Small Business Health Options Program 
 
Source:  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
HB 30/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Health Insurance - Conformity With Federal Law 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0030 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jamie Sexton 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
There is no economic impact on small businesses associated with this proposal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8