START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 35 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 35 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Submission of Building Permits to Supervisor of Assessments - 
Estimated Construction Cost 
 
   
This departmental bill requires county permit offices to include the estimated cost of 
construction when submitting a copy of a building permit to the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not significantly affect the operations or finances of 
SDAT. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal. A survey of local governments indicates that many jurisdictions 
currently provide or can provide, construction cost estimates to SDAT as part of the 
permitting process, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The person responsible for issuing building permits must submit a copy of 
the building permit to the supervisor of the county where the building is located after 
issuing a building permit. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 35/ Page 2 
Each year, SDAT is required to value one-third of all real property based on an inspection 
prior to the date of finality. Real property is valued and assessed once every three years. 
Prior to June 1, 2018, statute required that the assessments be based on a physical 
inspection; however, Chapter 651 of 2018 repealed the requirement that the department 
value all real property based on an exterior physical inspection of the real property. Instead, 
the department must value real property based on a review of each property in each 
three-year cycle. The review by the department must include a physical inspection of a 
property if (1) the value of improvements to the property is being initially established; 
(2) the value of substantially completed improvements is being established; (3) the 
property is the subject of a recent sale, and the inspection is deemed necessary by the 
department for purposes of market analysis; (4) the property owner requests a physical 
inspection as part of an active appeal; (5) the department is notified by a county finance 
officer that a substantially completed improvement has been made that adds at least 
$1.0 million in value to the property; or (6) the department determines that a physical 
inspection is appropriate. 
 
In any year of a three-year cycle, real property must be revalued if any of the following 
factors causes a change in the value of the real property:  (1) the zoning classification is 
changed at the initiative of the owner or anyone having an interest in the property; (2) a 
change in use or character occurs; (3) substantially completed improvements are made that 
add at least $100,000 in value to the property; (4) an error in calculation or measurement 
of the real property caused the value to be erroneous; (5) a residential use assessment is 
terminated; or (6) a subdivision occurs. 
 
Any increase in full cash value (market value) is phased in equally over the next 
three years. All property is assessed at 100% of full cash value. 
 
Background:  SDAT uses building permit notices to adjust property assessments to 
include the value of any improvements. County permit offices regularly, but not 
consistently, provide an estimated cost of the construction based on the permit information. 
 
This bill would assist SDAT’s real property assessors in determining the valuation of a 
property improvement more accurately. This will help to ensure a consistent process, which 
then supports more accurate assessments by improving the valuation of improvements. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  A survey of local governments indicates that many jurisdictions 
currently provide, or can provide, construction cost data to SDAT as part of the permitting 
process. Baltimore City, Washington and Worcester counties currently provide 
construction cost data for SDAT when submitting building permit data to the department. 
The City of Frederick provides this data to Frederick County, which provides the data to 
SDAT. The City of Havre de Grace collects construction cost data for building permits and 
will be able to provide this data to SDAT as required by the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 35/ Page 3 
However, Montgomery County indicates that it is unknown if the requirements of the bill 
will increase workload for permitting staff. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 276 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester 
counties; cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 35/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Property Tax – Submission of Building Permits to Supervisor of 
Assessments – Estimated Construction Cost 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0035 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Bob Yeager 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4