START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 51 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 51 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund and Commission 
 
 
This bill (1) establishes the Pediatric Cancer Research Commission to oversee the award 
of competitive grants from the Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund; (2) alters the authorized 
uses of the fund to include the provision of grants to eligible applicants to conduct pediatric 
cancer research (repealing the authorization that funds may be used to provide grants for 
pediatric cancer prevention and treatment) and the administrative costs of the fund and the 
commission; (3) authorizes a specified promotional account to allocate funds to a 
State-based childhood cancer organization; and (4) authorizes the specified promotional 
account to be used to educate the State scientific community about the opportunities for 
childhood cancer research through the fund (in addition to promoting donations to the fund 
under current law). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
increase by $52,900 in FY 2025 for staff. Future years reflect annualization, inflation, and 
elimination of one-time costs. While the bill primarily alters the purposes for which 
existing funds may be used, grant expenditures may increase to the extent that expanded 
use of the promotional account increases demand for grants. Any expense reimbursements 
for commission members are assumed to be absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
52,900 
60,500 
63,200 
66,000 
69,000 
Net Effect 
($52,900) 
($60,500) 
($63,200) 
($66,000) 
($69,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 51/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Pediatric Cancer Fund 
 
Each year the Secretary may (1) distribute funds from the fund to a promotional account to 
be allocated to a State-based childhood cancer organization for use in promoting further 
donations to the fund and to educate the State scientific community about the opportunities 
for childhood cancer research through the fund and (2) use funds from the fund to 
administer the fund (including staff and administrative associated with the commission). 
However, the Secretary may not distribute or use more than 5% of the fund for these 
purposes. 
 
Pediatric Cancer Research Commission 
 
The commission must:   
 
 
develop criteria, standards, and requirements for the review of applications for 
pediatric cancer research grants from the fund; 
 
establish procedures and guidelines to be used in the review, evaluation, ranking, 
and rating of the research grant proposals; 
 
develop criteria and a process for reviewing grant applications to ensure that each 
application is complete and satisfies the developed criteria, standards, and 
requirements; 
 
develop disclosure and recusal guidelines to be followed by commission members 
when considering grant applications; 
 
establish standards for the oversight of awards; and 
 
conduct progress reviews of grant recipients. 
 
The commission comprises the Secretary of Health (or designee) and various members 
appointed by the Governor. A member of the commission (1) must disclose to the State 
Ethics Commission whether the member is employed by or has a financial interest in an 
entity that may apply for grant funds and (2) may not receive compensation but is entitled 
to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. The Secretary may 
use funds from the fund for administrative expenses associated with the commission. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 253 and 254 of 2022 established the Maryland Pediatric Cancer 
Fund within MDH. The fund is authorized only to provide grants for eligible physicians, 
hospitals, laboratories, educational institutions, and other organizations and persons to 
conduct pediatric cancer research, prevention, and treatment. Expenditures from the fund 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 51/ Page 3 
must be made in accordance with the State budget, and money expended from the fund is 
supplemental to and not intended to take the place of funding otherwise appropriated to 
pediatric cancer research, prevention, and treatment. 
 
Chapters 253 and 254 required the Governor, in fiscal 2023, to include an appropriation of 
$5.0 million to the fund or, if not included, to include $5.0 million in the fiscal 2024 budget. 
Each year, MDH may use up to 5% of the amount appropriated to the fund for a 
promotional account to be used to promote donations to the fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Although the bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing 
funds may be used, actual special fund expenditures likely increase to cover administrative 
costs and to the extent that there is increased demand for research grants due to the 
expanded use of the promotional account. Additionally, while the fiscal 2025 budget 
withdraws $5.0 million in general funds (representing the entire fiscal 2024 appropriation 
for the fund) through a deficiency appropriation, the fund retains a $5.0 million fund 
balance from a fiscal 2023 appropriation. However, the fiscal 2025 budget does not include 
an appropriation from the fund for fiscal 2025 authorizing funds to be expended. Moreover, 
it is unclear if the bill’s language authorizing up to 5% of the fund to be used for a 
promotional account and for administrative costs is based on 5% of an appropriation or the 
annual fund balance. Nevertheless, this analysis assumes that:   
 
 
the $5.0 million fund balance is available to be expended in fiscal 2025 either by a 
budget amendment or deficiency appropriation; and 
 
the portion of funds authorized to be used for administrative expenses is limited to 
5% of the $5.0 million fund balance ($250,000). 
 
Thus, special fund expenditures for MDH increase by $52,920 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part-time (0.25) physician program manager to participate on the commission 
as the Secretary’s designee. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.25 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$46,272 
Operating Expenses 
6,648 
FY 2025 Administrative Expenditures 
$52,920 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Any expense reimbursements 
for members of the commission are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. To the extent that 5% of the special fund balance is insufficient to fully 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 51/ Page 4 
cover ongoing administrative costs – due to the absence of an ongoing funding mechanism 
for the fund – general funds may be necessary in future fiscal years to cover such costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 13 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4