START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 97 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 97 
(Delegate Taveras, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Baby Food - Toxic Heavy Metals - Testing and Labeling (Rudy's Law) 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person, beginning January 1, 2025, from selling, distributing, or 
offering for sale “baby food” that contains “toxic heavy metals” that exceed the limits 
established by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). A person may sell, 
distribute, or offer for sale baby food manufactured before January 1, 2026. Beginning 
January 1, 2025, each “manufacturer” of baby food must test a “representative sample” of 
each “production aggregate” of the manufacturer’s final baby food product for each toxic 
heavy metal. On request of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), a manufacturer of 
baby food must provide the laboratory test results to an authorized agent of the department. 
Beginning January 1, 2026, each manufacturer of baby food must make specified 
information publicly available on their website and the baby food product label. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $27,700 in FY 2025. Future years 
reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
27,700 
25,500 
26,500 
27,500 
28,600 
Net Effect 
($27,700) 
($25,500) 
($26,500) 
($27,500) 
($28,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on local governments. 
To the extent that local health departments must inspect baby food products sold in licensed 
food establishments such as grocery stores, expenditures may increase beginning in 
FY 2025. Revenues are not likely affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 97/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Baby food” means food packaged in a jar, pouch, tub, or box sold specifically for babies 
and children younger than age two. “Baby food” does not include infant formula. 
“Manufacturer” includes a food manufacturer, food processor, and food packer. 
“Production aggregate” means a quantity of product that is intended to have uniform 
composition, character, and quality and is produced according to a master manufacturing 
order. “Proficient laboratory” means a laboratory that (1) is accredited under the standards 
of the International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical 
Commission 17025:2017; (2) uses an analytical method at least as sensitive as the 
analytical method described in Section 4.7 of the FDA Elemental Analysis Manual for 
Food and Related Products; and (3) demonstrates proficiency in quantifying each toxic 
element to at least 6 micrograms of the toxic element to kilogram of food through an 
independent proficiency test by achieving a z-score that is less than or equal to plus or 
minus two. “Representative sample” means a sample that consists of a number of units that 
are drawn based on rational criteria, such as random sampling, and intended to ensure that 
the sample accurately portrays the material being sampled. “Toxic heavy metal” means 
arsenic, cadmium, lead, or mercury. 
 
Baby Food Manufacturer Requirements 
 
Baby food testing must be conducted by a proficient laboratory at least once per month. A 
manufacturer may test the final baby food product before packaging individual units of 
baby food for sale or distribution. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2026, each manufacturer of baby food must:   
 
 
make publicly available on their website for each baby food product sold, 
manufactured, delivered, held, or offered for sale in the State (1) the name and level 
of each toxic heavy metal present in the final baby food product; (2) sufficient 
information, such as the product name, universal product code, or lot or 
batch number, to enable consumers to identify the final baby food product; and (3) a 
link to the FDA website that includes the most recent guidance and information 
about the health effects of toxic heavy metals on children; and 
 
if the baby food is tested for a toxic heavy metal subject to an action level, regulatory 
limit, or tolerance established by FDA under 21 CFR § 109, include on the 
baby food product label a (1) Quick Response (QR) Code or other machine-readable 
code that allows consumers to access on the manufacturer’s website of the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 97/ Page 3 
baby food product information page, the test results for the toxic heavy metals and 
a link to the webpage on the FDA website that includes the most recent guidance 
and information about the health effects of the toxic heavy metal on children and 
(2) specified statement regarding the QR Code. 
 
Consumer Complaints 
 
If a consumer believes, based on information gathered through the use of the QR Code 
included on the baby food product label, that the baby food is being sold in the State with 
toxic heavy metals that exceed limits established by FDA, the consumer must report the 
baby food product to MDH. 
 
Current Law:  MDH’s Center for Food Processing is responsible for licensing and 
inspecting facilities that make, process, store, hold, or distribute food to sell wholesale to 
other businesses in Maryland. The Center for Facility and Process Review conducts a plan 
and process review for all food processing plants and prototypical food service facilities. 
Food processing plans are inspected to ensure compliance with applicable State and federal 
laws and regulations. Facilities that manufacture, process, pack, and hold food and operate 
(receive or distribute) across state lines fall under FDA jurisdiction and must comply with 
federal regulations. 
 
The federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act prohibits the manufacture or sale of any food 
that is adulterated or misbranded. The Food Additives Amendment to the Act authorizes 
FDA to regulate food ingredients. MDH implements the Maryland Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act, which conforms to the federal Act. 
 
Under the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act, a substance added to food is considered 
unsafe unless the substance confirms to the terms of an exemption for investigational use, 
or unless the substance is in conformance with a regulation describing the conditions under 
which the substance may be safely used. Pursuant to federal regulations (21 CFR § 109), a 
tolerance, regulatory limit, or action level may be established when a food additive cannot 
be controlled by regulation. A tolerance for an added substance in any food may be 
established when (1) the substance cannot be avoided by good manufacturing practice; 
(2) the tolerance is sufficient for the protection of the public health; and (3) no 
technological or other changes are foreseeable in the near future that might affect the 
appropriateness of the tolerance established. 
 
A regulatory limit for an added substance in any food may be established when (1) the 
substance cannot be avoided by good manufacturing practice; (2) there is no tolerance 
established for the substance in the particular food; and (3) there is insufficient information 
by which a tolerance may be established, or technological changes appear reasonably 
possible that may affect the appropriateness of a tolerance. An action level for an added 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 97/ Page 4 
substance in any food may be established when the criteria for a tolerance may be 
established, except that technological or other changes might affect the appropriateness of 
a tolerance in the foreseeable near future. 
 
Pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 321, “infant formula” means a food which purports to be or is 
represented for special dietary use solely as a food for infants by reason of its simulation 
of human milk or its suitability as a complete or partial substitute for human milk. 
 
There is currently no State or federal requirement for manufacturers to test baby food for 
toxic heavy metals. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $27,655 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part-time contractual administrative specialist to review heavy metal test results 
for baby food manufactured for sale in the State, review manufacturer’s compliance with 
the bill’s information sharing requirements, and respond to consumer complaints. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$17,050 
Operating Expenses 
  10,605 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$27,655 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent a small business baby food manufacturer does not 
currently test for heavy metals, expenditures for the business increase by a potentially 
significant amount. Small businesses must also make specified information available to 
consumers on baby food packaging, which further increase expenditures. Revenues for 
small businesses food establishments may decrease if the facility is no longer able to sell 
baby food products that do not comply with the bill’s requirements. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the FDA, the level of toxic heavy metals in the 
environment used to grow crops, process foods, and raise animals can vary depending on 
natural geographic differences, human activity, and proximity to pollutants. Babies and 
young children are more vulnerable to the harmful effects of toxic heavy metals in food 
because of their small body sizes and metabolism. In 2021, following a congressional 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 97/ Page 5 
investigation, the FDA launched the Closer to Zero campaign to reduce dietary exposure 
to contaminants as low as possible, while also maintaining access to nutritious foods. In 
January 2023, the FDA released draft guidance for lead in food intended for babies and 
children. Guidelines are expected to be finalized in 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 723 (Senator Benson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; U.S. Food and Drug Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5