START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 26 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 26 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Commerce) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the eligible uses of the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned 
Businesses Account (SMWOBA) to allow for grants of up to $10,000 in conjunction with 
a loan. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Commerce can handle the bill’s requirements with 
existing budgeted resources. The bill does not affect revenues into or expenditures from 
SMWOBA, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may be affected beginning as early as 
FY 2025, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Commerce has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SMWOBA, established in 2007, is a special, nonlapsing fund that is 
administered by Commerce. Generally, the account is used to provide investment capital 
and loans to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the State. 
 
A small percentage of gross video lottery terminal (VLT) proceeds is distributed to 
SMWOBA in Commerce each fiscal year. Commerce then provides grants from 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 26/ Page 2 
SMWOBA to eligible fund managers – in practice, mostly a mixture of county 
development corporations and private firms. The fund managers then provide investment 
capital and loans to small, minority, and women-owned businesses in the State. Fund 
managers must allocate at least 50% of available funds to eligible businesses in the 
jurisdictions and communities surrounding the State’s video lottery facilities. Funds repaid 
to the fund managers over time do not accrue to SMWOBA – they are held by the fund 
managers, outside of the State budget, to be used to provide additional rounds of assistance. 
 
SMWOBA also receives funding from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund in increasing 
increments through fiscal 2028 to fund access to capital for small, minority, women-owned, 
or veteran-owned businesses in the clean energy industry in the State. 
 
Chapter 116 of 2021 expanded the eligible uses of SMWOBA to include grants in areas 
declared to be federal disaster areas or subject to a federal or State declaration of 
emergency. In those circumstances, eligible fund managers may provide financial 
assistance in the form of a grant or by converting a prior loan to a grant – with a 
$50,000 limit on either form of assistance to a single business and an aggregate limit of 
$10.0 million in a fiscal year. This statewide expansion is permanent. 
 
Chapters 490 and 491 of 2022 expanded the eligible uses of SMWOBA to include grants 
to eligible businesses and nonprofit organizations in Anne Arundel County and the 
City of Annapolis when in a local state of emergency, as declared by the principal 
executive officer. Fund managers may provide direct grants or convert prior loans to grants, 
with a $50,000 limit on either form of assistance to a single entity. Commerce must approve 
any such assistance prior to distribution or conversion of the funds. This local expansion 
terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
Background:  Commerce advises that it believes pairing a $10,000 grant with a loan will 
increase SMWOBA demand and activity by offering small businesses more flexible 
funding opportunities to assist them with their capital needs. Adding a grant component to 
the program makes it more attractive to potential borrowers and helps with deploying 
SMWOBA funds. Despite statutory authorization to provide assistance in the form of both 
investment capital and loans, in practice, financial assistance under SMWOBA has been 
provided in the form of loans; the fund managers cannot provide investments due to 
federal securities laws. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  SMWOBA funds, which are a portion of VLT proceeds, are allocated 
to eligible fund managers and then used to provide loans. The bill does not alter the 
allocation of VLT proceeds to SMWOBA. Funds repaid to the fund managers over time 
do not accrue to SMWOBA – they are held by the fund managers, outside of the State 
budget, to be used to provide additional rounds of assistance. Therefore, altering the forms 
of financial assistance that fund managers may provide does not directly affect State 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 26/ Page 3 
revenues into or expenditures from SMWOBA, although it may alter how fund managers 
use available funding. For example, Commerce advises that it intends to allow fund 
managers more flexibility in using available funds for administrative expenses as 
compensation for additional program demand and foregone loan repayments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Many eligible fund managers for SMWOBA are local economic 
development entities, which benefit from additional flexibility to provide grants of up to 
$10,000 in conjunction with a loan beginning in fiscal 2025. This may increase program 
activity, resulting in increased local expenditures (loans, grants, and administrative costs) 
and revenues (loan repayments). However, the effects on future year revenues and 
expenditures are attenuated to the extent that funds provided as grants or used to defray 
administrative expenses would have otherwise been loaned out and repaid and then been 
available for additional rounds of loans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 215 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Commerce) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 14, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 26/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Small, Minority, and Women-Owned Businesses Account - 
Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0026 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Siers 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
  X   
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal allows Fund Managers of the Small, Minority, and Women-Owned 
Businesses Account (SMWOBA) to award grants up to $10,000 for businesses receiving 
a loan through the program.  
 
SMWOBA is a successful program in providing access to capital for small, minority, and 
women-owned businesses. Since inception, the program has deployed over $89.9 million. 
In FY 21, fund managers settled 229 transactions for a total of $14.1 million. These 
transactions directly supported 453 new jobs and 830 retained jobs. According to an 
economic impact estimate in the FY 21 Consolidated Incentives Report, these 1,283 jobs 
supported an additional 787 jobs in FY 21.1 The report estimates that each year those jobs 
are supported $344.4 million in economic activity is supported statewide and $5.1 million 
in state sales and income taxes. This means that if jobs supported by the program are 
sustained for only three years the additional state tax revenues exceed the initial 
outlay. The program is not only a valuable asset in promoting new business formation, 
but it likely leads to an increase in state revenues. 
                                              
1 https://commerce.maryland.gov/Documents/ProgramReport/maryland-jobs-development-act-full-report-FY21.pdf 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 26/ Page 5 
 
SMWOBA’s ability to promote and sustain new business formation, especially in 
traditionally marginalized groups, is important given Maryland’s current economic 
situation. The chart below shows the establishment entry rate in Maryland and the United 
States between 1990 and 2020 (the most recent year data is available). Maryland has 
begun lagging the nation, and SMWOBA serves as an important tool in growing 
Maryland’s economic future. 
 
Establishment Entry Rate in Maryland and United States, 1990 - 2020
 
Source: Business Dynamics Statistics, US Census Bureau 
 
Although SMWOBA is an effective program, it has not been fully utilized. The available 
balance as of the most recent annual report (FY 22) was over $8.5 million. This proposal, 
by allowing loan recipients to also receive grants, increases the flexibility that business 
owners have with the funding they receive, thereby making the program more attractive. 
The Department expects an increase in uptake among Maryland’s entrepreneurs.  
 
If the Department awards an additional $8.5 million in grants and loans as a result of this 
change and those awards have similar employment impacts as all settled transactions in 
FY 21, approximately 772 direct jobs would be created and retained in Maryland small 
businesses and more would be created through indirect and induced effects. Increasing 
the utilization of SMWOBA as the proposal would do will have a meaningful impact on 
Maryland’s small businesses and the Maryland economy in general. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5