START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 572

Chapter 572

(House Bill 19)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Northern Snakehead – Common Name

FOR the purpose of establishing the common name of the northern snakehead as the
~~“Patuxent~~ ~~Fish”~~ “Chesapeake Channa”; and generally relating to the common name
of the northern snakehead.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–701.1 and 4–714(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

4–701.1.

(a) There is a commercial northern snakehead OR PATUXENT FISH
CHESAPEAKE CHANNA license.

(b) (1) The license authorizes the holder to catch for sale northern snakeheads,
COMMONLY KNOWN AS PATUXENT FISH CHESAPEAKE CHANNA, in the tidal waters of
the State using:

(i) A bow and arrow attached to a retrieval line; or

(ii) Hook and line.

(2) A licensee may not fish with a bow and arrow under the license within
100 yards of:

(i) Another person or vessel;

(ii) A public or private swimming area;

(iii) A diver down flag; or

(iv) An occupied offshore stationary blind.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 572 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) An applicant for a license does not need to hold a tidal fish license under §
4–701 of this subtitle to be eligible for the license.

(d) A person who wishes to obtain a license shall complete and submit an
application for the license to the Department or any person designated by the Department.

(e) The term of the license is 1 year from September 1 through August 31 of the
following year.

(f) The annual license fee is $15.

(g) A licensee may not transfer a license issued under this section.

(h) A licensee who fishes for northern snakehead OR PATUXENT FISH
CHESAPEAKE CHANNA under the license shall possess the license.

4–714.

(f) Subject to Department regulations, a person may use archery equipment to
fish for northern snakehead, COMMONLY KNOWN AS PATUXENT FISH CHESAPEAKE
CHANNA, in Anne Arundel County waters.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before January 1, 2025,
the Department of Natural Resources shall:

(1) adopt regulations establishing the common name of the northern
snakehead as the ~~“Patuxent~~ ~~Fish”~~ “Chesapeake Channa”; and

(2) refer to the northern snakehead as the ~~“Patuxent~~ ~~Fish”~~ “Chesapeake
Channa” on all applicable material published by the Department.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2