START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 23 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 23 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland 
Insurance Administration) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange - Qualified Health Plans - Dental Coverage 
 
   
This departmental bill repeals a provision of law that specifies that a qualified health plan 
(QHP) is not required under certain circumstances to provide essential benefits that 
duplicate the minimum benefits of qualified dental plans (QDPs). As a result, all QHPs 
sold through the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) must include pediatric dental 
benefits. Accordingly, the bill also repeals the authority of MHBE to require children 
enrolling in a QHP to have specified essential pediatric dental benefits. The bill takes 
effect January 1, 2025, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans 
issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires 
nongrandfathered health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include 
pediatric dental care. However, a plan that does not cover pediatric dental care can be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 23/ Page 2 
considered a QHP if there is at least one stand-alone pediatric dental plan that is separately 
available for purchase on the same exchange. 
 
To be certified as a QHP by MHBE, a health benefit plan must provide the EHBs required 
under the ACA, with specified exceptions. A QHP is not required to provide EHBs that 
duplicate the minimum benefits of QDPs if (1) MHBE has determined that at least 
one QDP is available to supplement the QHP’s coverage and (2) at the time the carrier 
offers the QHP, the carrier discloses that it does not provide a full range of pediatric dental 
benefits and QDPs providing these and other benefits not provided by the QHP are 
available through the exchange. MHBE may determine whether a carrier may elect to 
include nonessential oral and dental benefits in a QHP. 
 
MHBE may require children enrolling in a QHP to have the essential pediatric dental 
benefits required under the ACA whether offered in the QHP, in conjunction with or an 
endorsement to the QHP, or as a stand-alone dental plan.  
 
Background:  MIA advises that, as 10 stand-alone dental plans are available for purchase 
on the Maryland exchange, carriers may currently sell QHPs without pediatric dental 
coverage. However, all carriers offering plans voluntarily include pediatric dental benefits 
at this time. The bill is intended to prevent the future introduction of QHPs that lack this 
coverage as a consumer protection measure.   
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not apply to ACA plans that are sold off the 
exchange. In those circumstances, carriers and consumers retain the option of purchasing 
an ACA-compliant policy that does not include pediatric dental coverage.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 228 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 23/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - February 9, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 23/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Maryland Health Benefit Exchange - Qualified Health Plans - Dental 
Coverage 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 23 
 
PREPARED BY: Jamie Sexton 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
This bill would have minimal impact on small businesses. This requirement would apply 
only to small group QHPs, which are sold through the SHOP Marketplace. Carriers in 
general are already including pediatric dental in these SHOP plans; this bill will ensure 
that they continue to do so in the future. In addition, the vast majority of small employer 
groups do not use the Exchange to purchase their plans and this bill will have no impact 
on the off-exchange market where almost all small group ACA plans are purchased. 
 

END OF PAGE 4