START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 419

Chapter 419

(House Bill 52)

AN ACT concerning

State Employees – Parental Bereavement Leave

FOR the purpose of providing that certain State employees are entitled to a certain amount
of parental bereavement leave with pay under certain circumstances; prohibiting
certain State entities from requiring certain State employees to use certain paid
leave under certain circumstances; and generally relating to parental bereavement
leave for State employees.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 9–1101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 9–1109
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

9–1101.

Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, this subtitle applies to all employees
in the State Personnel Management System, except temporary employees.

9–1109.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CHILD” MEANS AN ADOPTED, BIOLOGICAL, OR FOSTER CHILD, A
STEPCHILD, OR A LEGAL WARD, WHO IS AT LEAST 6 MONTHS OLD AND UNDER THE
AGE OF 21 27 YEARS.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 419 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “INFANT” MEANS AN ADOPTED, BIOLOGICAL, OR FOSTER CHILD, A
STEPCHILD, OR A LEGAL WARD, WHO IS UNDER THE AGE OF 6 MONTHS.

(3) (4) “PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE” MEANS LEAVE AN
EMPLOYEE IS ALLOWED TO USE:

(I) ON THE DEATH OF THE EMPLOYEE’S CHILD; OR

(II) WHEN THE EMPLOYEE EXPERIENCES A STILLBIRTH.

(4) (5) “STILLBIRTH” MEANS THE DEATH OF A FETUS AFTER A
GESTATION PERIOD OF 20 WEEKS OR MORE FOR AN EMPLOYEE:

(I) WHO WAS PREGNANT WITH THE FETUS;

(II) WHO IS THE SPOUSE OR DOMESTIC PARTNER OF AN
INDIVIDUAL WHO WAS PREGNANT WITH THE FETUS; OR

(III) WHO INTENDED TO ASSUME PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES
FOR THE FETUS IF THE FETUS HAD BEEN BORN ALIVE.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

(1) ALL EMPLOYEES, INCLUDING TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES, IN THE
EXECUTIVE, JUDICIAL, AND LEGISLATIVE BRANCHES OF STATE GOVERNMENT,
INCLUDING ANY UNIT WITH AN INDEPENDENT PERSONNEL SYSTEM; AND

(2) ALL EMPLOYEES OF A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER
EDUCATION, AS DEFINED IN § 2–308 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(C) AN EMPLOYEE SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION IS ENTITLED TO PARENTAL
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE WITH PAY.

(D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
EMPLOYEE MAY USE UP TO 10 DAYS OF PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE WITHIN 60
DAYS AFTER:

(I) THE DEATH OF THE EMPLOYEE’S CHILD; OR

(II) THE EMPLOYEE EXPERIENCES A STILLBIRTH.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN EMPLOYEE
MAY USE UP TO 60 DAYS OF PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE WITHIN 60 DAYS
AFTER:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 419

(I) THE EMPLOYEE EXPERIENCES A STILLBIRTH; OR

(II) THE DEATH OF THE EMPLOYEE’S INFANT.

(2) (3) AN EMPLOYEE MAY USE PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
ONLY AFTER NOTIFYING THE EMPLOYEE’S APPOINTING AUTHORITY OF THE
EMPLOYEE’S INTENTION TO USE PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.

(3) (4) AN EMPLOYEE’S APPOINTING AUTHORITY MAY NOT
REQUIRE AN EMPLOYEE ENTITLED TO PARENTAL BEREAVEMENT LEAVE UNDER
PARAGRAPH PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO USE ANY OTHER
PAID LEAVE AVAILABLE TO THE EMPLOYEE.

(E) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS GOVERNING PARENTAL
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3