START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 67 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 67 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Insurance - Penalties - Unauthorized Insurers, Insurance Producers, and Public 
Adjusters 
 
   
This departmental bill increases the maximum civil penalty that the Insurance 
Commissioner may impose on an unauthorized insurer or person engaging in the business 
of insurance in the State from $50,000 to $125,000 per violation. The maximum civil 
penalty for an insurance producer or public adjuster who violates provisions of the 
Insurance Article is increased from $500 to $5,000 per violation. The minimum penalties 
that may be assessed for these violations remain the same.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2025 to 
the extent the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) assesses increased penalties 
under the bill. Expenditures are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MIA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An insurer must have a certificate of authority issued by MIA and comply 
with formation and financial standards to engage in the insurance business in the State. 
Insurers must maintain an adequate level of assets, capital, surplus, and reserves. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 67/ Page 2 
Unlicensed entities engaged in the business of insurance are subject to a civil penalty of at 
least $100 and up to $50,000 per violation. 
 
MIA issues an insurance producer license to each person who sells, solicits, or negotiates 
insurance contracts. Applicants for an insurance producer license must pass an examination 
and meet other qualifications, including experience and continuing education 
requirements. MIA also issues a public adjuster license, which allows the holder to adjust 
claims on behalf of the insured for loss or damage to real or personal property of the insured 
covered by an insurance policy. To be licensed as a public adjuster, an individual must pass 
an examination and complete and submit the NAIC Uniform Individual Application. 
 
Insurance professionals who violate provisions of the Insurance Article are subject to 
various penalties. In addition to the suspension or revocation of an insurance producer or 
public adjuster license, the Insurance Commissioner may impose a penalty of at least $100 
and up to $500 for each violation of the Insurance Article. Penalties accrue to the 
general fund. 
 
Background:  The current maximum penalties assessable against an insurance producer 
or public adjuster who violates the Insurance Article ($500) and an unlicensed person 
engaging in the business of insurance in the State ($50,000) have not been increased since 
1963 and 1987, respectively. MIA advises that the maximum penalty of $50,000 for an 
unauthorized insurer or person engaging in the business of insurance in the State is no 
longer a meaningful deterrent and limits the administration’s ability to penalize fraudulent 
actors. The bill increases the maximum penalty consistent with MIA’s current maximum 
penalty for licensed insurers. The bill also more closely aligns the penalties for an insurance 
producer or public adjuster to those in surrounding states. For example, the maximum 
penalty for an insurance producer or public adjuster who violates a provision of insurance 
law is $5,000 in Virginia, Washington DC, and West Virginia; $10,000 in Pennsylvania; 
and $20,000 in Delaware.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 229 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Maryland Insurance Administration) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 67/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 67/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Insurance – Penalties – Unauthorized Insurers, Insurance Producers, and 
Public Adjusters 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0067 
 
PREPARED BY: Jamie Sexton 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
___ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
The only impact of this bill on small businesses would be on those that violate the law, because 
the amount of penalties assessed would be higher. 
 

END OF PAGE 4