START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 258

Chapter 258

(House Bill 68)

AN ACT concerning

Continuing Care Retirement Communities – ~~Governing~~ ~~Bodies~~ Transparency,
Grievances, and ~~Entrance~~ ~~Fees~~ Unit Reoccupancy

FOR the purpose of ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~membership~~ ~~of~~ ~~governing~~ ~~bodies~~ ~~of~~ ~~continuing~~ ~~care~~
~~retirement~~ ~~communities~~ ~~by~~ ~~increasing~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~subscribers~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~
~~circumstances~~ requiring a provider to post the provider’s most recent disclosure
statement on the provider’s website; altering the number of times ~~select~~ ~~committees~~
~~of~~ ~~certain~~ providers are required to ~~meet~~ ~~with~~ hold a meeting open to all of the
provider’s subscribers each year; requiring an authorized officer of a provider to
provide a summary of certain grievance information at certain meetings; authorizing
a subscriber member of a governing body to report on certain nonconfidential
information; requiring the Department of Aging to collect certain information about
certain internal grievances; ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~processes~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~termination~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~continuing~~
~~care~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~process~~ ~~for~~ ~~refunding~~
~~certain~~ ~~entrance~~ ~~fees~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ requiring a provider to submit
certain reports to a subscriber or a subscriber’s beneficiary if the subscriber’s unit
has not been reoccupied within certain periods of time; and generally relating to
continuing care retirement communities.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 10–101(a), (e), and (h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~
~~Section~~ ~~10–401(v)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section ~~10–401(v)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(w),~~ ~~10–408(b)(3),~~ 10–424, 10–426, 10–427, 10–428, and
10–449
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 258 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Human Services

10–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Department” means the Department of Aging.

(h) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Aging.

~~10–401.~~

(V) “RESIDENT ASSOCIATION” INCLUDES A RESIDENT ASSOCIATION OR AN
EQUIVALENT BODY.

[(v)] (W) “Subscriber” means an individual for whom a continuing care
~~agreement~~ ~~is~~ ~~purchased.~~

[(w)] (X) (1) “Surcharge” means a separate and additional charge that:

~~(i)~~ ~~is~~ ~~imposed~~ ~~simultaneously~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~entrance~~ ~~fee;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~may~~ ~~be~~ ~~required~~ ~~of~~ ~~some,~~ ~~but~~ ~~not~~ ~~all,~~ ~~subscribers~~ ~~because~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~
~~condition~~ ~~or~~ ~~circumstance~~ ~~that~~ ~~applies~~ ~~only~~ ~~to~~ ~~those~~ ~~subscribers.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~“Surcharge”~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~include~~ ~~a~~ ~~second~~ ~~person~~ ~~entrance~~ ~~fee.~~

~~10–408.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~(3)~~ ~~A~~ ~~capital~~ ~~improvement~~ ~~or~~ ~~replacement~~ ~~that~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~meet~~ ~~the~~ ~~standard~~
of [§ 10–401(w)] § 10–401(X) of this subtitle is not subject to review by the Department
~~under~~ ~~§§~~ ~~10–409~~ ~~through~~ ~~10–415~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle.~~

10–424.

(a) (1) A provider shall give without cost a disclosure statement for each
facility for which the provider holds a preliminary, initial, or renewal certificate of
registration:

(i) to a prospective subscriber before the earlier of payment of any
part of the entrance fee or execution of a continuing care agreement; and

(ii) annually to any subscriber who requests a disclosure statement.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 258

(2) A provider shall submit its initial disclosure statement to the
Department for review at least 45 days before giving the statement to any prospective
subscriber.

(b) (1) A provider shall revise the disclosure statement annually and file it
with the Department within 120 days after the end of the provider’s fiscal year.

(2) The Department shall review the disclosure statement solely to ensure
compliance with § 10–425 of this subtitle.

(c) (1) An amended disclosure statement is subject to each requirement of this
subtitle.

(2) A provider shall file an amended disclosure statement with the
Department when it is delivered to a subscriber or prospective subscriber.

(D) A PROVIDER SHALL POST THE MOST RECENT DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
ON THE PROVIDER’S WEBSITE.

10–426.

(a) At least [once a year] QUARTERLY, each provider shall hold a meeting open
to all of the provider’s subscribers.

(b) At the [meeting] MEETINGS, an authorized officer of the provider shall:

(1) summarize the provider’s operations, significant changes from the
previous year, and goals and objectives for the next year; and

(2) answer subscribers’ questions.

(C) AT THE LAST QUARTERLY MEETING OF THE YEAR, AN AUTHORIZED
OFFICER OF THE PROVIDER SHALL PROVIDE AN AGGREGATED, DEIDENTIFIED
SUMMARY OF INTERNAL GRIEVANCES SUBMITTED UNDER § 10–428 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

10–427.

(a) (1) If a provider has a governing body, at least [one] TWO of the provider’s
subscribers shall be [a] full and regular [member] MEMBERS of the governing body.

(2) If the provider owns or operates [more than three] MULTIPLE facilities
in the State, the governing body shall include at least one of the provider’s subscribers [for
every three facilities] FROM EACH FACILITY in the State.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 258 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) [Subject to paragraph (4) of this subsection, a] A member of the
governing body who is selected to meet the requirements of this subsection shall be a
subscriber at a facility in the State and be [selected according to the same general written
standards and criteria used to select other members of the governing body] ELECTED BY
THE RESIDENT ASSOCIATION OF THE FACILITY.

(4) [The governing body shall confer with the resident association at each
of the provider’s facilities before the subscriber officially joins the governing body].

(5) (I) A SUBSCRIBER MEMBER OF A GOVERNING BODY MAY
REPORT ON NONCONFIDENTIAL DELIBERATIONS, ACTIONS, AND POLICIES OF THE
GOVERNING BODY TO THE RESIDENT ASSOCIATION.

(II) THE GOVERNING BODY IN ITS SOLE BUT REASONABLE
DISCRETION SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER A MATTER IS CONFIDENTIAL.

(5) THE GOVERNING BODY OF EACH OF THE PROVIDER’S FACILITIES
~~SHALL~~ ~~DIRECT~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OFFICER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROVIDER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MEET~~ ~~AT~~ ~~LEAST~~ ~~QUARTERLY~~ ~~TO~~
~~REVIEW~~ ~~AND~~ ~~DISCUSS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CURRENT~~ ~~FINANCIAL~~ ~~STATEMENTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROVIDER~~
~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESIDENT~~ ~~ASSOCIATION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~COMMITTEE~~ ~~DESIGNATED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESIDENT~~
~~ASSOCIATION.~~

(6) The Secretary may waive the requirements of this subsection for a
provider in the process of decertifying as a provider, if the Secretary determines that there
are no subscribers willing and able to serve on the governing body.

(b) (1) If a provider does not have a governing body, the provider shall appoint
a select committee of its officers or partners to meet at least [twice a year] QUARTERLY
with the resident association at each of its facilities to address concerns of the subscribers
and to ensure that the opinions of subscribers are relayed to all officers or partners of the
provider.

(2) If a facility does not have a resident association, the committee shall
meet with a reasonable number of representatives, not required to exceed fifteen, that the
subscribers elect.

(c) As determined by the provider’s governing body, the provider shall make
available to subscribers either the nonconfidential portions of the minutes of each meeting
of the governing body or a summary of the nonconfidential portions of the minutes, within
1 month of approval of the minutes.

10–428.

(a) A provider shall establish an internal grievance procedure to address a
subscriber’s grievance.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 258

(b) The internal grievance procedure shall at least:

(1) allow a subscriber or group of subscribers collectively to submit a
written grievance to the provider;

(2) require the provider to send a written acknowledgment to the
subscriber or group of subscribers within 5 days after receipt of the written grievance;

(3) require the provider to assign personnel to investigate the grievance;

(4) give a subscriber or group of subscribers who file a written grievance
the right to meet with management of the provider within 30 days after receipt of the
written grievance to present the grievance; and

(5) require the provider to respond in writing within 45 days after receipt
of the written grievance regarding the investigation and resolution of the grievance.

(c) (1) Within 30 days after the conclusion of an internal grievance procedure
established under this section, a subscriber, group of subscribers, or provider may seek
mediation through one of the Community Mediation Centers in the State or another
mediation provider.

(2) If a provider, subscriber, or group of subscribers seeks mediation under
paragraph (1) of this subsection, the mediation shall be nonbinding.

(D) (1) AT LEAST TWICE EACH YEAR ON AN ANNUAL BASIS, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLECT FROM EACH PROVIDER INFORMATION ABOUT
INTERNAL GRIEVANCES FILED FOR EACH OF THE PROVIDER’S FACILITIES,
INCLUDING:

(I) THE NUMBER OF INTERNAL GRIEVANCES FILED;

(II) THE SUBJECT MATTER OF EACH GRIEVANCE FILED
AGGREGATED, DEIDENTIFIED SUMMARY OF INTERNAL GRIEVANCES;

(III) WHETHER A GRIEVANCE WENT TO MEDIATION AND THE
OUTCOME OF THE MEDIATION; AND

(IV) THE FINAL DISPOSITION OF EACH FILED GRIEVANCE.

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT
SHALL REPORT TO THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE HEALTH
AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 258 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE DATA RECEIVED FROM EACH
PROVIDER UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

10–449.

(a) A continuing care agreement shall allow a subscriber to terminate the
agreement by giving a written termination notice to the provider.

[(b) If a continuing care agreement is terminated by the subscriber’s election or
death within the first 90 days of occupancy, the provider shall pay any contractual entrance
fee refund within 30 days after the earlier to occur of:

(1) the recontracting of the subscriber’s unit by:

(i) another subscriber for whom an entrance fee has been paid; or

(ii) another party who is not a subscriber; or

(2) the later to occur of:

(i) the 90th day after the date the written termination notice is
given or the date of death; or

(ii) the day the independent living units at the facility have operated
at 95% of capacity for the previous 6 months.

(c) If a continuing care agreement is terminated by the subscriber’s election or
death after the first 90 days of occupancy, the provider shall pay any contractual entrance
fee refund within 60 days after the subscriber’s death or the effective date of termination,
if on the date of death or at any time between the date the written termination notice is
given and the effective date of termination:

(1) the subscriber resides in a unit at a higher level of care than the level
of care in which the subscriber resided on initially entering the facility; and

(2) the last unit in which the subscriber resided at the initial level of care
on entering the facility has been occupied by or reserved for another subscriber who has
paid an entrance fee.]

(B) (1) IF A CONTINUING CARE AGREEMENT IS TERMINATED:

(I) BY WRITTEN NOTICE GIVEN BY A SUBSCRIBER, THE
~~TERMINATION~~ ~~DATE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONTINUING~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DATE~~
~~ON~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SUBSCRIBER~~ ~~VACATED~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UNIT~~ ~~AND~~ ~~REMOVED~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~PERSONAL~~
PROPERTY OF THE SUBSCRIBER FROM THE UNIT; OR

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 258

(II) ON THE SUBSCRIBER’S DEATH, THE TERMINATION OF THE
~~CONTINUING~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~EFFECTIVE~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DATE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~SUBSCRIBER’S~~ ~~DEATH.~~

(2) WHEN A CONTINUING CARE AGREEMENT IS TERMINATED BY THE
SUBSCRIBER’S ELECTION OR DEATH, THE PROVIDER SHALL PAY ANY CONTRACTUAL
ENTRANCE FEE REFUND.

(C) (1) IF A CONTINUING CARE AGREEMENT PROVIDES FOR A
~~REFUNDABLE~~ ~~ENTRANCE~~ ~~FEE~~ ~~CONDITIONED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REOCCUPANCY~~ ~~OR~~
RECONTRACTING OF THE SUBSCRIBER’S UNIT, THE PROVIDER SHALL ASSIGN THE
~~UNIT~~ ~~A~~ ~~SEQUENTIAL~~ ~~REFUND~~ ~~NUMBER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~DETERMINE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORDER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~REFUNDABLE~~
ENTRANCE FEES TO BE PAID.

(2) WHEN A SEQUENTIAL REFUND NUMBER IS ASSIGNED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PROVIDER SHALL RECORD:

(I) THE DATE WHEN THE NUMBER WAS ASSIGNED; AND

(II) THE NUMBER OF VACATED AND AVAILABLE UNITS AT THE
FACILITY ON THE DATE THE NUMBER WAS ASSIGNED.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION,
BEGINNING 60 DAYS AFTER THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF TERMINATION OF A
CONTINUING CARE AGREEMENT, THE SUBSCRIBER OR THE SUBSCRIBER’S ESTATE
~~SHALL~~ ~~HAVE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RIGHT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RECEIVE~~ ~~A~~ ~~REFUND~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~EQUAL~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ANY~~
~~ENTRANCE~~ ~~FEE~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONTINUING~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~LESS~~ ~~THE~~
AMOUNT OF ANY:

(I) UNPAID FEES OR CHARGES INCURRED BY THE SUBSCRIBER,
INCLUDING MONTHLY SERVICES FEES; AND

(II) CHARITABLE ASSISTANCE PROVIDED BY THE PROVIDER TO
THE SUBSCRIBER.

(2) AFTER A CONTINUING CARE AGREEMENT TERMINATES, THE
BALANCE ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
PAYABLE TO THE SUBSCRIBER OR SUBSCRIBER’S ESTATE IN THE ORDER OF THE
SEQUENTIAL REFUND NUMBER ASSIGNED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) NOTWITHSTANDING OTHER PROVISIONS OF LAW, A PROVIDER SHALL
PAY THE BALANCE OF ANY CONTRACTUAL ENTRANCE FEE REFUND WITHIN 60 DAYS
~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERMINATION~~ ~~DATE~~ ~~IF~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERMINATION~~ ~~DATE~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUBSCRIBER~~ ~~RESIDED~~
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 258 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~UNIT~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~HIGHER~~ ~~LEVEL~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LEVEL~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~
~~SUBSCRIBER~~ ~~RESIDED~~ ~~WHEN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SUBSCRIBER~~ ~~INITIALLY~~ ~~RESIDED~~ ~~AT~~ ~~THE~~
~~FACILITY.~~

[(d)] (F) This section does not prohibit a provider from requiring that a
subscriber’s unit be vacated before any contractual entrance fee refund is paid as a result
of the subscriber’s election to terminate a continuing care agreement.

(G) (E) EVERY 6 MONTHS, A PROVIDER SHALL SUBMIT TO THE
DEPARTMENT A REPORT THAT INCLUDES, FOR THE PRIOR 6 MONTHS:

(1) THE NUMBER OF SATISFIED ENTRANCE FEE REFUNDS;

(2) THE DOLLAR AMOUNT OF EACH SATISFIED ENTRANCE FEE
~~REFUND;~~

(3) THE OUTSTANDING SEQUENTIAL LIST OF ENTRANCE FEE
REFUNDS, INCLUDING DOLLAR AMOUNTS DUE;

(4) THE CURRENT PERCENTAGE OF UNITS AT A FACILITY THAT ARE
OCCUPIED; AND

(5) THE AVERAGE LENGTH OF TIME THE PROVIDER TAKES TO
~~CONTRACT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RECONTRACT~~ ~~UNITS~~

(1) IF AN ENTRANCE FEE REFUND IS CONDITIONED ON THE
REOCCUPYING OF A SUBSCRIBER’S UNIT AND THE UNIT HAS NOT BEEN REOCCUPIED
WITHIN 9 MONTHS OF THE SUBSCRIBER’S DEATH OR THE DATE OF THE CONTRACT
TERMINATION, A PROVIDER SHALL SUBMIT A WRITTEN REPORT TO THE SUBSCRIBER
OR THE SUBSCRIBER’S BENEFICIARY STATING:

(I) THAT THE UNIT HAS NOT BEEN REOCCUPIED; AND

(II) THE EFFORTS THE PROVIDER HAS MADE TO REOCCUPY THE
UNIT.

(2) AFTER THE PROVIDER SUBMITTED THE REPORT REQUIRED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PROVIDER SHALL SUBMIT AN
UPDATED WRITTEN REPORT TO THE SUBSCRIBER OR THE SUBSCRIBER’S
BENEFICIARY EVERY 6 MONTHS UNTIL THE SUBSCRIBER’S UNIT HAS BEEN
REOCCUPIED.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 258

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
application to any cause of action arising before the effective date of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9