START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 68 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 68 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Continuing Care Retirement Communities - Transparency, Grievances, and Unit 
Reoccupancy 
 
 
This bill requires providers to (1) post the most recent disclosure statement on their 
website; (2) hold a meeting open to all of the provider’s subscribers at least quarterly; 
(3) provide an aggregated, deidentified summary of internal grievances at the last quarterly 
meeting of the year; and (4) provide specified information to a subscriber or the 
subscriber’s beneficiary regarding entrance fee refunds if the refund is conditioned on the 
reoccupancy of the subscriber’s unit. The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) must 
collect specified information from providers regarding internal grievances and report on 
the data received by December 1 each year to specified committees of the 
General Assembly. The bill must be construed to apply only prospectively and may not be 
applied or interpreted to have any effect on or application to any cause of action arising 
before the effective date of the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 68/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Continuing Care Agreement Contractual Entrance Fee Refunds 
 
If an entrance fee refund is conditioned on the reoccupying of a subscriber’s unit and the 
unit has not been reoccupied within nine months of the subscriber’s death or the date of the 
contract termination, a provider must submit a written report to the subscriber or the 
subscriber’s beneficiary stating (1) that the unit has not been reoccupied and (2) the efforts 
the provider has made to reoccupy the unit. The provider must submit an updated written 
report to the subscriber or the subscriber’s beneficiary every six months until the 
subscriber’s unit has been reoccupied. 
 
Subscriber Input 
 
A subscriber member of a governing body may report on nonconfidential deliberations, 
actions, and policies of the governing body to the resident association. The governing body 
in its sole but reasonable discretion must determine whether a matter is confidential. 
 
If the provider does not have a governing body, a select committee of its officers or partners 
must meet at least quarterly with the resident association. 
 
Reporting Requirements Regarding Internal Grievances 
 
The bill requires MDOA, on an annual basis, to collect from each provider information 
about internal grievances filed for each of the provider’s facilities, including (1) the number 
of internal grievances filed; (2) the aggregated, deidentified summary of internal 
grievances; (3) whether a grievance went to mediation and the outcome of the mediation; 
and (4) the final disposition of each grievance. By December 1 each year, MDOA must 
report on the data received from each provider to specified committees of the 
General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Termination of Continuing Care Agreements and Contractual Entrance Fee Refunds 
 
Under § 10-401 of the Human Services Article, “continuing care in a retirement 
community” means providing shelter and providing either medical and nursing or other 
health related services or making the services readily accessible through the provider or an 
affiliate of the provider, whether or not the services are specifically offered in written 
agreement for shelter (1) to an individual who is at least 60 years of age and not related by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 68/ Page 3 
blood or marriage to the provider; (2) for the life of the individual or for a period exceeding 
one year; and (3) under one or more written agreements that require a transfer of assets or 
an entrance fee notwithstanding periodic changes. “Continuing care agreement” means an 
agreement between a provider and a subscriber to provide continuing care. 
 
Under § 10-449 of the Human Services Article, continuing care agreements must allow a 
subscriber to terminate the agreement by giving a written notice to the provider. If a 
continuing care agreement is terminated by the subscriber’s election or death within the 
first 90 days of occupancy, the provider must pay any contractual entrance fee refund 
within 30 days after the earlier of: 
 
 
the recontracting of the subscriber’s unit by another subscriber for whom the 
entrance fee has been paid or another party who is not a subscriber; or  
 
the later of (1) the 90th day after the date the written termination notice is given or 
the date of death or (2) the day the independent living units at the facility have 
operated at 95% of capacity for the previous six months. 
 
If a continuing care agreement is terminated by the subscriber’s election or death after the 
first 90 days of occupancy, the provider must pay any contractual entrance fee refund 
within 60 days after the subscriber’s death or the effective date of termination, if on the 
date of death or at any time between the date the written notice is given and the effective 
date of termination: 
 
 
the subscriber resides in a unit at a higher level of care than the level of care in which 
the subscriber resided on initially entering the facility; and 
 
the last unit in which the subscriber resided at the initial level of care on entering 
the facility has been occupied by or reserved for another subscriber who had paid 
an entrance fee. 
 
Subscriber Input 
 
At least once a year, each provider must hold a meeting open to all of the provider’s 
subscribers. The provider must summarize their operations, significant changes from the 
previous year, and goals and objectives for the next year, as well as answer subscribers’ 
questions. 
 
If a provider has a governing body, at least one of the provider’s subscribers must be a full 
and regular member of the governing body. If a provider owns or operates more than 
three facilities in the State, the governing body must include at least one of the provider’s 
subscribers for every three facilities. A subscriber member of the governing body must be 
selected according to the same general written standards and criteria used to select other 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 68/ Page 4 
members of the governing body. The governing body must confer with the resident 
association at each of the provider’s facilities before the subscriber officially joins the 
governing body. 
 
If a provider does not have a governing body, the provider must appoint a select committee 
of its officers or partners to meet at least twice a year with the resident association at each 
of its facilities to address concerns of the subscribers and ensure their opinions are relayed 
to all officers or partners of the provider. 
 
Internal Grievances 
 
A provider must establish an internal grievance procedure that must at least: 
 
 
allow a subscriber or group of subscribers collectively to submit a written grievance; 
 
require the provider to send a written acknowledgement within 5 days after receipt 
of the written grievance; 
 
require the provider to assign personnel to investigate the grievance; 
 
give a subscriber or group of subscribers who file a written grievance the right to 
meet with management of the provider within 30 days after receipt of the written 
grievance to present the grievance; and 
 
require the provider to respond in writing within 45 days after the receipt of the 
written grievance regarding the investigation and resolution of the grievance. 
 
Within 30 days after the conclusion of an internal grievance procedure, a subscriber, group 
of subscribers, or provider may seek mediation. The mediation must be nonbinding.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 76 (Senators Lam and Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 68/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5