START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 66 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 66 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax Credits - Public School Employees, Health and Safety 
Improvements, and Property Used for Local Housing Programs 
 
   
This bill authorizes county and municipal governments to grant a property tax credit for 
(1) residential real property that is owned by and is the primary dwelling of an employee 
of the public school system of the county where the residential real property is located; 
(2) an apartment building or a condominium building if the owner of the building made 
health or safety improvements to the building on or after July 1, 2024; and (3) an apartment 
building or a condominium building that is used on or after July 1, 2024, for the purposes 
of a local housing program for homeless individuals or families. Local governments may 
provide for (1) the amount and duration of the property tax credits; (2) additional eligibility 
criteria for the property tax credits; and (3) any other provision necessary to carry out the 
property tax credits. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years 
beginning after June 30, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant decrease in local property tax revenue beginning in 
FY 2025 to the extent the property tax credits are granted. The amount of the revenue 
decrease depends on the number of eligible properties in each jurisdiction, the assessed 
value of eligible properties, local property tax rates, and any other criteria required by local 
governments. Local expenditures are not directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 66/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  None applicable. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2025 to the 
extent the property tax credits authorized by the bill are granted. The amount of the revenue 
decrease cannot be reliably estimated and depends on the number of eligible properties in 
each jurisdiction, the assessed value of eligible properties, local property tax rates, and any 
other criteria required by local governments. Depending on the jurisdiction, the revenue 
decrease could be significant.    
 
As a point of reference, the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) indicates 
that approximately 125,000 public school employees work within the 24 local school 
systems (as of October 2022). Providing a $2,500 property tax credit to 10% of public 
school employees would reduce local property tax revenues by $31.25 million annually. 
 
Local property tax revenues could also decrease by a significant amount due to the 
proposed property tax credits for certain apartments and condominium buildings. Based on 
reports from the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT), there are 
209,223 improved condominium properties with a total assessed value of $47.3 billion and 
2,407 vacant condominium properties with a total assessed value of $67.7 million (as of 
July 1, 2023). In addition, there are 10,532 improved apartment properties with a total 
assessed value of $50.0 billion and 756 vacant apartment properties with a total assessed 
value of $147.9 million. 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the County 
Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the Department 
of Legislative Services website. 
 
Additional information on residential housing sales data can be found in the following 
report:  Fiscal 2023 Median Residential Sales by Quarter. A copy of the report can be 
found on the SDAT website. 
 
Additional information on public school employees can be found in the following report:  
Staff Employed at School and Central Office Levels, Maryland Public Schools, October 
2022. A copy of the report can be found on the MSDE website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 66/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, Washington, and Worcester 
counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Maryland State Department of Education, 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - March 5, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3