START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 94 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 94 
(Delegate Pasteur) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Correctional Services - Inmate Employment - Agricultural Work 
 
   
This bill repeals the authority of the Division of Correction (DOC) to arrange for the 
employment of inmates in agricultural work at specified camps. The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a material impact on State operations or 
finances.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a material impact on local government 
operations or finances.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except for inmates needed or being utilized by the State Highway 
Administration for emergency road maintenance, DOC is required to arrange for inmates 
to be employed in agricultural work during any part of the year. A person that employs 
inmates in agricultural work must (1) pay the reasonable value for the work at the estimated 
prevailing wage in the community where the inmates are employed and (2) give any 
security for the payments that DOC requires. 
 
A person that employs inmates may sell the produce harvested by the inmates. Inmates 
employed in agricultural work must be under the control and supervision of DOC to the 
same extent as when employed in the construction and maintenance of public roads.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 94/ Page 2 
These provisions apply to inmates of any camp in Queen Anne’s County or in any other 
county in which similar camps are established and inmates in a county within a reasonable 
distance, to be determined by DOC, of any such camp. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 747 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 187 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2