START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 60 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 60 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Rehabilitation Services - Disability - Definition 
 
 
This bill, for purposes of identifying individuals eligible for rehabilitative services, alters 
the definition of “disability” to be any physical or mental impairment that constitutes or 
results in a substantial impediment to employment or independent living. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill alters the definition of “disability” to more closely conform 
to related definitions under the federal rehabilitation acts, as discussed below. The change 
is not anticipated to affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under State law related to rehabilitative services, “disability” means any 
defect or infirmity that may incapacitate an individual totally or partially for gainful 
employment or independent living. The State Board of Education must cooperate with the 
appropriate federal agencies in administering the rehabilitation acts of the U.S. Congress 
and do what is necessary to secure the benefit of the rehabilitation acts. 
 
Under 29, U.S. Code § 705, which pertains to vocational rehabilitation and other 
rehabilitation services, “individual with a disability” means an individual who (1) has a 
physical or mental impairment, which for such an individual constitutes or results in a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 60/ Page 2 
substantial impediment to employment; and (2) can benefit in terms of an employment 
outcome from specified vocational rehabilitation services. 
 
Division of Rehabilitation Services 
 
The Division of Rehabilitation Services (DORS) in the Maryland State Department of 
Education is generally responsible for efforts to rehabilitate and place in gainful 
employment individuals who are disabled and susceptible to rehabilitation and to 
rehabilitate individuals to function more independently. DORS is also responsible for 
providing a coordinated set of activities for transitioning students with a disability that 
promotes movement from school to postschool activities, including postsecondary 
education, vocational training, integrated employment, supported employment, adult 
services, independent living, and community participation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2