START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 186

Chapter 186

(House Bill 75)

AN ACT concerning

Higher Education – Teacher Development and Retention Program – ~~Definition~~
Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “institution of initial eligibility” to include
community colleges as eligible institutions as part of the criteria for applicants for
the Teacher Development and Retention Program; altering certain school years for
participation in the Program; altering the evaluation requirements for the Program;
authorizing the Teacher Development and Retention Fund to be used for
administrative expenses for the Program; altering the termination date of the
Program; and generally relating to the Teacher Development and Retention
Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–2701, 18–2703(a) and (b)(1), 18–2705, and 18–2706
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–2702(a) through (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 627 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023
Section 4

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

18–2701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Eligible individual” means an individual who is:

(1) Enrolled in the first or second year at an institution of initial eligibility;
and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 186 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Interested in pursuing a career in the teaching profession.

(c) “Fund” means the Teacher Development and Retention Fund established
under this subtitle.

(d) “Institution of initial eligibility” means [an]:

(1) AN institution of higher education in the State where at least 40% of
the attendees receive federal Pell Grants; OR

(2) A COMMUNITY COLLEGE ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 16 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(e) “Program” means the Teacher Development and Retention Program
established under this subtitle.

18–2702.

(a) (1) There is a Teacher Development and Retention Program.

(2) The Teacher Development and Retention Program is a pilot program
designed to incentivize a cohort of students to pursue a career in the teaching profession.

(b) (1) The purpose of the Program is to provide support to eligible individuals
who ultimately pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a teacher employed full–time in a
high–needs school, grade level, or content area in the State in which there is a shortage of
teachers, as identified by the Department.

(2) The Program shall provide financial support to eligible individuals
interested in pursuing a career in the teaching profession, beginning by offering eligible
individuals a one–time stipend for participation in an experiential learning opportunity in
a classroom and concluding by placing those individuals in high–needs schools, grade
levels, or content areas.

(c) The Office shall establish eligibility criteria for the Program, including
requirements for an applicant to:

(1) Be enrolled in the first or second year at an institution of initial
eligibility in an associate’s or a bachelor’s degree program; and

(2) Before receiving an educator internship stipend under § 18–2703 of this
subtitle, pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a teacher employed full–time in a
high–needs school, grade level, or content area in which there is a shortage of teachers, as
identified by the Department, for a minimum of 2 years.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 186

18–2703.

(a) (1) In each school year from the [2023–2024] 2024–2025 school year
through the [2025–2026] 2026–2027 school year, a recipient who is selected for support
under the Program shall receive an initial stipend to support the recipient’s participation
in an experiential learning opportunity in a public school or publicly funded
prekindergarten classroom.

(2) The experiential learning opportunity shall:

(i) Occur within the first or second year of the recipient’s enrollment
in an institution of initial eligibility; and

(ii) Contribute to the education of the students in the classroom in
which the recipient participates.

(3) The purpose of the initial stipend awarded under this subsection is to
nurture in the recipient a passion for becoming a teacher.

(4) If the institution of initial eligibility has a written agreement with a
public partner school or publicly funded prekindergarten program for the establishment of
a training practicum under § 6–120 of this article, then the recipient’s experiential learning
opportunity shall be in a classroom within the partner school.

(5) The Office shall determine the amount of the initial stipends awarded
under this subsection.

(b) (1) In each school year from the [2026–2027] 2027–2028 school year
through the [2028–2029] 2029–2030 school year, a Program recipient shall be eligible for
an internship stipend if the Program recipient:

(i) Is currently enrolled in a teacher preparation program at an
institution of higher education in the State that, through its course of study leads to a
Maryland professional teacher’s certificate;

(ii) Is currently engaged in an internship or a practicum providing
direct experience working with students in a public school or publicly funded
prekindergarten program as part of the recipient’s course of study;

(iii) Continues to make satisfactory progress toward a degree and
maintain the standards of the institution; and

(iv) Pledges to fulfill a service obligation for 2 years as a teacher
employed full–time in a high–needs school, grade level, or content area in which there is a
shortage of teachers, as identified by the Department under paragraph (4) of this
subsection.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 186 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

18–2705.

(a) On or before July 1, 2028, 2029, the Commission shall [hire an independent
consultant to evaluate] CONDUCT AN EVALUATION OF the effectiveness of the Program
in attracting new teachers to the profession.

(b) On or before January 1, 2029, 2030, the Commission shall report the results
of the evaluation to the Governor, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

18–2706.

(a) There is a Teacher Development and Retention Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide support to eligible individuals who are
interested in pursuing a career in the teaching profession and who ultimately pledge to
fulfill a service obligation as a teacher employed full–time in a high–needs school, grade
level, or content area in which there is a shortage of teachers.

(c) The Commission shall administer the Fund.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

(2) Interest earnings of the Fund; and

(3) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(f) (1) The Fund [may] SHALL be used [only] to administer the Program and
provide support to recipients under the Program.

(2) THE FUND MAY BE USED FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES FOR
THE PROGRAM.

(g) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 186

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(h) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

Chapter 627 of the Acts of 2023

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2023. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of [6] 7 years and, at the end
of June 30, [2029] 2030, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5