START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 84 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 84 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals and Urgent Care Centers - Sepsis Protocol (Lochlin's Law) 
 
 
This bill requires each hospital and urgent care center in the State, by January 1, 2025, to 
implement an evidence-based protocol for the early recognition and treatment of a patient 
with sepsis, severe sepsis, or septic shock based on generally acceptable standards of care. 
The sepsis protocol must comply with U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) sepsis guidelines. Each hospital and urgent care center must (1) require periodic 
training in the implementation of the sepsis protocol, as specified and (2) ensure that staff 
receive updated training following a substantive change to the protocol. A specialty 
psychiatric hospital must establish a process for the screening and early recognition of a 
patient with sepsis, severe sepsis, or septic shock, and procedures to transfer the patient to 
the appropriate setting. A hospital that submits sepsis data to the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services Hospital Inpatient Quality Reporting Program is presumed to meet the 
requirements of the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can likely oversee sepsis protocol implementation using existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to § 19-301 of the Health-General Article, “hospital” means an 
institution that (1) has a group of at least five physicians who are organized as medical staff 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 84/ Page 2 
for the institution; (2) maintains facilities to provide, under the supervision of medical staff, 
diagnostic and treatment services for two or more unrelated individuals; and (3) admits or 
retains the individuals for overnight care. 
 
Pursuant to Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.09.77.01), “free-standing urgent care 
center” means a location, distinct from a hospital emergency room, a physician’s office, or 
a freestanding clinic, whose purpose is to diagnose and treat illness or injury for 
unscheduled, ambulatory patients seeking immediate medical attention. 
 
Sepsis Initiatives in Maryland 
 
Chapters 489 and 490 of 2018 required the Secretary of Health to establish a Sepsis Public 
Awareness Campaign Workgroup to (1) develop a public awareness campaign on sepsis 
awareness and prevention; (2) identify, review, and evaluate resources that could be used 
to educate the public on sepsis; and (3) identify cost-effective methods for disseminating 
information to the public about sepsis. The workgroup’s required report included 
recommendations related to improving messaging and providing resources to the general 
public for seeking medical care for sepsis symptoms. 
 
In 2015, the Maryland Patient Safety Center and the Maryland Hospital Association 
undertook a Sepsis Hospital Collaborative that engaged 21 hospitals to improve sepsis care 
with a goal of reducing sepsis mortality in participating hospitals by 10%. The initiative 
reduced the rate of sepsis mortality by 25%, saving more than 550 lives. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to CDC, sepsis is the body’s extreme response to an 
infection. Sepsis is life-threatening, and without timely treatment, can rapidly lead to tissue 
damage, organ failure, and death. Sepsis occurs when an infection an individual already 
has triggers a chain reaction throughout the body. Symptoms can include confusion or 
disorientation, shortness of breath, a high heart rate, fever, extreme pain or discomfort, 
and/or clammy or sweaty skin. Approximately 1.7 million adults develop sepsis, and 
approximately 270,000 adults die as a result of sepsis in the United States each year. 
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics, approximately 75,000 infants and 
children develop sepsis each year, and approximately 7,000 infants and children die 
annually. CDC maintains sepsis resources and guidelines for implementation in hospitals. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 332 (Senators Lewis Young and Guzzone) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 84/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; American Academy of Pediatrics; U.S. Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3