START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 76 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 76 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Pharmacists - Administration of Vaccines 
 
 
This emergency bill repeals language that temporarily authorized a licensed pharmacist to 
administer certain vaccinations, under specified circumstances, to an individual age 3 to 17. 
Instead, the bill permanently authorizes a licensed pharmacist, under the same specified 
circumstances, to (1) administer specified vaccinations to an individual as young as 
7 years old and (2) order and administer a vaccination for influenza, COVID-19, or in 
response to a public health emergency to an individual who is at least 3 years old. The bill 
also clarifies the circumstances under which a licensed pharmacist may administer certain 
vaccinations to adults. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, an individual must be licensed by the 
State Board of Pharmacy (MBOP) to practice pharmacy in the State. The practice of 
pharmacy includes administering vaccinations as follows: 
 
 
A pharmacist may administer an influenza vaccination to an individual who is at 
least 9 years old, provided the vaccination is administered in accordance with 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 76/ Page 2 
regulations adopted by MBOP, in consultation with the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH).  
 
For individuals 11 to 17 years old, a pharmacist may administer a vaccination listed 
in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) recommended 
immunization schedule if the individual has a prescription from an authorized 
prescriber. 
 
For adults, a pharmacist may administer a vaccination listed in the CDC’s 
recommended immunization schedule or Health Information for International 
Travel and the vaccination is administered under a written protocol that (1) is 
vaccine specific and (2) meets criteria established in regulation by MDH, in 
consultation with the boards of pharmacy, physicians, and nursing. 
 
From July 1, 2021, to June 30, 2023, a pharmacist was authorized to administer a 
vaccine to an individual age 3 to 17 if the vaccine was approved by the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) and ordered and administered in accordance with 
the immunization schedules of CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP) if the pharmacist (1) completed a practical training program of at 
least 20 hours that included specified topics; (2) had a current certificate in basic 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); (3) completed a minimum of 2 hours of 
continuing pharmaceutical education related to immunizations as part of license 
renewal; (4) complied with specified recordkeeping and reporting requirements; and 
(5) informed each child vaccination patient and adult caregiver accompanying them 
of the importance of well-child visits with a pediatric primary care provider and 
refer the patient to such a provider when appropriate. 
 
The bill generally repeals these provisions and instead authorizes a pharmacist to order and 
administer a vaccination to an individual who is at least age 3 if the vaccine is (1) an 
influenza vaccine; (2) a COVID-19 vaccine; or (3) used in response to a public health 
emergency. A pharmacist must meet the same requirements established for the temporary 
authorization to administer a vaccination to a child age 3 to 17, including training, current 
CPR certification, continuing education, recordkeeping and reporting requirements, and 
informing child vaccination patients and their caregivers of the importance of well-child 
visits and referring them to a pediatric primary care provider when appropriate. 
 
The bill also specifies that a pharmacist who has met the above noted requirements may 
administer to an individual who is at least age 7 a vaccination that is (1) recommended by 
ACIP or (2) approved or authorized by FDA. 
 
Finally, the bill specifies that a pharmacist who has met the above noted training, CPR, and 
continuing education requirements may administer to an adult a vaccination that is 
recommended in CDC’s Health Information for International Travel. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 76/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Small business pharmacies benefit from the ability to permanently 
administer influenza and COVID-19 vaccinations to children as young as age 3 and other 
specified vaccinations to children as young as age 7. Conversely, other health care 
providers that administer vaccinations may administer fewer of them. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 372 and HB 1232 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 18 (Senators Augustine and Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3