START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 856

Chapter 856

(House Bill 16)

AN ACT concerning

Tax Sales – Homeowner Protection Program – Funding

FOR the purpose of requiring each collector of property taxes to include with each property
tax bill a separate insert, designed by the State Tax Sale Ombudsman, that describes
the Homeowner Protection Program and encourages taxpayers to make a voluntary
donation to the Program through a website maintained by the State Department of
Assessments and Taxation; ~~prohibiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector~~ ~~from~~ ~~delivering~~ ~~a~~ ~~certificate~~ ~~of~~
~~sale~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~purchaser~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~property~~ ~~at~~ ~~a~~ ~~tax~~ ~~sale~~ ~~until~~ ~~the~~ ~~purchaser~~ ~~has~~ ~~paid~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~fee~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~fee~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~credited~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Homeowner~~ ~~Protection~~
~~Fund;~~ and generally relating to funding for the Homeowner Protection Program.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 4–201.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section ~~14–820(a)~~ ~~and~~ 14–891(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 14–891(a), (b), (c), and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

4–201.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE HOMEOWNER PROTECTION
PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 8, PART VII OF THIS ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 856 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) EACH COLLECTOR SHALL INCLUDE WITH EACH PROPERTY TAX BILL A
SEPARATE INSERT THAT:

(1) INCLUDES A CONCISE DESCRIPTION OF THE ASSISTANCE THE
PROGRAM PROVIDES TO PREVENT LOW–INCOME, ELDERLY, AND DISABLED
HOMEOWNERS FROM LOSING THEIR HOMES TO TAX SALE FORECLOSURE;

(2) MAY INCLUDE TESTIMONY FROM PARTICIPANTS IN THE
PROGRAM; AND

(3) SHALL ENCOURAGE TAXPAYERS TO MAKE A VOLUNTARY
DONATION TO THE PROGRAM THROUGH THE WEBSITE MAINTAINED BY THE
DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) MAINTAIN A WEBSITE THAT ANY PERSON MAY USE TO MAKE A
VOLUNTARY ONE–TIME OR RECURRING ELECTRONIC DONATION TO THE PROGRAM;
AND

(2) CREDIT DONATIONS RECEIVED THROUGH THE WEBSITE TO THE
HOMEOWNER PROTECTION FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–891 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(D) THE STATE TAX SALE OMBUDSMAN SHALL DESIGN THE SEPARATE
INSERT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION AND PROVIDE THE
INSERT TO EACH COLLECTOR.

~~14–820.~~

(a) (1) [The] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
~~collector~~ ~~shall~~ ~~deliver~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~purchaser~~ ~~a~~ ~~certificate~~ ~~of~~ ~~sale~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector’s~~ ~~hand~~ ~~and~~
~~seal,~~ ~~or~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector’s~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~facsimile~~ ~~signature,~~ ~~acknowledged~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector~~ ~~as~~
a conveyance of land[, which].

(2) (I) THE COLLECTOR MAY NOT DELIVER A CERTIFICATE OF
~~SALE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURCHASER~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURCHASER~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~PAID~~ ~~A~~ ~~FEE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
COLLECTOR OF $15 FOR EACH CERTIFICATE ISSUED BY THE COLLECTOR.

(II) THE FEE IMPOSED UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE HOMEOWNER PROTECTION FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–891
OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) THE certificate OF SALE shall set forth:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 856

[(1)] (I) that the property described in it was sold by the collector to the
~~purchaser;~~

[(2)] (II) the date of the sale;

[(3)] (III) the amount for which the property was sold;

[(4)] (IV) the total amount of taxes due on the property at the time of sale
~~together~~ ~~with~~ ~~interest,~~ ~~penalties~~ ~~and~~ ~~expenses~~ ~~incurred~~ ~~in~~ ~~making~~ ~~the~~ ~~sale;~~

[(5)] (V) a description of the property in substantially the same form as
~~the~~ ~~description~~ ~~appearing~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector’s~~ ~~tax~~ ~~roll.~~ ~~If~~ ~~the~~ ~~property~~ ~~is~~ ~~unimproved~~ ~~or~~ ~~has~~ ~~no~~
~~street~~ ~~number,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~collector~~ ~~has~~ ~~procured~~ ~~a~~ ~~description~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~property~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~
~~or~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~ ~~surveyor,~~ ~~this~~ ~~description~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~included~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~certificate~~ ~~of~~
~~sale.~~ ~~In~~ ~~Garrett~~ ~~County~~ ~~a~~ ~~copy~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~description~~ ~~as~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~§~~ ~~14–813(f)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle,~~
~~as~~ ~~that~~ ~~section~~ ~~relates~~ ~~specifically~~ ~~to~~ ~~Garrett~~ ~~County,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~included~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~certificate~~ ~~of~~
~~sale;~~

[(6)] (VI) a statement that the rate of redemption is 6% a year, except as
~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section;~~

[(7)] (VII) the time when an action to foreclose the right of redemption may
~~be~~ ~~instituted;~~ ~~and~~

[(8) (i)] (VIII) 1. that the certificate will be void unless foreclosure
~~proceedings~~ ~~are~~ ~~brought~~ ~~within~~ ~~2~~ ~~years~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~certificate;~~ ~~or~~

[(ii)] 2. that, unless foreclosure proceedings are brought within 3
~~months~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~certificate~~ ~~to~~ ~~any~~ ~~abandoned~~ ~~property~~ ~~in~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City~~ ~~sold~~
~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~14–817(c)(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~minimum~~ ~~bid~~ ~~less~~ ~~than~~ ~~the~~ ~~lien~~ ~~amount,~~ ~~the~~
~~certificate:~~

[1.] A. is void as to a private purchaser; and

[2.] B. reverts to the Mayor and City Council for a period
~~of~~ ~~2~~ ~~years~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~tax~~ ~~sale.~~

14–891.

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the Homeowner Protection Fund.

(b) There is a Homeowner Protection Fund.

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to finance the Program.

(f) The Fund consists of:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 856 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) tax and interest payments made to the Department by homeowners
enrolled in the Program;

(2) VOLUNTARY DONATIONS TO THE FUND UNDER § 4–201.1 OF THIS
ARTICLE;

(3) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND UNDER § 14–820(A)(2) OF
THIS SUBTITLE;

[(2)] (4) (3) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

[(3)] (5) (4) interest earnings; and

[(4)] (6) (5) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the Fund.

(g) For each of fiscal years 2023, 2024, and 2025, the Governor shall include in
the annual budget bill an appropriation of $750,000 to the Fund.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4