START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 888

Chapter 888

(House Bill 94)

AN ACT concerning

Correctional Services – Inmate Employment – Agricultural Work

FOR the purpose of repealing the authority of the Division of Correction to arrange for the
employment of certain inmates in certain camps to perform agricultural work; and
generally relating to the employment of inmates.

BY repealing
Article – Correctional Services
Section 9–515
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

[9–515.

(a) This section applies to:

(1) inmates of any camp in Queen Anne’s County or in any other county in
which similar camps are established; and

(2) inmates in a county within a reasonable distance, to be determined by
the Division of Correction, of a camp described in item (1) of this subsection.

(b) Except for inmates needed or being utilized by the State Highway
Administration for emergency road maintenance, the Division of Correction shall arrange
for inmates to be employed in agricultural work during any part of the year.

(c) A person that employs inmates in agricultural work under this section shall:

(1) pay the reasonable value for the work at the estimated prevailing wage
in the community where the inmates are employed; and

(2) give any security for the payments that the Division of Correction
requires.

(d) A person that employs inmates under this section may sell the produce
harvested by the inmates.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 888 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) Inmates employed in agricultural work under this section shall be under the
control and supervision of the Division of Correction to the same extent as when employed
in the construction and maintenance of public roads.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2