START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 43 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 43 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicle Registration - Exceptions for Golf Carts - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person to operate a golf cart equipped with approved lighting on 
county or municipal highways between dawn and dusk if the maximum posted speed limit 
does not exceed 30 miles per hour. The golf cart must be kept as far to the right of the 
roadway as feasible, and the driver must have a valid driver’s license. A golf cart operating 
pursuant to the bill’s authorization is exempt from the general requirement that each motor 
vehicle driven on a highway in the State be registered. The governing body of a county or 
municipality may designate the highways under their respective jurisdictions on which a 
golf cart may be operated. The bill’s statewide authorization replaces similar authorizations 
that only apply in certain jurisdictions (Smith Island, the community of Golden Beach 
Patuxent Knolls in St. Mary’s County, the Town of Vienna in Dorchester County, Hoopers 
Island or Taylors Island, and the City of Crisfield in Somerset County). Under the bill, the 
operation of a golf cart on Smith Island between dusk and dawn is prohibited. The operation 
of golf carts in the community of Golden Beach Patuxent Knolls on highways on which 
the maximum posted speed limit does not exceed 35 miles per hour is expressly authorized 
under the bill, consistent with current statutory provisions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 43/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer driven on a 
highway must be registered. Certain motor vehicles are exempt from this requirement, 
including:   
 
 
certain snowmobiles in Allegany and Garrett counties; and 
 
certain golf carts in Allegany County, on Smith Island, in the City of Crisfield in 
Somerset County, in the community of Golden Beach Patuxent Knolls in 
St. Mary’s County, in the Town of Vienna in Dorchester County, and on 
Hoopers Island and Taylors Island. 
 
A “motor vehicle” is defined as a vehicle that, unless otherwise specifically exempted, is 
self-propelled or propelled by electric power obtained from overhead electrical wires and 
not operated on rails. Certain vehicles, such as low-speed vehicles, bicycles, and motor 
scooters, are restricted to certain highways based on the maximum posted speed limit; they 
may be subject to different rules of the road than passenger cars and trucks. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 316 (Senator Bailey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s 
counties; cities of College Park, Frostburg, and Rockville; Town of Bladensburg; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2