START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 38 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 38 
(Delegate Edelson) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore City - Motor Vehicle Off-Street Parking Requirements Near Mass 
Transit Stations 
 
 
This bill prohibits the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City from adopting or 
enforcing a local law that requires the creation of new motor vehicle off-street parking for 
a development that includes residential use and that is located within a 0.25-mile radius of 
a present or planned (1) MARC station; (2) Baltimore Maryland Transit Administration 
(MTA) Light Rail station; (3) Red Line station, regardless of transit mode; or 
(4) Metro station. “Red Line” means a transit facility, regardless of mode, operating in a 
combination of at-grade, elevated, or underground configurations through Baltimore City 
and Baltimore County along a generally east-to-west alignment between the terminus of 
Security Boulevard on the west and Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center on the east, 
connecting as appropriate to other fixed-route transit services. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, the 
Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City may regulate (1) the height, number of stories, 
and size of buildings and other structures; (2) the percentage of a lot that may be occupied; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 38/ Page 2 
(3) off-street parking; (4) the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; (5) population 
density; and (6) the location and use of buildings, signs, structures, and land. 
 
Zoning regulations adopted by the Mayor and City Council must be in accordance with the 
city’s comprehensive plan and designed to, among other things, (1) control street 
congestion; (2) properly manage growth and development; and (3) promote or facilitate 
adequate transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreation, parks, and other public 
facilities. The zoning regulations must also include reasonable consideration for (1) the 
character of the district or zone and its suitability for particular uses and (2) encouragement 
for orderly development and the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on any small business that 
develops a building (or buildings) that includes residential use in Baltimore City within a 
0.25-mile radius of a present or planned MARC station, Baltimore MTA Light Rail station, 
Red Line station, or Metro station. Eliminating off-street parking requirements may reduce 
the cost of development near those transit stations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2