START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 92 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 92 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Finance 
 
Resources and Education for All Prisons (REAP) Act 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to 
(1) set goals for the number of incarcerated individuals in postsecondary education 
programs; (2) establish a tracking system for the number of incarcerated individuals in 
postsecondary education programs; (3) establish a tracking system for the progress of 
incarcerated individuals in postsecondary education programs, as specified; (4) forward 
specified data to the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC); (5) assist 
incarcerated individuals in accessing federal Pell Grants for higher education; and (6) adopt 
regulations to carry out these provisions. MHEC must assist DPSCS in creating the 
required tracking systems. The bill specifies that the Governor must provide funding 
annually in the budget bill for DPSCS to use for marketing for postsecondary education 
programs to incarcerated individuals and for the required tracking systems. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DPSCS, MHEC, and affected universities can handle the bill’s requirements 
with existing resources, as discussed below; however, this estimate does not take into 
account any new discretionary funding associated with marketing. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Affected community colleges can likely handle the bill’s requirements with 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 92/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The duties under the bill relating to postsecondary education programs 
are limited to incarcerated individuals within the Division of Correction (DOC) in DPSCS. 
In order to assist incarcerated individuals (including those in local correctional facilities) 
in accessing federal Pell Grants, DPSCS must consult with institutions of higher education, 
including all University System of Maryland (USM) institutions, Morgan State University 
(MSU), Anne Arundel Community College, Hagerstown Community College, 
Wor-Wic Community College, and Goucher College. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Inmate Training and Job Pilot Program 
 
Chapter 677 of 2021 established the Inmate Training and Job Pilot Program to provide 
educational and vocational training opportunities for incarcerated individuals in the 
12 months preceding their release. Chapter 677 established pilot programs at certain 
USM institutions (Bowie State University, Coppin State University, and the University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore) and MSU. Additionally, MHEC is authorized to establish 
additional pilot programs at other institutions of postsecondary education through a 
memorandum of understanding. MHEC and each participating institution must administer 
the program in cooperation with DOC within DPSCS. The Inmate Training and Job Pilot 
Program terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
Each pilot program must have an individualized plan for success that specifies a staff 
member at the institution who serves as the primary contact responsible for each 
incarcerated individual’s participation and education in the program. The primary contact 
must meet with participating incarcerated individuals regularly throughout their 
participation in the pilot program and ensure the incarcerated individuals are enrolled in 
appropriate courses that work with the incarcerated individuals’ schedules. Courses must 
be credit bearing and lead to a degree or an industry-recognized certificate or license. All 
courses are subject to regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Correction at DPSCS. 
 
The primary contact must also select at least three student mentors who are (1) at least 
age 18; (2) enrolled in the institution of postsecondary education; and (3) enrolled as a 
junior or senior if the pilot program is located at a four-year institution. Student mentor 
participants must receive course credit and a small stipend from the pilot program. 
 
Additional Program Requirements:  MHEC must establish a hotline to connect program 
participants to counseling and job services. If participants desire such aid, MHEC must 
facilitate contact between each program participant and a nonprofit organization in the 
community where the participant plans to reside (after release) whose mission includes aid 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 92/ Page 3 
with job placement, housing services, or counseling services. Also, MHEC must encourage 
former program participants to serve as contacts for future participants. 
 
MHEC, DOC, and the applicable institutions of postsecondary education must determine 
a suitable format for incarcerated individuals to take courses, whether virtual or nonvirtual. 
DOC must ensure that courses and instruction are provided in a suitable manner and create 
a safe and reasonable process by which to confer a degree to an incarcerated individual 
who is still incarcerated and who completes the requirements for a degree as part of the 
pilot program.  
 
DOC must coordinate with MHEC to develop a hybrid virtual and in-person learning 
environment in the division’s statewide system. 
 
Funding:  The fiscal 2025 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, includes $363,000 
for the program. In addition, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation for the pilot program in the amount of $363,000 in fiscal 2026. Funding must 
be provided to MHEC for the costs associated with program administration, including a 
designated employee who is responsible for the administration of the pilot program, grants 
made to participating institutions (institutions must collectively aim to enroll 
40 incarcerated individuals to be divided among the institutions to qualify for an allocation 
of funds), and stipends for student mentors. Additionally, funding must be provided to 
DOC within DPSCS to cover costs associated with program administration, including a 
designated employee. 
 
Reporting:  Each program participant must agree to provide the assigned institution of 
postsecondary education and nonprofit organization with regular updates for two years 
regarding employment, future postsecondary enrollments, and any licensure or 
certification. 
 
Each president (or other governing entity) of each participating institution must submit a 
report to MHEC on the number of enrolled incarcerated individuals in the current 
academic year on or before December 15 each year from 2022 through 2026. On the basis 
of this data, MHEC must prorate funding to each participating postsecondary institution 
based on the number of participating incarcerated individuals. 
 
By July 1, 2024, and July 1, 2028, MHEC – in consultation with DOC – must submit an 
interim report and a final report, respectively, to the Governor and the General Assembly 
on the progress of the program. These reports must include program participant information 
on (1) courses enrolled in; (2) post-confinement employment; (3) post-confinement 
continuing education; and (4) post-confinement certification or licensure. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 92/ Page 4 
Division of Correction 
 
Promptly after an incarcerated individual is sentenced to the jurisdiction of DOC, the 
division must assemble an adequate case record for the incarcerated individual that 
includes (1) a description, photograph, and family history of the incarcerated individual; 
(2) any previous record of the incarcerated individual; (3) a summary of the facts of each 
case for which the incarcerated individual is serving a sentence; (4) the results of a specified 
risk and needs assessment of the incarcerated individual; and (5) the results of a specified 
physical, mental, and educational examination of the incarcerated individual. 
 
DOC must conduct a risk and needs assessment and a physical, mental, and educational 
examination of an incarcerated individual as soon as feasible after the individual is 
sentenced to the jurisdiction of DOC. Based on the information assembled for an 
incarcerated individual’s case record, DOC must classify an incarcerated individual and 
develop a case plan to guide an incarcerated individual’s rehabilitation while under the 
custody of DOC. 
 
Office of Correctional Education 
 
The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Workforce Development and 
Adult Learning (DWDAL), in conjunction with DPSCS, oversees training, education, and 
job programs for incarcerated individuals. 
 
DWDAL’s Office of Correctional Education (OCE) provides career training opportunities 
“behind the fence.” Offerings vary by institution but include training in automotive skills, 
barbering, construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead to a portable, 
industry-recognized credential that contributes to an incarcerated individual’s 
employability after release.  
 
In addition to occupational programming, OCE oversees academic and transitional courses 
throughout Maryland’s correctional facilities. Academic programming includes GED 
preparation ahead of earning a Maryland high school diploma and English as a 
second language courses. Prior to release, incarcerated individuals may complete 
transitional courses to ease their reentrance to society. These offerings include classes in 
parenting, employment readiness, financial literacy, and life skills.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Annual Funding in the Budget Bill 
 
The bill specifies that the Governor must provide funding annually in the budget bill for 
DPSCS to use for marketing for postsecondary education programs to incarcerated 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 92/ Page 5 
individuals and for the tracking systems for postsecondary education programs. However, 
advice provided by the Attorney General indicates that a mandatory appropriation must 
either include an exact dollar figure for the funding or a funding formula that makes it 
possible to compute the level of funding required. The bill does neither and, therefore, does 
not establish a mandated appropriation. Accordingly, any funding is discretionary. 
 
Further, as noted above, Chapter 677 established and mandates funding through fiscal 2026 
for the Inmate Training and Job Pilot Program, which has similar goals as the bill. The 
fiscal 2025 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, includes $363,000 for the program. 
In addition, the fiscal 2025 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, includes 
approximately $25.8 million for MDL to provide correctional education. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
DPSCS can assist incarcerated individuals in accessing federal Pell Grants for higher 
education, set goals for the number of incarcerated individuals in postsecondary education 
programs, establish the required tracking systems, and promulgate the required regulations 
with existing resources. This estimate does not include any new discretionary funding 
associated with marketing the postsecondary education programs to incarcerated 
individuals. 
 
Other Agencies 
 
MHEC can meet the bill’s requirements with existing resources. MSU and USM 
institutions can meet the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 416 of 2023; HB 25 of 2022; and HB 1334 of 2021.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 620 (Senator Carter) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Department of Budget and Management; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 92/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 11, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 11, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 11, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6