START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 75 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 75 
(Delegate Ebersole) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Teacher Development and Retention Program - Alterations 
 
  
This bill expands eligibility for Teacher Development and Retention Program educator 
stipends (a pilot program that provides both initial stipends and internship stipends) to 
include an otherwise eligible individual who is initially enrolled in any Maryland 
community college. The bill also delays the stipend award periods and the program 
termination date by one year. Finally, the bill requires the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission (MHEC) to conduct an evaluation, rather than hiring an independent 
consultant to do so, and alters the completion date for the evaluation. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Increasing eligibility for the Teacher Development and Retention Program 
does not require additional spending; however, given other changes, special fund spending 
under the bill is delayed by one year. This estimate reflects general funds appropriated for 
the program in FY 2024 becoming available to capitalize the program’s special fund and 
assumes that these monies are generally sufficient to cover all stipends awarded at least in 
the near term, as anticipated when the program was established. General fund expenditures 
decrease by an estimated total of $1.0 million, spread over several years through FY 2029, 
due to repealing the requirement for an independent evaluation to be completed in FY 2029. 
No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community college finances are not directly affected by their students 
receiving stipends through the pilot program; however, more community college students 
may enroll in teacher preparation programs at those community colleges. Local school 
system finances are not directly affected by students in teacher preparation programs 
receiving a stipend; however, additional individuals may participate in student teaching 
internships. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 75/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Among other things, the Maryland Educator Shortage Reduction Act 
(Chapter 627 of 2023) establishes the Teacher Development and Retention Program as a 
pilot program (in effect for six years until it terminates on June 30, 2029) to incentivize a 
cohort of students to pursue a career in the teaching profession. Its stated purpose is to 
provide support to eligible individuals who ultimately pledge to fulfill a service obligation 
as a teacher employed full time in a high-needs school, grade level, or content area in the 
State in which there is a shortage of teachers, as identified by the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE). More specifically, the pilot program must provide 
financial support (i.e., an initial stipend and an internship stipend) to eligible individuals 
interested in pursuing a career in the teaching profession, beginning by offering eligible 
individuals a one-time stipend for participation in an experiential learning opportunity in a 
classroom and concluding by placing those individuals in high-needs schools, grade levels, 
or content areas.  
 
The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) within MHEC must establish 
eligibility criteria for the pilot program, including requirements for an applicant to (1) be 
enrolled in the first or second year at an institution of initial eligibility (where at least 40% 
of the attendees receive federal Pell Grants) in an associate or bachelor’s degree program 
and (2) before receiving an educator internship stipend established under the pilot program, 
pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a teacher employed full time in a high-needs school, 
grade level, or content area in which there is a shortage of teachers, as identified by MSDE, 
for a minimum of two years. 
 
OSFA must administer the pilot program, including developing processes for eligible 
individuals to apply for the program and for awarding stipends to those who meet the 
eligibility criteria. OSFA must give preference to applicants who have been employed in a 
public school or a publicly funded prekindergarten program within the last five years.  
 
Initial Stipend 
 
Over a three-year period, specifically from the 2023-2024 school year through the 
2025-2026 school year, a recipient who is selected for support under the pilot program 
must receive an initial stipend to support the recipient’s participation in an experiential 
learning opportunity in a public school or publicly funded prekindergarten classroom. The 
experiential learning opportunity must (1) occur within the first or second year of the 
recipient’s enrollment in an institution of initial eligibility (where at least 40% of the 
attendees receive federal Pell Grants) and (2) contribute to the education of the students in 
the classroom in which the recipient participates. The purpose of the initial stipend is to 
nurture in the recipient a passion for becoming a teacher. If the institution of initial 
eligibility has a written agreement with a public partner school or publicly funded 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 75/ Page 3 
prekindergarten program for a teacher training program, as specified, then the recipient’s 
experiential learning opportunity must be in a classroom within the partner school. OSFA 
must determine the amount of the initial stipends awarded.  
 
Internship Stipend 
 
Subsequently, over another three-year period, specifically from the 2026-2027 school year 
through the 2028-2029 school year, a pilot program recipient is eligible for an internship 
stipend if the program recipient (1) is currently enrolled in a teacher preparation program 
at an institution of higher education in the State that, through its course of study, leads to a 
Maryland professional teacher’s certificate (accordingly, a recipient may have transferred 
from an institution of initial eligibility to another institution); (2) is currently engaged in 
an internship or a practicum providing direct experience working with students in a public 
school or publicly funded prekindergarten program as part of the recipient’s course of 
study; (3) continues to make satisfactory progress toward a degree and maintain the 
standards of the institution; and (4) pledges to fulfill a service obligation for two years as 
a teacher employed full time in a high-needs school, grade level, or content area in which 
there is a shortage of teachers, as identified by MSDE. A program recipient who meets the 
requirements receives an internship stipend of up to $20,000 for a 10-month educator 
internship. If the recipient of an internship stipend does not fulfill the service obligation, 
the recipient must repay MHEC the internship stipend funds received, as specified. 
 
Service Obligation 
 
In order to ensure that pilot program recipients fulfill the service obligation, MSDE must 
submit to OSFA a list of (1) high-needs schools in which there are a significant proportion 
of teacher vacancies and teachers teaching in a grade level or content area other than the 
grade level or content area in which they are certificated and (2) grade levels and content 
areas in which there are a significant proportion of teacher vacancies and teachers teaching 
in a grade level or content area other than the grade level or content area in which they are 
certificated.  
 
Evaluation 
 
By July 1, 2028, MHEC must hire an independent consultant to evaluate the effectiveness 
of the pilot program in attracting new teachers to the profession. By January 1, 2029, 
MHEC must report the results of the evaluation to the Governor and the General Assembly.  
 
Funding and Special Fund 
 
Funding for the pilot program is as provided in the State budget. However, the Teacher 
Development and Retention Fund is established as a special, nonlapsing fund that is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 75/ Page 4 
administered by MHEC. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget 
to the fund; (2) interest earnings of the fund; and (3) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only to administer the program 
and provide support to recipients under the pilot program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MHEC advises that, despite the expectation of capitalizing the 
special fund created by the Maryland Educator Shortage Reduction Act with $10.0 million 
in general funds in the fiscal 2024 budget, MHEC has only recently gained access to these 
funds; accordingly, MHEC has not yet awarded any initial stipends. As noted in the fiscal 
and policy note for the enacting legislation (House Bill 1219 of 2023, enacted as 
Chapter 627), these funds were appropriated to MSDE in the budget instead of to MHEC. 
Nevertheless, MHEC and MSDE signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) on 
April 8, 2024, to secure access for MHEC to the $10.0 million intended for the Teacher 
Development and Retention Program. Under that MOU, all fiscal 2024 payments under the 
program will be made by MSDE on behalf of MHEC. All unspent remaining funds will be 
transferred to MHEC during year-end closeout and credited to the appropriate special fund.  
 
Since MHEC has only recently gained access to the $10.0 million, it has not yet hired staff 
to administer the stipend program or established the stipend within the Maryland College 
Aid Processing System (MDCAPS). It is assumed that, when MHEC is able to do so, it 
hires two full-time administrators to administer the program and updates MDCAPS to 
include the stipend program. Further, since the stipend program has not yet been added to 
MDCAPS, it is assumed that eligibility for the program can be changed at no additional 
cost. MHEC estimates the total cost to establish the stipend (including the changes in this 
bill) in MDCAPS to be $45,000, consistent with the original estimate for the pilot program. 
Accordingly, these costs are not assumed to be due to this bill, but rather to the Maryland 
Educator Shortage Reduction Act. It is assumed that the staff hired to administer the 
program conduct the evaluation required to be conducted by MHEC, as further explained 
below. 
 
Under the bill, community college and four-year institution students are eligible to receive 
the initial stipend in the 2024-2025 school year through the 2026-2027 school year. They 
are also eligible to receive the internship stipend from the 2027-2028 school year through 
the 2029-2030 school year. Consequently, the bill also extends the program termination 
date by one year to June 30, 2030. The Department of Legislative Services notes that the 
fiscal and policy note for House Bill 1219 identified that the only community colleges to 
meet the 40% Pell Grant threshold were Garrett College and Wor-Wic Community 
College; the bill expands eligibility to all other community colleges in the State. According 
to program enrollment information published by MHEC, at least 2,700 community college 
students are enrolled in teacher preparation programs each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 75/ Page 5 
Further, increasing eligibility for the Teacher Development and Retention Program does 
not require additional funding because the bill does not increase the number of awardees 
or the size of the stipends. However, to the extent that additional individuals receive 
stipends under the program and stipend amounts are not reduced, general fund and 
special fund expenditures increase. Special fund revenues increase when additional 
general funds are required to maintain the program.  
 
Given the delay in MHEC accessing the $10.0 million, this estimate assumes that additional 
funding is not required due to the one-year delay in the award periods for stipends. As 
noted above, no stipends have been awarded as the funding only recently became available 
to MHEC.  
 
Finally, the bill repeals the requirement for MHEC to hire an independent consultant to 
conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness of the program. Instead, under the bill, MHEC 
must conduct an evaluation of the program by January 1, 2030. The fiscal and policy note 
for House Bill 1219 assumed annual evaluation costs of between $100,000 and $300,000 
through fiscal 2029, beginning with $175,000 in fiscal 2024. Costs for program evaluation 
over the six years of the pilot program were estimated to total approximately $1.0 million. 
As these costs are not eligible to be covered by the special fund under current law, the 
estimate assumed additional general fund expenditures would be needed each year. Since 
the bill requires the evaluation to be conducted by MHEC and not an independent 
consultant, it is assumed that the staff hired by MHEC to administer the program also 
conduct the evaluation; thus, general fund expenditures decrease by the amount that would 
have been spent on the evaluation, or approximately $1.0 million through the duration of 
the pilot program. Special fund expenditures may increase if additional resources are 
needed by MHEC to administer the program with the additional responsibility of 
conducting the evaluation; however, any such costs cannot be reliably estimated and are 
likely minimal. It is unknown how the scope of an evaluation by MHEC compares to what 
would have been done by an independent evaluator.   
 
Additional Comments:  The bill requires MHEC to conduct an evaluation by July 1, 2029; 
accordingly, MHEC must complete the evaluation during fiscal 2029 – which is the 
second year for the awarding of internship stipends under the bill. Thus, the evaluation will 
not be able to fully incorporate the effect of internship stipends – by the time it must be 
completed, only two years of internship stipends will have been awarded. Further, even 
though the evaluation must now be completed by July 1, 2029, the report on the evaluation 
is not due to be submitted until January 1, 2030 – six months later.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 75/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 377 (Senator King) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6