START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 553

Chapter 553

(House Bill 22)

AN ACT concerning

Agriculture – Pollinator Habitat Plan – Requirements for State Highway
Administration

FOR the purpose of requiring a certain pollinator habitat plan established by the State
Highway Administration under certain provisions of law to include certain policies
and procedures regarding the use of pollinator habitat areas along State highways;
requiring the Administration to track and evaluate federal programs that provide
funding for pollinator habitats, native plants, and invasive species control and to
apply for certain federal funding under certain circumstances; requiring the
Administration to update the pollinator habitat plan on or before a certain date and
annually thereafter; and generally relating to pollinator habitats.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Agriculture
Section 2–1801
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

2–1801.

(a) In this section, “neonicotinoid pesticide” has the meaning stated in § 5–2A–01
of this article.

(b) (1) On or before July 1, 2017, subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection,
the Department of Natural Resources, the Maryland Environmental Service, and the State
Highway Administration, in consultation with the Department, each shall establish a
pollinator habitat plan.

(2) A pollinator habitat plan required under this subsection:

(i) Shall include best management practices for the designation,
maintenance, creation, enhancement, and restoration of pollinator habitat areas;

(ii) Shall be as protective of pollinators as the Department’s
managed pollinator protection plan;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 553 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) May not require an action on land that is inconsistent with any
federal, State, or local law, regulation, rule, or guidance that applies to the land;

(iv) May not require the creation of pollinator habitat on productive
farmland; and

(v) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, may not
allow the use of the following pesticides, seeds, or plants in an area designated or created
as a pollinator habitat area in accordance with a pollinator habitat plan:

1. Neonicotinoid pesticides;

2. Pesticides labeled as toxic to bees or other pollinators; or

3. Seeds or plants treated with a neonicotinoid pesticide.

(3) (i) Pesticides labeled as toxic to bees or other pollinators that are
not neonicotinoid pesticides may be used in an area designated or created as a pollinator
habitat area under a pollinator habitat plan if the Secretary of Health determines that the
use is necessary to respond to a specific instance of threat to public health.

(ii) A pollinator habitat plan required under this subsection may not
restrict a farmer, or a person working under the supervision of a farmer, from using the
pesticides, seeds, or plants specified under paragraph (2)(v) of this subsection for
agricultural purposes, including:

1. Crop production;

2. Livestock;

3. Poultry;

4. Equine; and

5. Noncrop agricultural fields.

(c) (1) (I) IN ADDITION TO THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION
(B) OF THIS SECTION, THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION’S POLLINATOR
HABITAT PLAN SHALL INCLUDE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:

1. TO ENCOURAGE THE USE OF POLLINATOR–FRIENDLY
NATIVE PLANTS ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS;

2. TO DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN POLLINATOR HABITAT
AREAS ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS, TO THE EXTENT REASONABLE AND FEASIBLE AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 553

IN ACCORDANCE WITH RELEVANT SAFETY STANDARDS FOR DRIVERS, BICYCLISTS,
AND PEDESTRIANS; AND

3. FOR EDUCATING AND COMMUNICATING WITH THE
PUBLIC ABOUT POLLINATOR HABITAT AREAS ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS.

(II) IN DEVELOPING THE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
REQUIRED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE STATE HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION SHALL CONSIDER THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION’S
PUBLICATION ON ROADSIDE BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES THAT BENEFIT
POLLINATORS.

(III) THE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR EDUCATING AND
COMMUNICATING WITH THE PUBLIC UNDER ITEM (I)3 OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY
INCLUDE:

1. PLACING AND MAINTAINING, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
ANY APPLICABLE PROVISIONS IN TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE TRANSPORTATION
ARTICLE, OF INFORMATIONAL SIGNS ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS;

2. PUBLISHING INFORMATION ON THE WEBSITE OF THE
STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION AND ASSOCIATED SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS;
AND

3. OUTREACH TO COMMUNITY ASSOCIATIONS AND
ELECTED OFFICIALS.

(2) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL:

(I) TRACK AND EVALUATE FEDERAL PROGRAMS THAT
PROVIDE FUNDING FOR POLLINATOR HABITATS, NATIVE PLANTS, AND INVASIVE
SPECIES CONTROL, INCLUDING FUNDING UNDER THE FEDERAL INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENT AND JOBS ACT OF 2021; AND

(II) APPLY FOR ANY FUNDING THAT THE ADMINISTRATION
DETERMINES APPROPRIATE AND BENEFICIAL TO POLLINATOR HABITATS IN THE
STATE.

(D) (1) The Department of Natural Resources, the Maryland Environmental
Service, and the State Highway Administration each shall:

[(1)] (I) On or before September 1, 2017, make available to the public on
its website the pollinator habitat plan established in accordance with subsection (b) of this
section; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 553 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(2)] (II) On or before July 1, 2018, implement the pollinator habitat plan
established in accordance with subsection (b) of this section.

(2) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL UPDATE THE
POLLINATOR HABITAT PLAN PUBLISHED ON ITS WEBSITE TO INCLUDE:

(I) CURRENT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES ADOPTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(II) A LIST OF THE LOCATION AND APPROXIMATE SIZE OF
CURRENT POLLINATOR HABITAT AREAS MAINTAINED BY THE ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
Assembly that nothing in this Act shall be interpreted to modify, limit, or interfere with
State or local laws relating to weed control under Title 9, Subtitle 4 of the Agriculture
Article.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4