START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 93 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 93 
(Delegate Mireku-North, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Termination of Residential Lease - Limitation of Liability 
for Rent 
 
 
This bill generally expands the circumstances under which a tenant’s liability for rent may 
be limited when vacating a premises due to medical reasons by (1) specifically extending 
applicability to individuals with a mental disorder who meet certain requirements and 
(2) authorizing psychologists to complete the necessary certification that a tenant must 
provide to the landlord. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  In limited circumstances under statute, a tenant’s liability 
for rent under a lease agreement may not exceed two months’ rent following the date on 
which the tenant vacates the premises due to certain medical conditions. In order to qualify 
for this limitation, prior to vacating the premises the tenant must provide the landlord with:  
(1) a certification prepared by a physician, as discussed below, regarding the medical 
condition of an individual who is a named party in a lease or an authorized occupant under 
the lease’s terms and (2) a written notice of the termination of the lease stating the date by 
when the tenant will vacate the premises. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 93/ Page 2 
The certification must specify that the physician’s patient is no longer able to live at the 
leased premises because the patient has a medical condition that (1) substantially restricts 
the physical mobility of the patient within, or from entering and exiting, the leased premises 
or (2) requires the patient to move to a home, facility, or institution to obtain a higher level 
of care than can be provided at the leased premises. The bill establishes that a qualifying 
medical condition also includes a mental disorder (as defined in statute) if the condition 
either (1) causes the continued habitation of the leased premises to be unfeasible or 
unsustainable for the patient or (2) requires the patient to move to a home, facility, or 
institution to obtain a higher level of care than can be provided at the leased premises. 
 
Under current law (and unchanged by the bill), the certification must also state that the 
expected duration of the patient’s medical condition will continue beyond the termination 
date of the patient’s lease. 
 
Under current law, the certification must be prepared on the letterhead or printed 
prescription form of the physician and be signed by the physician. The bill expands the list 
of medical professionals who may complete the necessary certification to include licensed 
psychologists, as specified, and makes related conforming changes. 
 
Generally, the provisions discussed above do not apply to a tenant under a residential lease 
that contains a liquidated damages clause or early termination clause that (1) requires 
written notice to vacate of one month or less and (2) imposes liability for rent less than or 
equal to two months’ rent after the date on which the tenant vacates the leased premises. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 162 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 93/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3