START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 137 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 137 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Civil Actions - Civil Immunity - Educator Intervention 
 
 
This bill establishes that a member of the administrative, educational, or support staff of 
any public, private, or parochial school acting in an official capacity is immune from civil 
liability for any personal injury or property damage resulting from an intervention in an 
altercation between students or other student disturbance if (1) the member intervened in a 
reasonably prudent manner and (2) the member’s actions do not constitute grossly 
negligent, willful, wanton, or intentionally tortious conduct. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Violence Prevention/Intervention by School Employee (§ 7-307 of the Education Article) 
 
A principal, teacher, school security guard, or other school system personnel in any 
public school may take reasonable action necessary to prevent violence on school premises 
or on a school-sponsored trip, including intervening in a fight or physical struggle that takes 
place in his or her presence, whether the fight is among students or other individuals. The 
degree and force of the intervention may be as reasonably necessary to prevent violence, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 137/ Page 2 
restore order, and protect the safety of the combatants and surrounding individuals. If the 
preventer/intervening individual is hurt while taking preventive action or intervening in a 
fight (1) the county board must compensate the individual for any necessary medical 
expenses that are a direct result of the preventive action or intervention and (2) the individual 
may not lose any compensation for any time lost from school duties as a direct result of the 
individual’s preventive action/intervention, subject to a potential reduction in compensation 
because of payments made under the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
In any suit, claim, or criminal charge brought by a parent or other claimant of one of the 
combatants against the preventer/intervening individual because of the preventive action 
or intervention, the county board (1) must provide legal counsel for the 
preventer/intervening individual or may provide reimbursement for the reasonable 
expenses of the legal defense of any criminal charge if the county board considers it 
appropriate and (2) must save the preventer/intervening individual harmless from any 
award or decree against the individual. 
 
Limits on Liability for County Boards of Education (§ 5-518 of the Courts and Judicial 
Proceedings Article and § 4-105 of the Education Article) 
 
Under § 5-518 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, a county board of education 
employee acting within the scope of employment, without malice and gross negligence, is 
not personally liable for damages resulting from a tortious act or omission for which a 
limitation of liability (discussed below) is provided for the county board, including 
damages that exceed the limitation on the county board’s liability. In these cases, a 
civil claim may be filed against the employee, but the board of education must be joined 
as a party and is required to indemnify the employee for any personal liability associated 
with a money judgment entered against the employee. 
 
County boards of education are not covered under the Local Government Tort Claims Act. 
However, a county board of education may raise the defense of sovereign immunity to any 
amount claimed above the limit of its insurance policy or, if self-insured or a member of 
an insurance pool, above $400,000 (above $890,000 to a single claimant for a sexual abuse 
claim). A county board of education may not raise the defense of sovereign immunity to 
any claim of $400,000 or less. For sexual abuse claims, the liability of a county board of 
education may not exceed $890,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising from an 
incident or occurrence. 
 
Each county board of education must carry comprehensive liability insurance to protect the 
board and its agents and employees. The purchase of this insurance is a valid educational 
expense. The State Board of Education must establish standards for these insurance 
policies, including a minimum liability coverage of not less than $400,000 for each 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 137/ Page 3 
occurrence ($890,000 for claims of sexual abuse as specified). The policies purchased must 
meet the standards established by the State Board of Education. 
 
A county board complies with this requirement if it (1) is individually self-insured for at 
least $890,000 for each occurrence (under the rules and regulations adopted by the 
Insurance Commissioner) or (2) pools with other public entities for the purpose of 
self-insuring property or casualty risks. 
 
Federal Statutes 
 
The Paul D. Coverdell Teacher Protection Act, which was passed as part of the No Child 
Left Behind Act of 2001, provides protection from liability for teachers and school 
professionals acting within the scope of employment to maintain order or control in the 
classroom or school. The Act contains several exceptions, including cases involving willful 
or criminal misconduct, gross negligence, reckless misconduct, or a conscious, flagrant 
indifference to the rights or safety of the individual harmed by the teacher. The Act, which 
applies to states that receive Title I funding, also contains extensive preemption and 
applicability provisions. 
 
Recent Court Decision 
 
In Gambrill v. Board of Education of Dorchester County, 481 Md. 274 (2022), the 
Court of Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) held that the federal Coverdell Act 
does not preempt § 5-518 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article because (1) the 
Coverdell Act provides teachers with liability protection for harm they cause through 
negligent acts or omissions within the scope of employment, not immunity from suit for 
those acts or omissions and (2) § 5-518 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article falls 
within the Coverdell Act’s exception to its preemption provisions for a “state law that 
makes the school or governmental entity liable for the acts or omissions of its employees 
to the same extent as an employer is liable for the acts or omissions of its employees.” 
 
The case involved a negligence action filed by the parents of a student against the 
Dorchester County Board of Education and teachers and administrators at their daughter’s 
middle school for injuries their daughter sustained at the hands of her fellow students 
during a series of incidents that occurred over the course of a school year. The parents 
alleged that the defendants failed to supervise the students, which resulted in the bullying 
and physical assault of their daughter. In addition to its determination of the preemption 
issue discussed above, the court also held that the parents’ negligence claim was not barred 
by the educational malpractice doctrine, under which courts decline to recognize a cause 
of action based on academic decision-making or educational placement. According to the 
court, the parents’ negligence claim was centered on the duty of school employees and 
their employer to use reasonable measures to protect their daughter while she was on school 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 137/ Page 4 
grounds, which they breached when they failed to properly supervise students and take 
precautions to protect their daughter’s physical safety; these allegations were not connected 
to the educational placement of their daughter or academic decisions regarding her 
educational needs. In its analysis, the court also determined that the policy reasons against 
recognizing a cause of action for damages due to acts of negligence in the educational 
process (e.g., lack of a satisfactory standard of care applicable to a teacher’s or 
administrator’s conduct, uncertainty in determination of damages, and an extreme burden 
on the school system’s resources) did not apply to the parents’ negligence claim. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 137 of 2023; HB 1363 of 2022; and HB 828 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4