START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 753

Chapter 753

(House Bill 127)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis (nPEP) Standing
Order Program – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis (nPEP)
Standing Order Program to authorize pharmacists ~~and~~ ~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~providers~~ to
~~prescribe~~ ~~or~~ dispense nPEP under certain circumstances; authorizing the Maryland
Department of Health to administer the Program, collect fees necessary for the
administration of the Program, and establish guidelines for training related to the
Program; and generally relating to the Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis
(nPEP) Standing Order Program.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 13–5201 through ~~13–5205~~ 13–5203 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 52.
Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis (nPEP) Standing Order Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–101(x)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 52. NONOCCUPATIONAL POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS (NPEP)
STANDING ORDER PROGRAM.

13–5201.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 753 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE STATE BOARD OF PHARMACY.

(C) “CDC GUIDELINES” MEANS THE “UPDATED GUIDELINES FOR
ANTIRETROVIRAL POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS AFTER SEXUAL, INJECTION
DRUG USE, OR OTHER NONOCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO HIV – UNITED STATES
2016” OR ANY SUBSEQUENT GUIDELINES PUBLISHED BY THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

(D) “NONOCCUPATIONAL POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS” OR “NPEP”
MEANS MEDICATION USED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MOST RECENT CDC
GUIDELINES TO REDUCE THE CHANCES OF A PATIENT DEVELOPING HIV AFTER
POTENTIAL EXPOSURE TO THE DISEASE.

(E) “PHARMACIST” MEANS A PHARMACIST LICENSED IN THE STATE UNDER
TITLE 12 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE.

(F) “PRIVATE OR PUBLIC ENTITY” MEANS A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER,
LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT, COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATION, OR OTHER
PERSON THAT ADDRESSES MEDICAL OR SOCIAL ISSUES RELATED TO HIV
~~EXPOSURE.~~

(G) (F) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE NONOCCUPATIONAL POSTEXPOSURE
PROPHYLAXIS (NPEP) STANDING ORDER PROGRAM.

(H) (G) “STANDING ORDER” MEANS A DIRECTIVE AUTHORIZING
PHARMACISTS AND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS TO DISPENSE THE NPEP REGIMENS
LISTED IN THE ORDER WITHOUT A PRESCRIPTION.

13–5202.

(A) THERE IS A NONOCCUPATIONAL POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS
(NPEP) STANDING ORDER PROGRAM.

(B) THE PROGRAM SHALL:

(1) AUTHORIZE A PHARMACIST WHO IS REGISTERED WITH THE
PROGRAM TO DISPENSE NPEP THROUGH A STANDING ORDER IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 13–5203 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 753

(2) AUTHORIZE A LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WITH
PRESCRIBING AUTHORITY TO PRESCRIBE AND DISPENSE NPEP THROUGH A
STANDING ORDER IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 13–5204 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(3) OPERATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROCEDURES APPROVED BY
THE DEPARTMENT WITH THE ADVICE AND APPROVAL OF THE BOARD.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY:

(1) NECESSARY FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) THAT ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF SPECIFIC POPULATIONS
INCLUDING VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT AND PEDIATRIC PATIENTS.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT MAY:

(1) COLLECT FEES NECESSARY FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE
PROGRAM, UNLESS THE PATIENT QUALIFIES FOR NPEP THROUGH THE PROGRAM
FOR PREVENTING HIV INFECTION FOR RAPE VICTIMS ESTABLISHED UNDER §
11–1008 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE;

(2) ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM AND ESTABLISH A STANDARDIZED
SET OF GUIDELINES FOR ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~ENTITIES~~ PHARMACISTS
PARTICIPATING IN THE PROGRAM TO USE IN DEVELOPING AND CONDUCTING
PATIENT EDUCATION AND TRAINING ON NPEP THAT INCLUDES:

(I) AVOIDING EXPOSURE TO HIV;

(II) RESPONDING TO EXPOSURE TO HIV WITH THE
APPROPRIATE USE OF NPEP;

(III) ACCESS TO NPEP AND THE APPROPRIATE FOLLOW–UP
AFTER THE ADMINISTRATION OF NPEP; AND

(IV) ENGAGEMENT IN ADDITIONAL CARE INCLUDING:

1. ACCESS TO PRE–EXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS (PREP);
AND

2. HARM REDUCTION PROGRAMS FOR PATIENTS WITH
CONTINUING RISK OF EXPOSURES; AND

(3) COLLECT AND REPORT DATA ON THE OPERATION AND RESULTS
OF THE PROGRAM.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 753 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

13–5203.

(A) AT THE TIME OF DISPENSING NPEP, A PHARMACIST REGISTERED WITH
THE PROGRAM SHALL:

(1) SCREEN THE PATIENT TO DETERMINE THAT HIV EXPOSURE
OCCURRED WITHIN 72 HOURS BEFORE THE DISPENSING;

(2) DETERMINE WHETHER THE PATIENT MEETS CLINICAL CRITERIA
CONSISTENT WITH THE MOST RECENT CDC GUIDELINES, INCLUDING THE:

(I) THE IDENTIFICATION OF ANY CONTRAINDICATED
MEDICATIONS; AND

(II) IF APPLICABLE, EXPOSURE AS THE RESULT OF AN ALLEGED
RAPE OR SEXUAL OFFENSE OR ALLEGED CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE;

(3) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, DETERMINE
WHETHER AN AVAILABLE STANDING ORDER IS APPROPRIATE FOR THE PATIENT AND
DISPENSE NPEP IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MOST RECENT CDC GUIDELINES;

(4) REFER THE PATIENT TO A DISEASE INTERVENTION SPECIALIST
WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT FOR ONGOING TREATMENT; AND

(5) DETERMINE WHETHER THE PATIENT HAS A PRIMARY CARE
PROVIDER AND:

(I) IF THE PATIENT HAS A PRIMARY CARE PROVIDER, NOTIFY
THE PROVIDER THAT THE PATIENT WAS DISPENSED NPEP; OR

(II) IF THE PATIENT DOES NOT HAVE A PRIMARY CARE
PROVIDER, PROVIDE THE PATIENT WITH A LIST OF LOCAL PRIMARY CARE
PROVIDERS AND CLINICS PROVIDED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) IF AN AVAILABLE STANDING ORDER IS NOT APPROPRIATE FOR THE
PATIENT, THE PHARMACIST SHALL REFER THE PATIENT TO A PRIMARY CARE
PROVIDER.

(C) A PHARMACIST MAY DISPENSE NPEP IN ACCORDANCE WITH A THERAPY
MANAGEMENT CONTRACT UNDER TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 6A OF THE HEALTH
OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE.

~~13–5204.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 753

(A) A LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WITH PRESCRIBING AUTHORITY
WHO IS REGISTERED WITH THE PROGRAM MAY DELEGATE THE DISPENSING OF
NPEP UNDER A STANDING ORDER TO AN EMPLOYEE OR A VOLUNTEER OF AN
~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~ENTITY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCORDANCE~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~WRITTEN~~
AGREEMENT UNDER § 13–5205 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) ANY LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER WHO HAS DISPENSING
AUTHORITY MAY DISPENSE NPEP TO AN INDIVIDUAL IN ACCORDANCE WITH A
STANDING ORDER IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

~~13–5205.~~

AN AUTHORIZED PRIVATE OR PUBLIC ENTITY SHALL ENTER INTO A WRITTEN
~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~PROVIDER~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~PRESCRIBING~~
~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ESTABLISH~~ ~~PROTOCOLS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRESCRIBING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~DISPENSING~~ ~~OF~~
NPEP TO ANY INDIVIDUAL IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

Article – Health Occupations

12–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(x) (1) “Practice pharmacy” means to engage in any of the following activities:

(i) Providing pharmaceutical care;

(ii) Compounding, dispensing, or distributing prescription drugs or
devices;

(iii) Compounding or dispensing nonprescription drugs or devices;

(iv) Monitoring prescriptions for prescription and nonprescription
drugs or devices;

(v) Providing information, explanation, or recommendations to
patients and health care practitioners about the safe and effective use of prescription or
nonprescription drugs or devices;

(vi) Identifying and appraising problems concerning the use or
monitoring of therapy with drugs or devices;

(vii) Acting within the parameters of a therapy management contract,
as provided under Subtitle 6A of this title;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 753 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(viii) Administering vaccinations in accordance with § 12–508 of this
title or self–administered drugs or maintenance injectable medications in accordance with
§ 12–509 of this title;

(ix) Delegating a pharmacy act to a registered pharmacy technician,
pharmacy student, or an individual engaged in a Board approved pharmacy technician
training program;

(x) Supervising a delegated pharmacy act performed by a registered
pharmacy technician, pharmacy student, or an individual engaged in a Board approved
pharmacy technician training program;

(xi) Providing drug therapy management in accordance with §
19–713.6 of the Health – General Article;

(xii) Prescribing and dispensing contraceptive medications and
self–administered contraceptive devices approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration; [or]

(xiii) Prescribing and dispensing nicotine replacement therapy
medications; OR

(XIV) IF THE PHARMACIST IS REGISTERED WITH THE
NONOCCUPATIONAL POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS (NPEP) STANDING ORDER
PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 13–5202 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE,
~~PRESCRIBING~~ ~~AND~~ DISPENSING NONOCCUPATIONAL POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS
(NPEP) MEDICATION APPROVED BY THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH “UPDATED GUIDELINES FOR ANTIRETROVIRAL
POSTEXPOSURE PROPHYLAXIS AFTER SEXUAL, INJECTION DRUG USE, OR OTHER
NONOCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE TO HIV – UNITED STATES 2016” OR SUBSEQUENT
GUIDELINES PUBLISHED BY THE FEDERAL CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION.

(2) “Practice pharmacy” does not include the operations of a person who
holds a permit issued under § 12–6C–03 of this title.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6