START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 162

Chapter 162

(House Bill 151)

AN ACT concerning

Charles County Board of Education – Vacancy Procedures – Timing and Video
Streaming and Archiving

FOR the purpose of requiring the Charles County Board of Education, except under certain
circumstances, to fill a vacancy on the county board within a certain number of days
after the vacancy occurs; requiring the county board to make certain materials
publicly available ~~on~~ through its website; and generally relating to filling a vacancy
on the Charles County Board of Education.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–501(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–501(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–501.

(a) (1) The Charles County Board consists of:

(i) Nine elected members; and

(ii) One student member.

(f) (1) (I) [The] WITHIN 60 EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH
(II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER A VACANCY OCCURS ON THE
COUNTY BOARD, THE elected members of the county board shall select a qualified
individual to fill [any] THE vacancy on the board for the remainder of that term and until
a successor is elected and qualifies.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 162 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE COUNTY BOARD MAY CHOOSE NOT TO FILL A VACANCY
THAT OCCURS IN AN ELECTION YEAR FOR THE SEAT THAT IS VACANT.

(2) An individual appointed to fill a vacancy of an elected member shall be
a resident of the same county commissioner district as that of the vacating member.

(3) (I) An interview of an applicant for a vacancy on the board shall be
conducted by the board at a meeting open to the public.

(II) THE BOARD SHALL MAKE PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON
THROUGH ITS WEBSITE:

1. LIVE VIDEO STREAMING OF EACH PUBLIC MEETING
UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH; AND

2. A COMPLETE AND UNEDITED ARCHIVED VIDEO
RECORDING OF EACH PUBLIC MEETING THAT IS LIVESTREAMED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THIS PARAGRAPH AND THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT.

(4) (i) The board shall publish a list of the names of the applicants for
a vacancy on the board at least 2 weeks before the interview of the first applicant is
scheduled to occur.

(ii) Public notice of the date, time, and location of each interview
shall be published:

1. At least 2 weeks before the interview is scheduled to occur;
and

2. In the same manner as a public notice of a regular meeting
of the board is published.

(5) The board is not required to conduct discussions of the applicants or
make the final selection of the member to fill a vacancy of the elected member at a meeting
open to the public.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2