START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 105 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 105 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Drunk Driving Offenses - Expungement and the Ignition Interlock System 
Program 
 
 
This bill (1) authorizes an individual to file a petition for expungement under § 10-105 of 
the Criminal Procedure Article if the individual received a probation before judgment 
(PBJ) for specified drunk driving offenses; (2) expands mandatory participation in the 
Maryland Ignition Interlock System Program (IISP); and (3) makes technical and 
conforming changes regarding these provisions. By December 1, 2028, and each 
December 1 thereafter, the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) must report specified 
information about IISP participants to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by as much as $997,600 
in FY 2025 to handle additional expungements. Future year expenditures reflect 
annualization and inflation. Additional general fund expenditures may be incurred by 
expungement-related State agencies, as discussed below. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
revenues increase by $279,900 in FY 2025; future year revenues reflect annualization. 
MVA can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. The Judiciary and the 
Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) can absorb any impacts from the bill’s IISP 
provisions within existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$279,900 
$373,200 
$373,200 
$373,200 
$373,200 
GF Expenditure 
$997,600 
$1,154,800 
$1,206,600 
$1,259,600 
$1,315,000 
Net Effect 
($717,700) 
($781,600) 
($833,400) 
($886,400) 
($941,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase for local entities to process expungement 
orders issued by courts, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 105/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Expungements 
 
A person may file a petition for expungement under § 10-105 of the Criminal Procedure 
Article if the person received a PBJ for a charge of violating § 21-902(a) (driving while 
under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se) or § 21-902(b) of 
the Transportation Article (driving while impaired by alcohol). The petition may not be 
filed within 15 years after the date the petitioner was discharged from probation. A person 
is not entitled to expungement if the petition is based on the entry of PBJ for a violation of  
§ 21-902(a) or (b), and the person, within 15 years after entry of the PBJ, has (1) been 
convicted of a crime other than a minor traffic violation or a crime where the act on which 
the conviction is based is no longer a crime or (2) received PBJ for a violation of § 21-902. 
 
Ignition Interlock System Program and Related Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill expands mandatory participation in IISP to include (1) an individual who is granted 
PBJ for driving while under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se 
(current law requires IISP participation for a person convicted of these offenses) and (2) an 
individual who is convicted of or granted PBJ for driving while impaired by alcohol (under 
current law, with respect to impaired driving, participation is mandatory only for an 
individual convicted of committing an offense while transporting a minor younger than 
age 16 and drivers younger than age 21). 
 
An IISP participant is considered to have begun participation in the program on the day the 
ignition interlock system is installed in the participant’s vehicle. 
 
MVA must include the following information about individuals required to participate in 
IISP in its annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly:  (1) the number of 
individuals convicted of a violation of § 21-902 of the Transportation Article; (2) the 
number of individuals granted a PBJ for a violation of § 21-902; and (3) the number of 
individuals granted a PBJ for a violation of § 21-902 who were subsequently charged with 
or convicted of a further violation of § 21-902. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Expungements 
 
In general, a person seeking expungement of records pertaining to a criminal charge must 
file a petition for expungement with the court under § 10-105 or § 10-110 of the Criminal 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 105/ Page 3 
Procedure Article. With some exceptions, § 10-105 applies to dispositions other than a 
conviction, and § 10-110 applies to expungements of convictions. 
 
Expungement of a court or police record means removal from public inspection:   
 
 
by obliteration; 
 
by removal to a separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate 
reason for access are denied access; or 
 
if access to a court record or police record can be obtained only by reference to 
another such record, by the expungement of that record, or the part of it that provides 
access. 
 
Under § 10-105 of the Criminal Procedure Article, a person who has been charged with the 
commission of a crime for which a term of imprisonment may be imposed or who has been 
charged with a civil offense or infraction, except a juvenile offense, may file a petition for 
expungement of a police record, court record, or other record maintained by the State or a 
political subdivision of the State, under various circumstances listed in the statute. These 
grounds include acquittal, dismissal of charges, entry of PBJ, entry of nolle prosequi, stet 
of charge, and gubernatorial pardon. Individuals convicted of a crime that is no longer a 
crime, convicted of possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal Law Article, 
convicted of or found not criminally responsible for specified public nuisance crimes or 
specified misdemeanors, or who had a conviction vacated due to being a victim of human 
trafficking (as defined in statute), are also eligible for expungement of the associated 
criminal records under certain circumstances. 
 
In general, a petition for expungement under § 10-105 based on an acquittal, a 
nolle prosequi, or a dismissal may not be filed within three years after the disposition, 
unless the petitioner files a written waiver and release of all tort claims arising from the 
charge. A petition based on a PBJ may not be filed before the petitioner’s discharge from 
probation or three years after the probation was granted, whichever is later. A petition 
based on a stet with the requirement of drug or alcohol abuse treatment may not be filed 
before the petitioner’s completion of treatment or three years after the stet was entered on 
the docket, whichever is later. Otherwise, a petition based on a stet or a compromise may 
not be filed within three years after the stet or the compromise. A person is not entitled to 
expungement if (1) subject to a specified exception, the petition is based on the entry of 
PBJ and the person, within three years of the entry of the PBJ, has been convicted of a 
crime other than a minor traffic violation or a crime where the act on which the conviction 
is based is no longer a crime or (2) the person is a defendant in a pending criminal 
proceeding. 
 
Pursuant to § 10-107 of the Criminal Procedure Article, if two or more charges, other than 
one for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 of the Criminal 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 105/ Page 4 
Law Article, arise from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts, they are considered 
to be a unit. A charge for a minor traffic violation or possession of cannabis under § 5-601 
of the Criminal Law Article that arises from the same incident, transaction, or set of facts 
as a charge in the unit is not a part of the unit. If a person is not entitled to expungement of 
one charge or conviction in a unit, the person is not entitled to expungement of any other 
charge or conviction in the unit. 
 
Drunk Driving and Ignition Interlock System Program 
 
Pursuant to § 21-902 of the Transportation Article, a person may not drive or attempt to 
drive any vehicle while (1) under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol 
per se; (2) impaired by alcohol; (3) impaired by a drug, any combination of drugs, or any 
combination of drugs and alcohol; or (4) impaired by a controlled dangerous substance 
(CDS). Driving under the influence of alcohol per se means driving with a blood alcohol 
concentration (BAC) of 0.08 or higher. BAC is measured, at the time of testing, as grams 
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath. 
 
Required Ignition Interlock System Use:  In addition to any other penalty, a court may 
prohibit a person from driving a motor vehicle without an ignition interlock device for up 
to three years, if the person is convicted of or granted PBJ for a violation of driving under 
the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; driving while impaired by 
alcohol; or committing any of certain specified violations while transporting a minor. 
 
An individual must participate in IISP if:   
 
 
convicted of driving while under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of 
alcohol per se; 
 
convicted of transporting a minor while impaired by alcohol, if the minor was 
younger than age 16; 
 
convicted of homicide or life-threatening injury by motor vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se, impaired by alcohol, 
or impaired by a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol; or 
 
convicted of driving while impaired by alcohol or while impaired by a drug, 
combination of drugs, or combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, if the trier 
of fact finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the driver refused a test. 
 
If an individual specified above fails to participate in or successfully complete the program, 
MVA must suspend the individual’s license until the individual successfully completes the 
program. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 105/ Page 5 
In addition, an individual must participate in IISP as a condition of modification of a license 
suspension or revocation or issuance of a restricted license (1) if convicted of driving while 
impaired by alcohol, including an offense committed while transporting a minor, if the 
individual has been convicted of any specified alcohol- or drug-related driving offense 
within the preceding five years or (2) if the individual is younger than age 21, for a violation 
of an alcohol restriction or the prohibitions on driving while impaired by alcohol or while 
impaired by drugs or a combination of drugs and alcohol. These individuals face a 
mandatory one-year license suspension for failure to participate in IISP or successfully 
complete the program. 
 
Generally, an individual must participate in the program for (1) six months, for the 
first time the individual is required to participate; (2) one year, for the second time the 
individual is required to participate, and (3) three years, for the third or subsequent time 
the individual is required to participate. 
 
An individual who is not otherwise required to participate in IISP may participate under 
specified circumstances, including if the individual’s license is suspended or revoked for 
driving while impaired by alcohol or impaired by alcohol and drugs, if the individual’s 
license has an alcohol restriction, or if MVA modifies a license suspension or issues the 
individual a restricted license. 
 
An IISP participant is considered to begin participation in the program when the participant 
provides evidence of the installation of an ignition interlock system by an approved service 
provider in a manner required by MVA. 
 
For a more detailed discussion of the implementation of IISP in Maryland, please see the 
Appendix – Ignition Interlock System Programs.  
 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol or Under the Influence of Alcohol Per Se:  A person 
convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se 
is subject to maximum penalties of (1) for a first offense, a $1,000 fine and/or 
1 year imprisonment; (2) for a second offense, a $2,000 fine and/or 2 years imprisonment; 
(3) for a third offense, a $5,000 fine and/or 5 years imprisonment; and (4) for a fourth or 
subsequent offense, a $10,000 fine and/or 10 years imprisonment. 
 
Penalties for first and second offenses generally increase if the offense is committed while 
transporting a minor. A person convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol or under 
the influence of alcohol per se while transporting a minor is subject to maximum penalties 
of (1) for a first offense, a $2,000 fine and/or 2 years imprisonment; (2) for a second offense, 
a $3,000 fine and/or 3 years imprisonment; (3) for a third offense, a $5,000 fine and/or 
5 years imprisonment; and (4) for a fourth or subsequent offense, a fine of $10,000 and/or 
10 years imprisonment. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 105/ Page 6 
Driving While Impaired by Alcohol:  A person convicted of driving while impaired by 
alcohol is subject to maximum penalties of (1) for a first offense, a fine of $500 and/or 
two months imprisonment; (2) for a second offense, a fine of $500 and/or 
1 year imprisonment; (3) for a third offense, a $5,000 fine and/or 5 years imprisonment; 
and (4) for a fourth or subsequent offense, a $10,000 fine and/or 10 years imprisonment. 
 
Penalties for first and second offenses generally increase if the offense is committed while 
transporting a minor. A person convicted of driving while impaired by alcohol while 
transporting a minor is subject to maximum penalties of (1) for a first offense, a fine of 
$1,000 and/or 1 year imprisonment; (2) for a second offense, a $2,000 fine and/or 
2 years imprisonment; (3) for a third offense, a $5,000 fine and/or 5 years imprisonment; 
and (4) for a fourth or subsequent offense, a $10,000 fine and/or 10 years imprisonment. 
 
Administrative Penalties:  In addition to specified maximum monetary and incarceration 
penalties, alcohol- and drug-related offenses are subject to points assessment by MVA, 
which makes the driver subject to either suspension or revocation of the driver’s license. 
For a conviction of driving while under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of 
alcohol per se or while impaired by a CDS, MVA must assess 12 points against the driver’s 
license, and the license is subject to revocation. For a conviction of driving while impaired 
by alcohol, a drug, combination of drugs, or combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, 
MVA must assess 8 points against the driver’s license, and the license is subject to 
suspension. A driver who accumulates 8 or 12 points against his or her driver’s license 
within a two-year period is subject to license suspension or revocation, respectively. 
 
License Revocation and Suspension:  Statute includes additional provisions regarding 
MVA license suspension and revocation. For example, MVA may revoke the license of an 
individual who is convicted of driving while impaired by alcohol or while impaired by a 
drug, a combination of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol and who 
was previously convicted of two or more specified drunk or drugged driving violations 
within a three-year period. 
 
In addition, MVA may impose a suspension for up to one year if an individual is convicted 
more than once within a five-year period of any combination of drunk or drugged driving 
offenses; however, a restricted license for the period of suspension may be issued to a 
person who participates in IISP. 
 
State Revenues:  The bill expands the circumstances under which participation in IISP is 
mandatory. According to figures provided by the Maryland Department of Transportation, 
the bill results in approximately 5,570 additional participants annually, based on the 
average annual number of individuals granted PBJ for driving while under the influence of 
alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se and the average annual number of 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 105/ Page 7 
individuals convicted of or granted PBJ for driving while impaired by alcohol from 2019 to 
2021 and the 2022 rate of IISP participation among a representative sample of individuals. 
 
To enroll in the program, an individual must pay a $47 participation fee and a $20 fee to 
obtain a license with an interlock restriction. Accordingly, TTF revenues increase by an 
estimated $279,893 in fiscal 2025 – accounting for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective 
date – and approximately $373,190 annually thereafter. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Related to Expungements 
 
Judiciary:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by as much as $997,619 
in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring 17 clerks among the District Court and the circuit courts to 
process expungements under the bill. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
17.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$874,267 
Operating Expenses 
123,352 
Maximum FY 2025 Judiciary Expenditures 
$997,619 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
According to the Judiciary, the following PBJs for violations of § 21-902 of the 
Transportation Article were entered in the District Court and the circuit courts:   
 
 
in fiscal 2022:  5,598 in the District Court and 716 in the circuit courts; and 
 
in fiscal 2023:  6,509 in the District Court and 1,012 in the circuit courts. 
 
Based on data regarding dispositions eligible for expungement under the bill (including 
older dispositions) and estimated processing times for expungements, the Judiciary 
anticipates the need for at least 15 clerks in the District Court and 2 clerks in the circuit 
courts. While data is not available on the projected number of petitions that will be filed 
under the bill, given the cumulative number of eligible dispositions, the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) agrees that there may be a need for additional personnel. To 
the extent that fewer petitions than anticipated are filed or personnel can process 
expungements more efficiently than currently projected, expenditures for the Judiciary are 
less. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 105/ Page 8 
DLS also notes that the fiscal 2023 budget included 41 positions and $3.0 million for the 
Judiciary to process cannabis expungements. The Judiciary advises that, as of 
January 2024, 33 of these positions had been filled – 12 in the District Court (3 in 
jurisdictions with a high volume of expungements overall and a 9-person expungement 
center to address potential filings from cannabis legalization) and 21 in the circuit courts. 
While the number of expungement petitions filed in the District Court increased in 
fiscal 2023 compared to fiscal 2022, it is still lower than previous years. Because the 
volume of cannabis expungement petition filings has been lower than expected, the staff 
in the expungement center have been preparing for expungements required under 
Chapter 680 of 2021, which essentially established automatic expungements for cases 
resulting in specified dispositions and will commence beginning October 1, 2024. Given 
the additional clerical resources recently provided to the Judiciary and the lower than 
anticipated volume for cannabis expungements, existing personnel may be able to absorb 
some of the extra workload anticipated under the bill, which may further reduce 
expenditures. 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of petitions for expungement filed in the 
trial courts in fiscal 2021 through 2023. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Petitions for Expungement 
Fiscal 2021-2023 
 
 
District Court 
Circuit Court 
Fiscal 2021 
39,061 
5,940 
Fiscal 2022 
32,874 
5,574 
Fiscal 2023 
38,563 
7,688 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
The Judiciary further advises that the bill requires changes to forms, brochures, and an 
instructional video, at a cost of $11,740 (including restocking costs). DLS advises that, 
given the frequency of changes to the expungement statutes in recent years, these are 
routine expenditures and can be implemented with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services:  General fund expenditures may 
increase for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to process 
expungement orders under the bill. DPSCS advises generally that the Criminal Justice 
Information System (CJIS) requires one additional administrative employee for every 
2,500 additional orders for expungement it receives. However, DLS notes that CJIS has 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 105/ Page 9 
been routinely accommodating workloads beyond the 2,500-caseload standard. The 
number of additional clerks needed cannot be reliably determined at this time and depends 
on the number of expungement orders issued by courts under the bill. For illustrative 
purposes only, the cost associated with hiring one administrative employee is 
approximately $58,684 in fiscal 2025, increasing to $77,350 by fiscal 2029. 
 
Department of State Police:  The Department of State Police advises that it can implement 
the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Related to the Ignition Interlock System Program 
 
As discussed above, an additional 5,570 interlock cases annually are anticipated as a result 
of the bill. MVA advises that existing staff can likely absorb these additional cases. 
Additionally, MVA advises that it can comply with the bill’s reporting requirement and 
absorb the one-time programming changes that must be completed to the MVA Customer 
Connect system with existing budgeted resources. Finally, any impact on caseloads for the 
Judiciary or OAH due to the bill’s changes is not expected to materially affect State 
finances. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill has an operational effect on local police departments and 
other entities that are custodians of records eligible for expungement under the bill. 
Depending on the volume of expungement orders received from the courts and the capacity 
to absorb this additional workload with existing resources, the bill may require additional 
local resources. However, Anne Arundel, Baltimore, and Frederick counties do not 
anticipate a fiscal impact. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Authorized service providers for IISP likely see a significant 
increase in monthly maintenance fees due to an increased number of individuals 
participating in IISP. In addition, small businesses that employ commercial driver’s license 
holders may be affected to the extent that any of their drivers must participate in IISP due 
to the bill’s changes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 451, SB 505, and SB 528 of 2023; HB 557 and SB 653 of 2022; and HB 749 and 
SB 672 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 421 (Senator Waldstreicher, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 105/ Page 10 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, and Frederick counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of General Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State Archives; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell and 
Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 105/ Page 11 
Appendix – Ignition Interlock System Programs 
 
 
An ignition interlock device connects a motor vehicle’s ignition system to a breath analyzer 
that measures a driver’s blood alcohol concentration (BAC). The device prevents the car 
from starting if the driver’s BAC exceeds a certain level and periodically retests the driver 
after the motor vehicle has been started. According to the National Conference of State 
Legislatures (NCSL), all 50 states and the District of Columbia authorize or mandate the 
use of an ignition interlock device to deter alcohol-impaired driving. The Maryland Ignition 
Interlock System Program (IISP) was established through regulation in 1989 and codified 
by Chapter 648 of 1996. The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) in the Maryland 
Department of Transportation is responsible for administering IISP. 
 
Drivers may elect to participate in IISP or may be referred to the program by a court, the 
administration, and administrative law judges. Since 2011, IISP has undergone various 
changes that have increased the number of alcohol-impaired drivers who are either 
mandated or authorized to participate in the program. 
 
A driver who had a BAC test result of 0.15 or more or who refused to take a test is only 
eligible for a modification of a license suspension if the driver participates in the program 
for one year. 
 
The following drivers are required to participate in IISP and face an indefinite mandatory 
license suspension if they fail to participate or successfully complete the program: 
 
 
a person convicted of driving or attempting to drive under the influence of alcohol 
or under the influence of alcohol per se (including a person whose license is 
suspended or revoked for a conviction of these offenses under a specified provision 
or for an accumulation of points for these violations); 
 
a person required to participate by court order due to a conviction for driving while 
impaired by alcohol or while impaired by a drug, any combination of drugs, or a 
combination of one or more drugs and alcohol, and the trier of fact found beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the person refused a requested test;  
 
a person convicted of homicide by motor vehicle while under the influence of 
alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; impaired by alcohol; or impaired 
by a drug, a combination of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and 
alcohol;  
 
a person convicted of life-threatening injury by motor vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; impaired by alcohol; 
or impaired by a drug, a combination of drugs, or a combination of one or more 
drugs and alcohol; and 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 105/ Page 12 
 
a person convicted of transporting a minor while impaired by alcohol and the minor 
was younger than age 16. 
 
The following drivers are required to participate in IISP as a condition of modification of 
a suspension or revocation of a license or issuance of a restricted license and face a one-year 
mandatory license suspension if they fail to participate or successfully complete 
participation in the program: 
 
 
a driver ordered by a criminal court to participate in the program for a drunk driving 
offense; 
 
a driver who is convicted of driving while impaired by alcohol and within the 
preceding five years was convicted of a drunk or drugged driving offense; or 
 
a driver younger than age 21 who violated the alcohol restriction on the driver’s 
license or violated specified impaired driving prohibitions. 
 
Exhibit 1 summarizes the categories of offenders required to participate in IISP and their 
minimum participation periods. 
 
A participant is considered to have successfully completed IISP when the service provider 
certifies to MVA that during the three consecutive months preceding the participant’s date 
of release there was not: 
 
 
an attempt to start a vehicle with a BAC of 0.04 or higher, unless a subsequent test 
performed within 10 minutes registered a BAC lower than 0.04; 
 
a failure to take or pass a random test with a BAC of 0.025 or lower, unless a 
subsequent test performed within 10 minutes registered a BAC lower than 0.025; or  
 
a failure of the participant to appear at the approved service provider for required 
maintenance, repair, calibration, monitoring, inspection, or device replacement. 
 
Chapters 65 and 66 of 2019 modified the definition of “ignition interlock system” to mean, 
among other things, that the device has a camera (1) with the capability of recording still 
images of the person taking the test of the person’s blood alcohol level; (2) without the 
capability to record sound; (3) without the capability to record video; and (4) that records 
images only while the device is testing the blood alcohol level of the person taking the test 
or if the device is being tampered with. 
 
Exhibit 2 provides an overview of IISP participation since enactment of Chapter 557  
of 2011, up through fiscal 2021. MVA advises that, between October 1, 2011, and  
September 30, 2021, 3,924 drivers who were removed from IISP for noncompliance 
reentered the program at a later time. MVA advises that in fiscal 2021 there were 
15,185 unique drivers in IISP and 4,858 first-time referrals. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 105/ Page 13 
 
Exhibit 1 
Mandatory Participation in the Ignition Interlock System Program 
 
Category of Participant 
Participation Period 
Driver who committed administrative per se offense of refusing to 
take a test or took a test with a BAC result of 0.15 or more1  
One year 
Driver convicted of driving while under the influence of alcohol or 
under the influence of alcohol per se with a BAC test result of 0.08 
or more2    
Driver convicted of either (1) homicide by motor vehicle or 
(2) life-threatening injury by motor vehicle while under the 
influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; 
impaired by alcohol; or impaired by a drug, a combination of drugs, 
or a combination of drugs and alcohol2  
Six months for the first time the driver is 
required to participate 
One year for the second time the driver is 
required to participate 
Three years for the third or subsequent time 
the driver is required to participate 
Driver convicted of transporting a minor while impaired by alcohol 
and the minor was younger than age 163  
Subsequent offender convicted of driving while impaired by 
alcohol and, within the preceding five years, convicted of any drunk 
or drugged driving offense in the Transportation Article4  
Six months for the first time the driver is 
required to participate 
One year for the second time the driver is 
required to participate 
Three years for the third or subsequent time 
the driver is required to participate 
Driver younger than age 21 who violated the license alcohol 
restriction or violated the prohibitions on driving while impaired by 
alcohol or while impaired by drugs or a combination of drugs and 
alcohol5 
 
Six months for the first time the driver is 
required to participate 
One year for the second time the driver is 
required to participate 
Three years for the third or subsequent time 
the driver is required to participate 
 
 
BAC:  blood alcohol concentration 
 
1 Participation is considered “mandatory” because a driver who commits these offenses is only eligible for a 
modification of a license suspension if the driver participates for one year. 
2 Chapter 512 of 2016. 
3 Chapter 631 of 2014. 
4 Chapter 557 of 2011. 
5 Chapter 557 of 2011 and Chapter 512 of 2016. 
 
Note:  A driver ordered by a criminal court to participate in the program because of a drunk driving offense is subject 
to the general length of participation described above (i.e., six months, one year, or three years). However, a court 
may order the driver to participate for a longer period of time, not to exceed three years. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 105/ Page 14 
 
Exhibit 2 
Ignition Interlock System Program Participation 
Fiscal 2013-2021 
 
Fiscal Year 
Total 
Annual 
Participation 
Successful 
Completions 
Unsuccessful 
Participants 
2013 
14,884 
4,383 
2,496 
2014 
15,299 
4,648 
2,569 
2015 
15,171 
4,842 
2,634 
2016  
14,816 
4,901 
1,153 
2017 
16,289 
4,307 
1,293 
2018 
18,373 
5,575 
1,797 
2019 
19,411 
6,521 
2,078 
2020 
17,854 
6,815 
2,450 
2021 
15,185 
5,818 
2,172 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation  
 
 
National Safety Trends 
 
According to data from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), 
nationally, the percentage of highway fatalities associated with alcohol impairment has 
hovered around 30% from 1995 through 2020. In 2021, the latest year for which national 
data is available, there were 42,939 traffic fatalities nationally, of which 13,384 of those 
fatalities, or 31%, involved a driver with a BAC of 0.08 or higher. For the same period in 
Maryland, out of a total of 511 traffic fatalities, 163, or 32%, involved a driver with a BAC 
of 0.08 or higher. 
 
Recent national data indicates that risky driving behaviors, including impaired driving, 
increased following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. According to 
NHTSA, total traffic fatalities on U.S. roadways increased by 7.3% from 2019 to 2020 and 
a further 10.1% from 2020 to 2021. The overall national traffic fatality rate, as measured 
in fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles traveled, increased by 21% in 2020 compared to 
2019. The overall national traffic fatality rate increased again from 2020 to 2021, but at a 
much slower pace of 2.2%. According to NHTSA’s preliminary traffic fatality estimates 
for 2022 and 2023, the increased trend in traffic fatalities observed in 2020 and 2021 has 
abated. The preliminary estimates show that fatalities have declined in the five most recent 
quarters (from the second quarter of 2022 through the second quarter of 2023) for which 
estimates have been published. 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 105/ Page 15 
Model Guidelines for State Ignition Interlock Programs and Maryland Task Force 
Recommendations 
 
Traffic safety advocates are concerned about the proportion of traffic fatalities due to 
alcohol impairment, which has decreased only slightly in recent decades. Accordingly, 
NHTSA has recommended that states increase the use of ignition interlock devices to 
address alcohol-impaired driving. In November 2013, NHTSA released Model Guidelines 
for State Ignition Interlock Programs. The document, which still represents the most 
current model guidelines, contains recommendations for legislation and administrative 
changes to improve program administration, vendor oversight, data security and privacy, 
device reliability, and driver notification and licensing. According to the 2008 final report 
of the Maryland Task Force to Combat Driving Under the Influence of Drugs and Alcohol, 
the use of ignition interlock devices has been shown to lead to long-lasting changes in 
driver behavior and reduced recidivism. The task force advised that a minimum of 
six months of failure-free use is needed to significantly reduce recidivism. The task force 
reported that, when offenders are required to use ignition interlock devices, recidivism is 
reduced by at least 60% and as much as 95%. 
 
Use of Ignition Interlock in Other States 
 
According to NCSL, all 50 states and the District of Columbia authorize or mandate the 
use of an ignition interlock device to deter alcohol-impaired driving, and 31 states 
(Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Idaho, 
Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Nebraska,  
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oklahoma, Oregon,  
South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, and  
West Virginia) and the District of Columbia mandate the use of ignition interlock for any 
drunk driving conviction. Seven states (Florida, Michigan, Minnesota, North Carolina, 
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Wyoming) require the use of ignition interlock for high 
BAC (0.10 or higher) offenders and repeat offenders, and 5 states (Georgia, Maine, 
Massachusetts, Missouri, and Ohio) require only repeat offenders to use ignition interlock. 
In the remaining states, judges have the discretion to order installation as part of sentencing 
for convicted drunk drivers. 
 
States are also experimenting with ways to improve participant accountability and program 
compliance. As of October 2021, NCSL reports that 21 states (Arizona, Colorado, Florida, 
Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska,  
New Hampshire, New York, Oregon, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Vermont, Virginia, 
and Washington) require ignition interlock devices to contain a camera. The captured 
images are intended to ensure that the correct person is using the device to start the vehicle. 
Some states have also implemented “24/7 Sobriety Monitoring” programs, which combine 
treatment and punitive sanctions such as breath and urine testing, ankle bracelets, 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 105/ Page 16 
transdermal drug patches, and incarceration. NCSL reports that, as of September 2021, 
14 states have 24/7 sobriety monitoring programs or pilot programs at the state or county 
level (Alaska, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, North Dakota, 
South Dakota, Utah, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming). 

END OF PAGE 16