START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 115 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 115 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Victims' Rights - Notification of Release From 
Confinement (Jaycee Webster Victims' Rights Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a commitment unit to include the telephone number of the Maryland 
Crime Victims Resource Center in a specified required notification given to a victim, 
victim’s representative, or witness regarding the release from confinement of a sentenced 
defendant or child respondent. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finance or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, a victim of a crime or delinquent act (or a 
representative in the event the victim is deceased, disabled, or a minor) has a broad range 
of specific rights during the criminal justice process. On first contact with a victim, a law 
enforcement officer, District Court commissioner, or juvenile intake officer must give an 
identified victim a pamphlet that advises the victim of the rights, services, and procedures 
available in the time before and after the filing of a charging document. Also, within 
10 days after the filing or unsealing of an indictment or information, the prosecuting 
attorney must provide a victim with a pamphlet that describes the rights, services, and 
procedures available to a victim after the indictment or information is filed and a 
notification request form by which a victim may request notice of various proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 115/ Page 2 
Many of the rights afforded a victim of crime depend on a victim completing a notification 
request form or requesting notice by following the Maryland Electronic Courts system 
protocol. 
 
On receipt of a victim notification request form (or written request from a witness), a 
commitment unit, if practicable, must notify the victim, victim’s representative, or witness 
of specified information, including the date when the defendant or child respondent was 
placed in the custody of the commitment unit. The commitment unit must notify a victim, 
victim’s representative, or witness – in advance if practicable – if any of the following 
events occur concerning the defendant or child respondent:   
 
 
an escape; 
 
a recapture; 
 
a transfer to another commitment unit; 
 
a release from confinement and any conditions attached to the release; and 
 
the death of the defendant or child respondent. 
 
A “release from confinement” means work release, home detention, or other administrative 
or statutorily authorized release of a defendant or child respondent from a confinement 
facility. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 684 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 4 (Senator Waldstreicher, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Baltimore, 
Charles, 
Garrett, 
and 
Howard counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2