START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 32

Chapter 32

(House Bill 146)

AN ACT concerning

Health Occupations Boards – Reciprocal Licensure and Certification

FOR the purpose of authorizing certain health occupations boards to adopt regulations
establishing reciprocity for individuals licensed or certified in another state ~~or~~
~~jurisdiction;~~ and generally relating to health occupations boards and reciprocal
licensure and certification.

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 1–229
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

1–229.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD THAT
DOES NOT OTHERWISE HAVE STATUTORY AUTHORITY TO ISSUE LICENSES OR
CERTIFICATIONS UNDER THIS ARTICLE BY RECIPROCITY.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, A HEALTH
OCCUPATIONS BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH RECIPROCITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE LICENSED OR CERTIFIED IN ANOTHER STATE ~~OR~~
~~JURISDICTION~~ THAT OFFERS SIMILAR RECIPROCITY TO INDIVIDUALS LICENSED OR
CERTIFIED BY THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

(C) REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY A HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION SHALL REQUIRE THAT AN APPLICANT:

(1) BE LICENSED OR CERTIFIED IN ANOTHER STATE OR
~~JURISDICTION~~ UNDER REQUIREMENTS THAT THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD
DETERMINES ARE SUBSTANTIALLY EQUIVALENT TO ITS LICENSING OR
CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS ARTICLE;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 32 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) BE IN GOOD STANDING UNDER THE LAWS OF THE OTHER STATE
OR JURISDICTION;

(3) SUBMIT AN APPLICATION TO THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD
ON A FORM THAT THE BOARD REQUIRES;

(4) PAY TO THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD AN APPLICATION FEE
SET BY THE BOARD; AND

(5) SATISFY ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE
OR REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS BOARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2