START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 243

Chapter 243

(House Bill 137)

AN ACT concerning

Civil Actions – Civil Immunity – Educator Intervention

FOR the purpose of providing that a certain staff member of a school is not civilly liable for
personal injury or property damage resulting from intervention in certain student
activity subject to certain exceptions; and generally relating to immunity from civil
liability for school staff.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 5–803
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

5–803.

(a) (1) Whether or not an individual receives compensation for the individual’s
services, an employee of a county health department or other local department or agency
functioning as a school nurse or school health aide or a member of the administrative,
educational, or support staff of, or an individual who serves under a contract for services
to, any public, private, or parochial school is immune from liability for:

(i) Making a report required by law, if the individual acts on
reasonable grounds;

(ii) Participating in a judicial proceeding that results from the
individual’s report; and

(iii) Making a report to the appropriate school official or to a parent
if the individual has reasonable grounds to suspect that a student is:

1. Under the influence of alcoholic beverages or a controlled
dangerous substance;

2. In possession of alcoholic beverages or a controlled
dangerous substance; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 243 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. Involved in the illegal sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages or a controlled dangerous substance.

(2) Paragraph (1)(iii) of this subsection is effective only to the extent that
its provisions do not conflict with federal or State confidentiality laws and regulations.

(b) A county superintendent or any employee of a county school system who
presents or enters findings of fact, recommendations, or reports or who participates in an
employee dismissal, disciplinary, administrative, or judicial proceeding relating to a school
system employee that results from these actions is immune from any civil liability if the
action is:

(1) In the performance of duties;

(2) Within the scope of employment; and

(3) Without malice.

(C) A MEMBER OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE, EDUCATIONAL, OR SUPPORT
STAFF OF ANY PUBLIC, PRIVATE, OR PAROCHIAL SCHOOL ACTING IN AN OFFICIAL
CAPACITY IS IMMUNE FROM CIVIL LIABILITY FOR ANY PERSONAL INJURY OR
PROPERTY DAMAGE RESULTING FROM AN INTERVENTION IN AN ALTERCATION
BETWEEN STUDENTS OR OTHER STUDENT DISTURBANCE IF:

(1) THE MEMBER INTERVENED IN A REASONABLY PRUDENT MANNER;
AND

(2) THE ACTIONS TAKEN BY THE MEMBER IN INTERVENING DO NOT
CONSTITUTE GROSSLY NEGLIGENT, WILLFUL, WANTON, OR INTENTIONALLY
TORTIOUS CONDUCT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2