START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 136 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 136 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Employment Standards, Prevailing Wage, and Living Wage - Employer Adverse 
Actions and Enforcement 
 
 
This departmental bill prohibits employers from taking or threatening to take adverse 
action against employees who take specified actions relating to Employment of Minors, 
Equal Pay for Equal Work, Maryland Wage and Hour, Maryland Wage Payment and 
Collection, Workplace Fraud, and Living Wage laws and creates a uniform enforcement 
process. Thus, the bill creates new anti-retaliation provisions for the Employment of 
Minors, Maryland Wage Payment and Collection, and Living Wage laws and standardizes 
and/or strengthens existing anti-retaliation provisions and enforcement within the other 
laws. Additionally, an employer may not hinder or delay the Commissioner of Labor and 
Industry (or authorized representative) from enforcing the six affected statutes, and a 
person may not make or cause to be made a groundless or malicious complaint to the 
commissioner or in bad faith bring an action or proceeding related to the six affected 
statutes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $225,000 in FY 2025 for the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) to enforce the bill. Out-year expenditures reflect 
annualization and elimination of one-time start-up costs. General fund revenues increase 
minimally due to fines imposed on employers and individuals. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
225,000 
209,300 
218,200 
227,400 
237,000 
Net Effect 
($225,000) 
($209,300) 
($218,200) 
($227,400) 
($237,000)  
Note:  (-) = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 136/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments as employers are subject to several prohibition and 
enforcement provisions of the bill (Equal Pay for Equal Work and the State minimum wage 
provision), but the bill is not anticipated to materially affect local governments or the 
circuit courts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may conduct an investigation 
under the bill on the commissioner’s own initiative or on receipt of a written complaint. 
 
Within 90 days of receiving a written complaint related to the six affected statutes, the 
commissioner must investigate and attempt to resolve the issue informally through 
mediation. If the issue is not resolved through mediation and the commissioner determines 
that an employer has violated the bill, the commissioner must issue an order. These actions 
are subject to the State’s hearing and notice requirements. 
 
An order issued under the bill must describe the violation and direct, if appropriate, the 
recovery of lost wages and actual economic damages. In the commissioner’s discretion, an 
order may seek reinstatement or the hiring of employees with or without back pay and may 
assess a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each employee for whom the employer is not in 
compliance with the bill. 
 
The bill establishes court procedures if an employer does not comply with an order within 
30 days of issuance in which the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, the 
Attorney General, and an employee may bring an action under specified circumstances. 
 
The Commissioner of Labor and Industry must investigate any allegations of groundless 
or malicious complaints and any allegations of actions or proceedings brought in bad faith. 
If the Commissioner determines that a person has violated provisions of the bill, the 
Commissioner may assess an administrative penalty of up to $1,000, which is subject to 
the State’s hearing and notice requirements. A person who must defend an action taken as 
a result of a groundless or malicious complaint may be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees. 
 
The bill repeals the existing prohibition and/or enforcement provisions in three of the 
statutes (Equal Pay for Equal Work, Maryland Wage and Hour, and Workplace Fraud laws) 
that are generally duplicative under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 136/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Employment of Minors 
 
Generally, a minor under the age of 14 may not be employed or allowed to be employed in 
Maryland and individuals between the ages of 14 and 18 may not work without a permit, 
subject to specified exemptions. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry may issue a 
special permit for a minor of any age to be employed as an entertainer, model, or performer. 
 
A person who interferes with the commissioner’s enforcement of the statute or knowingly 
gives false information to the commissioner is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. A person who 
knowingly employs or allows a minor to be employed in violation of the law is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $10,000, and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year. The Employment of Minors law does not have any anti-retaliation 
protections for employees. 
 
Equal Pay for Equal Work 
 
Under the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law, an employer may not discriminate 
between employees in any occupation by providing less favorable employment 
opportunities based on sex or gender identity or paying a wage to employees of one sex or 
gender identity at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sex or 
gender identity if both employees work in the same establishment and perform work of 
comparable character or work on the same operation, in the same business, or of the same 
type. The State and local governments are considered employers. 
 
An employer may not prohibit an employee from inquiring about, discussing, or disclosing 
the wages of the employee or another employee or requesting that the employer provide a 
reason for why the employee’s wages are a condition of employment. An employer may 
not require an employee to sign a waiver or any other document to deny the employee the 
right to disclose or discuss the employee’s wages. An employer may not take any adverse 
employment actions against an employee for specified actions regarding wages or 
exercising specified rights. 
 
The Equal Pay for Equal Work law also requires an employer to provide, on request by an 
applicant for employment, the wage range for the position for which the applicant applied. 
An employer is prohibited from seeking wage history information for an applicant, or from 
screening or considering an applicant for employment or determining an applicant’s wages 
based on the applicant’s wage history. However, an applicant is not prohibited from 
voluntarily sharing wage history information with an employer. An employer may not 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 136/ Page 4 
retaliate against or refuse to interview, hire, or employ an applicant because the applicant 
did not provide wage history or requested the wage range. 
 
When the Commissioner of Labor and Industry has determined that the State’s Equal Pay 
for Equal Work law has been violated, the commissioner must (1) try to resolve any issue 
informally by mediation or (2) ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the 
applicant or employee. The Attorney General may bring an action in the county where the 
violation allegedly occurred for injunctive relief, damages, or other relief. An employee 
may bring an action against the employer under specified circumstances. 
 
An employer may not discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee or applicant 
because the employee or applicant makes a complaint, brings or causes an action or 
proceeding, or has testified or will testify in an action or a proceeding relating to Equal Pay 
for Equal Work. An employee or applicant may not make a groundless or malicious 
complaint or in bad faith take specified actions. The commissioner may bring an action for 
injunctive relief and damages against a person who violates this. An employer may not 
hinder, delay, or interfere with the enforcement of the Equal Pay for Equal Work law. 
 
Maryland Wage and Hour Law 
 
For a general overview on Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, please see the 
Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law. 
 
An employer may not take adverse action against an employee because the employee 
(1) makes a complaint that the employee has not been paid in accordance with law; 
(2) brings an action or proceeding; or (3) testifies in an action relating to the Maryland 
Wage and Hour law. An employer may not hinder or delay the Commissioner of Labor and 
Industry (or authorized representative) from enforcing the Maryland Wage and Hour law. 
An employee may not make or cause to be made a groundless or malicious complaint to 
the commissioner or in bad faith bring or testify in a related action or proceeding. A person 
who does so is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to 
$1,000. 
 
Maryland Wage Payment and Collection Law 
 
Maryland’s Wage Payment and Collection Law regulates the payment of wages by 
employers in the State. The law requires employers to pay workers the wage promised; 
establish regular paydays; pay wages when due; pay employees in a specified manner; pay 
employees at least once every two weeks or twice in each month, with exceptions; furnish 
employees with a statement of gross earnings; advise employees of their rate of pay and 
designated payday; and pay employees all wages due on termination of employment. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 136/ Page 5 
Maryland’s Wage Payment and Collection Law does not have any anti-retaliation 
protections for employees. 
 
Workplace Fraud Act 
 
Chapter 188 of 2009 (the Workplace Fraud Act) established, for the purpose of 
enforcement only, a presumption that work performed by an individual paid by an 
employer creates an employer-employee relationship, subject to specified exemptions. It 
prohibits construction companies and landscaping businesses from failing to properly 
classify an individual as an employee and establishes investigation procedures and 
penalties for noncompliance. 
 
The Act distinguishes between an employer who improperly misclassifies an employee and 
an employer who knowingly misclassifies an employee, and civil penalties are more severe 
for an employer who is guilty of knowingly misclassifying an employee. The maximum 
penalty for a knowing violation is a $5,000 fine for each employee who was not properly 
classified. 
 
An employer may not discriminate or take adverse action against an individual because the 
individual files a complaint with the employer or Commissioner of Labor and Industry, 
brings an action or proceeding or testifies in an action or proceeding relating to the 
Workplace Fraud Act. If the commissioner determines that a person has discriminated or 
taken adverse action against an individual, the commissioner must file a complaint to 
enjoin the violation, to reinstate the employee to the former position with back pay, and to 
award any other appropriate damages or other relief in the circuit court. 
 
A person may not make or cause to be made a groundless or malicious complaint to the 
commissioner or in bad faith bring or testify in an action or proceeding related to the 
Workplace Fraud Act. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry must investigate any 
allegations, and the Commissioner may assess an administrative penalty of up to $1,000 
for a violation, which is subject to the State’s hearing and notice requirements and must 
disclose the identity of the complainant under specified conditions. A person who must 
defend an action taken as a result of a groundless or malicious complaint may be entitled 
to recover attorneys’ fees. 
 
Living Wage 
 
Chapter 284 of 2007 made Maryland the first state to require State service contractors to 
pay their employees a “living wage.” For fiscal 2008, the living wage was set at $11.30 in 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Howard, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties and 
Baltimore City (Tier 1). It was set at $8.50 for all other areas of the State (Tier 2). The 
living wage rates are adjusted annually for inflation by the Commissioner of Labor and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 136/ Page 6 
Industry. Effective September 2023, the Tier 1 living wage is $16.13, and the Tier 2 wage 
is $12.11, though covered employees must be paid the higher of the State minimum wage 
($15.00 per hour) or the minimum living wage rate. Montgomery and Prince George’s 
counties and Baltimore City have local living wage ordinances that apply to their 
procurement of services. The living wage law does not apply to State contracts with 
nonprofit organizations. The living wage law does not have any anti-retaliation protections 
for employees. 
 
Background:  MDL advises that employees are often reluctant to exercise their rights 
under employment laws for fear of retaliation by their employer. Further, MDL advises 
that strong anti-retaliation laws encourage employees to exercise their rights, which in turn 
ensures that violations are more promptly reported and remedied, and employers abide by 
the law. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues may increase minimally from penalties paid by 
employers who are found by MDL to be in violation of anti-retaliation labor laws and from 
penalties paid by individuals who make groundless or malicious complaints or act in bad 
faith. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDL does not expect to receive many complaints alleging frivolous 
complaints. However, as the bill strengthens the anti-retaliation provisions in current law 
and also creates new ones, the Division of Labor and Industry anticipates receiving as many 
as 50 new complaints per year alleging adverse action violations. Additionally, MDL 
anticipates that strengthening protection against retaliatory acts will cause more workers to 
exercise their rights under existing laws, thereby creating 100 additional complaints of 
labor violations from employees.  
 
MDL cannot absorb the additional workload within existing resources and requires 
additional staffing to respond to the increase in inquiries and complaints prompted by the 
bill. Additionally, changes must be made to the complaint tracking database used by 
several of MDL’s units. Thus, general fund expenditures increase for MDL by $225,049 
in fiscal 2025, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 
effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one civil rights officer, one wage 
and hour investigator, and one part-time assistant Attorney General to investigate 
complaints and enforce the new requirements. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$149,758 
Database Costs 
44,900 
Other Operating Expenses 
    30,391 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$225,049 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 136/ Page 7 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover, 
termination of one-time costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
An employer against whom the commissioner issues an order for a violation of the bill may 
request an administrative hearing. Depending on the number of contested cases, which the 
Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) cannot estimate at this time, OAH may need to 
hire additional administrative law judges to handle administrative hearings stemming from 
the bill. Administratively, OAH needs to train administrative law judges on the substantive 
aspects of the bill and create a new code in its database to track hearings. Thus, 
reimbursable expenditures for OAH may increase beginning in fiscal 2025. OAH bills 
MDL for these expenses, so reimbursable revenues for OAH increase correspondingly, and 
general fund expenditures increase further for MDL. 
 
Causes of action created by the bill may be heard in a circuit court or the District Court, 
depending on the nature of the damages sought and filing choices of a plaintiff. However, 
the Judiciary does not anticipate a significant fiscal or operational impact due to the new 
causes of action. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 233 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Office of Administrative Hearings; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 20, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 136/ Page 8 
Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law 
 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal Fair Labor 
Standards Act, which specifies minimum wage and overtime requirements for employers 
and employees in the State. State law specifies that an employee must be paid the greater 
of the federal minimum wage (which is currently $7.25 per hour) or $15.00 per hour. 
However, an employer may pay 85% of the State minimum wage rate to employees 
younger than age 18. 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law and minimum wage requirements do not apply to 
certain categories of employees, including those defined as administrative, executive, or 
professional; certain seasonal employees; part-time employees younger than age 16; 
salesmen and those who work on commission; an employer’s immediate family; drive-in 
theater employees; employees training in a special education program in a public school; 
employees of an establishment that sells food and drink for on-premises consumption and 
has an annual gross income of $400,000 or less; employees employed by an employer who 
is engaged in canning, freezing, packing, or first processing of perishable or seasonal fresh 
fruits, vegetables, poultry, or seafood; certain farm workers; and covered employees under 
the Secure Maryland Wage Act. 
 
Generally, the employer of a tipped employee is allowed a tip credit that can be applied 
against the direct wages paid by the employer. The employee can be paid tipping wages so 
long as the wages plus the tips received equal at least the minimum wage, the employee 
retains all tips, and the employee customarily receives more than $30.00 a month in tips. 
The tip credit is equal to the State minimum wage, less $3.63. Thus, the wage paid by 
employers to tipped employees is $3.63, as long as their wages plus tips equal the minimum 
wage. 
 
Under Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, an employer is required to pay an overtime wage 
of at least 1.5 times the usual hourly wage for each hour over 40 hours that an employee 
works during one work week. This requirement does not apply to an employer that is 
subject to federal rail laws; a nonprofit concert promoter, legitimate theater, music festival, 
music pavilion, or theatrical show; or specified amusement or recreational establishments. 
It also does not apply to an employee for whom the U.S. Secretary of Transportation sets 
qualifications and maximum hours of service under federal law; a mechanic, parts person, 
or salesperson, under certain conditions; a driver employed by a taxicab operator; or 
specified air carrier employees under certain conditions. Also, specific exemptions apply 
for farm work, bowling establishments, and infirmaries. 
 
If an employer pays less than the wages required, the employee may bring an action against 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 136/ Page 9 
the employer to recover (1) the difference between the wage paid to the employee and the 
wage required; (2) an additional amount equal to the difference as liquidated damages; and 
(3) legal fees. The court must award these differences in wages, damages, and counsel fees 
if the court determines that an employee is entitled to recovery. However, if an employer 
shows to the satisfaction of the court that the employer acted in good faith and reasonably 
believed that the wages paid to the employee were not less than the required wages, then 
the court must award liquidated damages of an amount less than the difference in wages or 
no liquidated damages. 
 
A person who violates the Maryland Wage and Hour Law is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 136/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Employment Standards, Prevailing Wage, and Living Wage - 
Employer Adverse Actions and Enforcement 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0136 
 
PREPARED BY:  Devki Virk, Commissioner Labor & Industry 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Small employers who retaliate against employees for exercising their rights to 
ensure compliance with existing workplace standards laws will be subject to liability 
under the enhanced anti-retaliation provisions contained in this bill. As reporting of 
potential violations rises as a result of strengthened anti-retaliation measures, small 
businesses that fail to comply with existing Maryland employment standards laws may 
be at greater risk of detection. The risk of potential liability may result in the need for 
professional human resource and/or attorney guidance. However, consolidating anti-
retaliation provisions for workplace standards laws also eliminates the multiple 
different current anti-retaliation schemes that currently exist, which should help to 
mitigate these risks. Small businesses will be subject to a single set of rules for anti-
retaliation claims, not many different sets of rules.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 10