START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 468

Chapter 468

(House Bill 193)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Speed Limits – Establishment

FOR the purpose of authorizing Anne Arundel County and municipalities in Anne Arundel
County to decrease the maximum speed limit to not less than a certain speed on
highways after performing an engineering and traffic investigation; prohibiting
Anne Arundel County and municipalities in Anne Arundel County from
implementing a new speed monitoring system to enforce speed limits on highways
on which the speed limit has been reduced under this Act; and generally relating to
the establishment of speed limits on highways in Anne Arundel County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–801.1(a) through (d) and 21–803(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–803(a)(4)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–801.1.

(a) Unless there is a special danger that requires a lower speed to comply with §
21–801 of this subtitle, the limits specified in this section or otherwise established under
this subtitle are maximum lawful speeds. A person may not drive a vehicle on a highway
at a speed that exceeds these limits.

(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the maximum speed limits are:

(1) 15 miles per hour in alleys in Baltimore County;

(2) 30 miles per hour on:

(i) All highways in a business district; and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 468 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Undivided highways in a residential district;

(3) 35 miles per hour on divided highways in a residential district;

(4) 50 miles per hour on undivided highways in other locations; and

(5) 55 miles per hour on divided highways in other locations.

(c) Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, a posted maximum speed
limit lawfully in effect on December 31, 1974, is a maximum lawful speed even if it differs
from a limit specified in subsection (b) of this section.

(d) Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, a maximum speed limit
specified in subsection (b) of this section or in effect under subsection (c) of this section may
be altered as provided in this subtitle.

21–803.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) through (5) of this subsection, if,
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, a local authority determines that
any maximum speed limit specified in this subtitle is greater or less than reasonable or
safe under existing conditions on any part of a highway in its jurisdiction, it may establish
a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit for that part of the highway, which may:

(i) Decrease the limit at an intersection;

(ii) Increase the limit in an urban district to not more than 50 miles
per hour;

(iii) Decrease the limit in an urban district; or

(iv) Decrease the limit outside an urban district to not less than 25
miles per hour.

(4) (i) This paragraph applies only to:

1. ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY AND Montgomery County;
and

2. Municipalities located in ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY AND
Montgomery County.

(ii) A local authority may decrease the maximum speed limit to not
less than 15 miles per hour on a highway only after performing an engineering and traffic
investigation.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 468

(iii) A local authority may not implement a new speed monitoring
system to enforce speed limits on any portion of a highway for which the speed limit has
been decreased under this paragraph.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3