START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 225

Chapter 225

(House Bill 139)

AN ACT concerning

Landlord and Tenant – ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Home~~ ~~Energy~~ ~~Programs~~ Notice of Utility Bills
in Residential Leases – ~~Financial~~ ~~Assistance~~ Gas and Electric Services

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~landlord~~ ~~to~~ ~~accept~~ ~~financial~~ ~~assistance~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~
~~Home~~ ~~Energy~~ ~~Programs~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Human~~ ~~Services~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~cost~~ ~~of~~ ~~utility~~
~~services~~ ~~that~~ ~~a~~ ~~tenant~~ ~~is~~ ~~required~~ ~~to~~ ~~pay;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~landlord,~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~
~~circumstances,~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~a~~ ~~tenant~~ ~~with~~ ~~utility~~ ~~service~~ ~~documentation~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~
~~necessary~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~to~~ ~~determine~~ ~~the~~ ~~eligibility~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~tenant~~ ~~for~~ ~~financial~~
~~assistance~~ adding gas and electric utility services to the types of utility services for
which certain landlords are required to provide a certain notice in a written lease
and a copy of a certain receipt or bill summary under certain circumstances;
requiring a landlord to provide a tenant with certain information about utility costs
under certain circumstances; applying certain requirements relating to payment of
utility services to landlords of buildings that contain more than a certain number of
units; and generally relating to landlords, tenants, and ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Home~~ ~~Energy~~
~~Programs~~ required provisions in written leases.

BY ~~adding~~ ~~to~~ repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section ~~8–220~~ 8–205.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 8–205.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

8–205.1.

(a) In this section, “utility service provider” means a public service company or a
unit of State or local government that provides water [or], sewer, GAS, OR ELECTRIC
utility services.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 225 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) [(1) This section applies only to a landlord of a building that contains one or
two SIX OR MORE residential dwelling units.

(2)] This section does not apply to a landlord [that]:

(1) (I) THAT A landlord that requires a tenant, under an oral or written
lease, to pay water [or], sewer, GAS, OR ELECTRIC bills directly to the utility service
provider; OR

(2) (II) FOR ANY A UTILITY THAT IS ALLOCATED USING A RATIO
UTILITY BILLING SYSTEM, AS DEFINED IN § 8–212.4 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(c) A landlord that requires a tenant to make payments for water [or], sewer,
GAS, OR ELECTRIC utility services to the landlord shall:

(1) Use a written lease that provides notice that the tenant is responsible
for making payments for water [or], sewer, GAS, OR ELECTRIC utility services to the
landlord; and

(2) (I) Provide a copy of the water [or], sewer, GAS, OR ELECTRIC bill
to the tenant; OR

(II) BEFORE THE BEGINNING OF THE INITIAL LEASE AND EACH
TERM THEREAFTER FOR THE DURATION OF THE TENANCY, NOTIFY THE TENANT IN
WRITING OF THE TOTAL UTILITY COSTS BILLED TO THE LANDLORD IN THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR FOR WATER, SEWER, GAS, OR ELECTRIC UTILITY
SERVICES, DISAGGREGATED BY UTILITY TYPE.

8–205.2.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDER” HAS THE SAME
MEANING STATED IN § 8–205.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A LANDLORD OF A BUILDING
THAT CONTAINS FIVE OR FEWER RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS.

(2) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A LANDLORD THAT REQUIRES
A TENANT, UNDER AN ORAL OR WRITTEN LEASE, TO PAY WATER, SEWER, GAS, OR
ELECTRIC BILLS DIRECTLY TO THE UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDER.

(C) A LANDLORD THAT REQUIRES A TENANT TO MAKE PAYMENTS FOR
WATER, SEWER, GAS, OR ELECTRIC UTILITY SERVICES TO THE LANDLORD SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 225

(1) USE A WRITTEN LEASE THAT PROVIDES NOTICE THAT THE TENANT
IS RESPONSIBLE FOR MAKING PAYMENTS FOR WATER, SEWER, GAS, OR ELECTRIC
UTILITY SERVICES TO THE LANDLORD; AND

(2) PROVIDE A COPY OF THE WATER, SEWER, GAS, OR ELECTRIC
UTILITY BILL TO THE TENANT.

~~8–220.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF HOME ENERGY PROGRAMS IN
THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES.

(3) “UTILITY SERVICE” MEANS FUEL, GAS, ELECTRIC, HEAT, WATER,
~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~SIMILAR~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~A~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~COMPANY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~
REGULATED BY THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION.

(B) A LANDLORD SHALL ACCEPT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE
OFFICE FOR THE COST OF UTILITY SERVICES THAT A TENANT IS REQUIRED TO PAY.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO THE CONFIDENTIALITY REQUIREMENTS OF STATE
AND FEDERAL LAW, AND ON THE REQUEST OF A TENANT, A LANDLORD SHALL
PROVIDE A TENANT WITH UTILITY SERVICE DOCUMENTATION THAT IS:

(I) ACCESSIBLE TO THE LANDLORD, BUT OTHERWISE
INACCESSIBLE TO THE TENANT; AND

(II) NECESSARY FOR THE OFFICE TO DETERMINE THE
ELIGIBILITY OF THE TENANT FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.

(2) UTILITY SERVICE DOCUMENTATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) BE PROVIDED AT NO COST TO THE TENANT; AND

(II) INCLUDE BILLS AND OTHER STATEMENTS RELATED TO
UTILITY SERVICES.

(D) (1) FOR EACH VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION BY A LANDLORD, THE
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES MAY IMPOSE:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 225 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY OF
$500; OR

(II) FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, AN
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY OF $1,000.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PAY ANY PENALTY COLLECTED UNDER
THIS SUBSECTION INTO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4