START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 113 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 113 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Horse Riding - Helmet Requirement for Minors 
 
 
This bill generally prohibits an adult who is present and directly supervising a minor from 
allowing the minor to ride a horse in specified areas unless the minor is wearing – properly 
secured – a helmet that meets or exceeds the standards of the American Society of Testing 
and Materials (ASTM) for protective headgear used in equestrian riding.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues to the extent violations 
occur. Expenditures may decrease beginning in FY 2024 for the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH), as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. Any changes to enforcement can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that “horse” includes donkeys, mules, and ponies. 
 
Generally, the bill applies to riding a horse on (1) a highway; (2) a public horse-riding path; 
or (3) the grounds of a facility whose primary purpose is equestrian activities and that 
solicits or offers to the public recreational, educational, therapeutic, or competitive 
equestrian activities.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 113/ Page 2 
However, the bill’s requirements do not apply to a minor who is (1) crossing a public 
highway that separates privately owned land; (2) engaged in an agricultural practice or 
pursuit; (3) a member of an Amish or a Mennonite community; or (4) receiving therapy 
services from a licensed medical provider and for whom the use of an alternative helmet is 
necessary, appropriate, and in compliance with the Professional Association of Therapeutic 
Horsemanship International’s Guidelines for Alternative Helmet Use. 
 
A violation of the bill involving an adult supervising multiple minors at the same time must 
be treated as a single violation. An individual who violates the bill’s provisions is subject 
to a maximum $500 fine under the Maryland Vehicle Law. 
 
Current Law:  State law does not require horse riding participants to wear protective 
headgear. However, State law imposes helmet requirements for children under specified 
circumstances. An individual younger than age 16 may not ride a bicycle on any highway, 
bicycle way, or other property open to or used by the public for pedestrian or vehicular 
traffic unless the individual is wearing a helmet. This helmet requirement also applies to a 
person younger than age 16 who is a passenger in an attached restraining seat or in a trailer 
being towed by the bicycle. The helmet requirement does not apply to the boardwalk 
between the Ocean City inlet and 27th Street during specified hours in the Town of 
Ocean City. The helmet has to meet or exceed the standards of the American National 
Standards Institute, the Snell Memorial Foundation, or ASTM for protective headgear for 
use in bicycling. The provision is enforced by the issuance of a warning that informs the 
offender of the helmet requirement and provides educational materials about helmet use. 
A similar helmet requirement is in place for scooters and in-line skating. 
 
Except in Charles, St. Mary’s, and Worcester counties, a person may not ride an animal or 
drive an animal-drawn vehicle on any divided highway with a posted maximum speed of 
more than 35 miles per hour or any controlled access highway. In Anne Arundel County, 
a person may ride an animal on any part of a highway, including divided or controlled 
access highways, as long as the person does not ride on the roadway or shoulder of such a 
highway. 
 
State Expenditures:  To the extent the bill reduces debilitating injuries resulting from 
equestrian accidents, savings could be generated for MDH (i.e., due to fewer individuals 
requiring Medicaid and Developmental Disabilities Administration services). However, 
there is insufficient data at this time to estimate the number of traumatic head injuries that 
could be avoided and the resulting potential savings for either program. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the number of reported falls from horses by fiscal year, as reported by the 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems. The data shows patients 
treated at Maryland’s designated trauma centers only and is not limited to minors. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 113/ Page 3 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Patients that Sustained Injuries Due to Falls from Horses* 
Fiscal 2018-2023 
 
Fiscal Year 
Patients with 
Head Injuries 
Patients with No 
Head Injuries 
Total 
2018 
26 
73 
99 
2019 
24 
62 
86 
2020 
33 
61 
94 
2021 
24 
79 
103 
2022 
22 
58 
80 
2023 
24 
84 
108 
 
* Patients treated at Maryland designated trauma centers only. 
 
Source:  Maryland State Trauma Registry 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 20 of 2023 and HB 13 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 42 (Senator Kelly) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3