START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 103 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 103 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Dental Services - Coverage and Rate 
Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to study the feasibility of 
including coverage, with minimal benefit restrictions, for (1) removable full and partial 
dentures and (2) reimbursement for providers on a per-patient basis for house calls and 
extended care facility calls under the Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program. MDH 
must also study the feasibility of setting reimbursement rates for such services at amounts 
that (1) ensure that all dental care providers are reimbursed adequately to provide access 
to care and (2) are not less than 60% of the average commercial rates for all payors in the 
State who offer the services or, if average commercial rates cannot be determined, specified 
benchmark charges. In conducting the study, MDH must solicit input from specified 
stakeholders. MDH must report the findings of the feasibility study to specified committees 
of the General Assembly by December 1, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can complete and report on the feasibility study using existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under federal requirements, comprehensive dental coverage is mandatory 
for children enrolled in Medicaid. However, dental benefits for Medicaid-eligible adults 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 103/ Page 2 
are optional. Prior to January 1, 2023, Medicaid dental coverage (provided through the 
Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program) was available to children younger than age 21, 
former foster care recipients younger than age 26, pregnant women age 21 and older, and 
adults enrolled in the Rare and Expensive Case Management program. Effective 
January 1, 2023, Medicaid provides dental coverage for all adults with incomes up to 
133% of the federal poverty level. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 600 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2