START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 198 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 198 
(Delegates Korman and J. Lewis) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Transportation - WMATA Operating Assistance - Alteration (Maryland Metro 
Funding Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill temporarily pauses – for three fiscal years – the requirement that the Secretary of 
Transportation withhold a portion of the State’s annual operating grant to the Washington 
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) when WMATA’s budget increases by 
more than 3% over the previous fiscal year. The bill also requires the Secretary of 
Transportation to withhold a portion of the State’s annual operating grant to WMATA 
under other specified circumstances. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures increase by an estimated $223.7 million in FY 2025 
($150.0 million in general funds and $73.7 million in Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
special funds) because, absent the bill, the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT) is required to withhold a portion of its operating grant to WMATA. As discussed 
below, the FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes an additional  
$150.0 million in general funds for WMATA. State expenditures may also increase in 
FY 2026 and 2027, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
150.0 
- 
- 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
73.7 
- 
- 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($223.7) 
(-) 
(-) 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 198/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The existing requirement that the Secretary of Transportation withhold 
35% of the State’s operating grant to WMATA when WMATA’s budget increases by more 
than 3% over the previous fiscal year does not apply for fiscal 2025 through 2027 and 
applies again beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
Additionally, the Secretary of Transportation must withhold 35% of the State’s operating 
grant to WMATA for any fiscal year in which: 
 
 
the chairman of the WMATA Board of Directors has served as chairman for at least 
two prior years or represents the same jurisdiction as the member who served as 
chairman for the two immediately preceding years; or  
 
the Purple Line (defined as the light rail transit line between Bethesda in 
Montgomery County and New Carrollton in Prince George’s County) is in service 
and is not included on the maps posted at WMATA stations. 
 
Current law:  WMATA was established in 1967 through an interstate compact among 
Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia. The original purpose was construction 
and operation of a rapid rail transit system for the Washington metropolitan area. 
Maryland’s overall participation in the Washington metropolitan transit system consists of 
the provision of annual funding to WMATA for capital and operating costs of the 
Metrorail, Metrobus, and MetroAccess systems. WMATA’s operations are funded through 
operating revenues and subsidies provided by the compact signatories:  Maryland, Virginia, 
and the District of Columbia. General parameters on capital funding levels are typically 
established in a six-year Capital Funding Agreement developed through negotiations 
between WMATA and its local funding partners. 
 
In response to financial difficulties experienced by WMATA, the Maryland Metro/Transit 
Funding Act (originally enacted by Chapters 351 and 352 of 2018 and modified by 
Chapter 22 of 2021) mandates additional funding for WMATA. Specifically, the State 
provides an operating grant to WMATA based on its operating deficit; however, if 
WMATA’s operating budget increases by more than 3% over the prior fiscal year 
(calculated in a specified manner), the Secretary must withhold 35% of the State’s 
operating grant to WMATA. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Withholding Due to Budgetary Reasons 
 
Fiscal 2025:  The State’s operating grant to WMATA in fiscal 2024 was $475.0 million, 
and the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $489.0 million for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 198/ Page 3 
the WMATA operating grant from TTF, a 3% increase over fiscal 2024. However, 
WMATA’s operating budget is anticipated to increase substantially more than 3%, 
resulting in the withholding of 35% of MDOT’s operating grant to WMATA, as required 
by current law (absent the bill). An analysis by MDOT estimated that WMATA would 
need an additional $150.0 million from the State (totaling $639.0 million, reflecting a 
34.5% increase over fiscal 2024). As a result, to help ensure WMATA remains operational, 
the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes an additional 
$150.0 million in general funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account for WMATA. 
 
Absent the bill, MDOT is required to withhold 35% of the State’s $639.0 million operating 
grant to WMATA, or $223.7 million. Therefore, repealing the withholding provision for 
fiscal 2025 increases State expenditures by $223.7 million in fiscal 2025 ($150.0 million 
in general funds, which, as noted above, has been included in the fiscal 2025 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly, and $73.7 million in TTF special funds). 
 
Fiscal 2026 and 2027:  Similar to the effect discussed above for fiscal 2025, the bill may 
increase State expenditures in fiscal 2026 and/or 2027 if WMATA’s operating budget 
increases by more than 3% over the previous fiscal year in either of those fiscal years 
because, absent the bill, any such increase would result in the withholding of 35% of 
MDOT’s operating grant to WMATA. Any such impact, however, cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time, as it is unclear how much WMATA’s operating budget will increase 
in those fiscal years. 
 
Withholding Due to Other Reasons 
 
The bill also requires the Secretary of Transportation to withhold 35% of the State’s 
operating grant to WMATA for any fiscal year in which (1) the chairman of the WMATA 
Board of Directors has served as chairman for at least two prior years or represents the 
same jurisdiction as the member who served as chairman for the two immediately 
preceding years or (2) the Purple Line is in service and is not included on the maps posted 
at WMATA stations. 
 
Neither MDOT nor the Department or Legislative Services anticipates that this provision 
has any effect on State finances; it is assumed that WMATA will take the necessary actions 
to avoid any loss of funding from the State. Nevertheless, should WMATA not take such 
actions and this withholding provision is triggered in any given year, State expenditures 
(most likely TTF, but potentially also general fund expenditures) decrease significantly as 
the required portion of the operating grant is withheld. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 198/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 126 (Senators Augustine and Feldman) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 15, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4