START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 904

Chapter 904

(House Bill 103)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Dental Services – Coverage and Rate
Study

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to study the feasibility
of including certain dental services and certain reimbursement among the coverage
offered by the Maryland Healthy Smiles Dental Program and setting reimbursement
rates for certain services at certain amounts; and generally relating to a coverage
and rate study for dental services.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) The Maryland Department of Health shall study the feasibility of:

(1) including among the coverage offered by the Maryland Healthy Smiles
Dental Program, with minimal benefit restrictions:

(i) removable full and partial dentures; and

(ii) reimbursement for providers on a per–patient basis for house
calls and extended care facility calls; and

(2) setting reimbursement rates for the services listed under item (1) of this
subsection at amounts that are:

(i) at a level that ensures that all dental care providers are
reimbursed adequately to provide access to care; and

(ii) not less than 60% of:

1. the average commercial rates for all payors in the State
who offer the services; or

2. if the average commercial rates cannot be determined, the
benchmark charges for the American Dental Association Current Dental Terminology
(CDT) codes of the services.

(b) In conducting the study required under subsection (a) of this section, the
Maryland Department of Health shall solicit input from:

(1) State chapters of national professional dental organizations; and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 904 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) advocacy groups that work to improve the oral health of the State’s
low–income populations.

(c) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Department of Health shall
report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government
Operations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on
the findings of the feasibility study required under subsection (a) of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2