START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 534

Chapter 534

(House Bill 198)

AN ACT concerning

Transportation – WMATA Operating Assistance – Alteration
(Maryland Metro Funding Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of repealing for ~~a~~ certain fiscal ~~year~~ years a requirement that the
Secretary of Transportation withhold a certain percentage of the State’s share of
annual operating grants for the Washington Suburban Transit District if the State’s
operating assistance provided in the approved Washington Metropolitan Area
Transit Authority budget increases by more than a certain percentage over the total
operating assistance provided in the prior fiscal year; requiring the Secretary to
withhold a certain percentage of the State’s share of annual operating grants for the
District under certain circumstances; and generally relating to operating grants for
the Washington Suburban Transit District.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 10–205(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

10–205.

(b) (1) Subject to the appropriation requirements and budgetary provisions of
§ 3–216(d) of this article and upon receipt of an approval of a grant application in such form
and detail as the Secretary shall reasonably require, the Department shall provide for
annual grants to the Washington Suburban Transit District for a share of the operating
deficits of the regional transit system for which the District is responsible. “Operating
deficit” means operating costs less:

(i) The greater of operating revenues or 50 percent of the operating
costs; and

(ii) All federal operating assistance.

(2) The Department’s share shall equal 100 percent of the operating deficit.

(3) (i) [For] BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026 2028, FOR any fiscal
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 534 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

year in which the total Maryland operating assistance provided in the approved
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority budget increases by more than 3% over
the total operating assistance provided in the prior fiscal year’s approved Washington
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority budget, the Secretary shall withhold an amount equal
to 35% of the funds available under paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection.

(ii) For purposes of calculating a budget increase under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the following items may not be included:

1. The cost of any service, equipment, or facility that is
required by law;

2. A capital project approved by the board of directors of the
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority;

3. Any payments or obligations arising from or related to
legal disputes or proceedings or arbitration proceedings between or among the Washington
Metropolitan Area Transit Authority and any other person; and

4. Any service increases approved by the board of directors of
the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority.

(4) THE SECRETARY SHALL WITHHOLD AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO 35%
OF THE FUNDS AVAILABLE UNDER PARAGRAPHS (1) AND (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
FOR ANY FISCAL YEAR IN WHICH:

(I) THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE
WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY:

1. HAS SERVED AS CHAIRMAN FOR AT LEAST 2 PRIOR
YEARS; OR

2. REPRESENTS THE SAME JURISDICTION AS THE
MEMBER WHO SERVED AS CHAIRMAN FOR THE 2 IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEARS;
OR

(II) THE PURPLE LINE, AS DEFINED IN § 2–103.8 OF THIS
ARTICLE, IS IN SERVICE AND IS NOT INCLUDED ON THE MAPS POSTED AT
WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY STATIONS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2