START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 147 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 147 
(Delegate Hartman) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tobacco Tax Stamp Refunds - Loss Due to Theft 
 
 
This bill authorizes a claimant who buys tobacco stamps to receive a refund for tobacco 
tax stamps lost due to theft, subject to specified documentation requirements. If the stolen 
property is recovered, the claimant must notify the Comptroller and return any refund 
received under the bill. In addition to other penalties authorized by law, a claimant is 
subject to a fine of double the amount of any refund received under the bill for making a 
false claim. The Comptroller may adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount, potentially 
beginning as early as FY 2024. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for a small business 
that receives a refund for lost tobacco tax stamps as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To receive a refund for tobacco tax stamps lost due to theft, a claimant 
must provide to the Comptroller (1) a copy of the police report with a detailed inventory 
of the stolen property, including when the property was ordered, loaded onto the truck, and 
stamped and (2) a notarized affidavit signed by the claimant under penalty of perjury 
attesting to the truth of the information provided in the claim for a refund. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 147/ Page 2 
Current Law:  The tobacco tax rate for cigarettes is $3.75 for each package of 
20 cigarettes and 17.5 cents for each cigarette in a package of more than 20 cigarettes. In 
general, a person may not possess, sell, or attempt to sell unstamped cigarettes in the State. 
 
A licensed wholesaler may buy tax stamps in the manner and at the time that the 
Comptroller requires by regulation, and the Comptroller must allow a licensed wholesaler 
a discount of 0.82% of the purchase price of tax stamps. With specified exceptions, within 
72 hours after receiving cigarettes in the State and before selling or attempting to sell the 
cigarettes, a licensed wholesaler who first possesses the cigarettes must affix, to the 
smallest cigarette package, tax stamps in a total amount that at least equals the tobacco tax 
due on the number of cigarettes in the package. The tax stamps must be affixed to the 
package in the manner that is visible to a buyer and otherwise meets the Comptroller’s 
requirements. 
 
A taxpayer may file a claim for a refund for tobacco tax stamps that:   
 
 
are affixed erroneously to anything other than a package of cigarettes; 
 
are affixed to a package of unsalable cigarettes; 
 
are canceled by the Comptroller; 
 
if the claim is at least $250, are lost or destroyed in the State due to fire, flood, or 
other disaster, vandalism, or malicious mischief, except loss due to theft; or 
 
mutilated or damaged, whether or not affixed to a package of cigarettes. 
 
In general, a claim for a refund of tobacco tax may be filed within one year from the date 
of the event that caused the refund. A refund claim for tobacco tax stamps that are affixed 
to anything other than a package of cigarettes or to a package of unsalable cigarettes may 
be filed within three years from the date the tax was paid. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount to the extent 
that the Comptroller’s Office issues refunds for tobacco tax stamps lost due to theft, 
potentially beginning as early as fiscal 2024 due to the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date. 
Due to data limitations, the Department of Legislative Services is unable to estimate the 
potential volume of such refunds. As a point of reference, the refunding of tax stamps for 
50,000 packages of 20 cigarettes would result in a decrease of approximately $186,000 in 
general fund revenue.  
 
General fund revenue losses are offset to the extent that fines are collected for false claims 
under the bill. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 147/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 72 (Senators McCray and Lam) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - March 18, 2024 
 
js/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3