START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 108 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 108 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Baltimore County Board of Education - Nonstudent Member Compensation and 
Student Member Scholarships - Alterations 
 
 
This bill increases compensation for members of the Baltimore County Board of Education. 
Compensation for each nonstudent member, other than the chair of the board, increases by 
$9,000 to a total of $16,500 annually. Compensation for the board chair increases by 
$10,000 to a total of $17,500 annually. The student member scholarship is also increased 
by $2,500 such that a student member who completes a full term on the county board must 
receive a scholarship of $10,000. Compensation increases do not apply to the compensation 
of board members serving in a term beginning before the effective date of the bill and only 
take effect upon the next term of office (or in the event an individual is appointed or elected 
to fill out an unexpired term after the effective date of the bill). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2026.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County expenditures increase by $39,250 in FY 2027, rising to 
$102,500 by FY 2030 as compensation increases take effect. County revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of 12 members, 
including 4 at-large members appointed by the Governor, 7 nonpartisan members each 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 108/ Page 2 
elected from 1 of 7 councilmanic districts, and 1 student member. Elected members serve 
a term of four years and must stand for election in gubernatorial election years. Appointed 
members also serve a term of four years but must be appointed in presidential election 
years. The student member serves a one-year term. The Baltimore County Board of 
Education is 1 of 4 hybrid school boards in the State with both appointed and elected 
members. There are 20 elected school boards in the State. The Appendix – Local Boards 
of Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership 
of the 24 local boards of education. 
 
Each nonstudent member of the board (regardless of the member’s status as chair) is 
entitled to receive $7,500 as compensation for their service as board member. The student 
member is entitled to receive a scholarship of $7,500 upon the completion of a full term on 
the county board.   
 
Local Expenditures:  Under current law, Baltimore County provides its 12 members with 
a combined $90,000 in compensation annually. Baltimore County Public Schools advises 
that board members do not receive any additional fringe benefits beyond the compensation 
outlined in statute. Therefore, assuming the board chair remains one of the appointed 
members and assuming no members retire before the end of their term in office, 
Baltimore County expenditures increase by: 
 
 
$39,250 in fiscal 2027 representing the increased scholarship amount for the student 
member and increased compensation for elected members following the 
2026 gubernatorial election and newly elected members starting their terms in 
December 2026; 
 
$65,500 in fiscal 2028 representing a full year of increased compensation for elected 
members of the board (in addition to the student scholarship increase); 
 
$87,100 in fiscal 2029 representing increased compensation for appointed members 
beginning their term in December 2028 (in addition to the student scholarship and 
elected member compensation increases); and 
 
$102,500 in fiscal 2030 representing the full amount of compensation increases for 
student members and nonstudent members, including the additional increase for the 
chair of the board. 
     
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 108/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 451 (Senators Brooks and Hettleman) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County Public Schools; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 108/ Page 4 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
Membership 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. Twenty-two boards have student members; 
however, only 8 boards allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority 
to vote on matters relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with 
voting student members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to 
operating and capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and 
membership of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2024 
 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Anne Arundel2 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore City3 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore4 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed from county at large  
7 elected from councilmanic districts  
1 student (one-year term)  
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 108/ Page 5 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles5 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Harford6 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed from county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (one-year term)  
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term) 
Kent7 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Prince George’s8 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Somerset 
5 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Washington9 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Wicomico 
7 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term) 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 108/ Page 6 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed by Governor and elected board, except (1) in Baltimore City, 
members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore City Public School 
Board Community Panel and (2) in Harford County, members are appointed by the county executive with 
the advice and consent of the county council. Entries for local boards that are at any point in the process of 
transitioning between means of selection reflect the final state the board will be in once the transition fully 
takes effect. 
 
2 Chapter 473 of 2017 restructured the Anne Arundel County Board of Education from a nine-member 
appointed board to an eight-member elected board consisting of seven elected members (one from each of 
the seven councilmanic districts on a nonpartisan basis) and one student member. The terms of the elected 
members are staggered; four members were elected at the 2018 general election and three members were 
elected at the 2020 general election as the terms of previously appointed board members expired. In this 
manner, the elected board is phased in. The members elected in 2018 serve a six-year term, while the 
members elected in 2020 serve a four-year term. Thus, beginning in 2024, all members must stand for 
election. An elected member of the board generally serves a four-year term beginning on the first Monday 
in December after the member’s election and until a successor is elected and qualifies. 
 
3 Elected members serve a four-year term and appointed members serve a three-year term. Chapters 764 
and 765 of 2023 expanded student member voting rights to include matters relating to capital and operating 
budgets; school closings, reopenings, and boundaries; and student disciplinary matters. Additionally, 
Chapters 764 and 765 require that the student member be elected by the high school students of 
Baltimore City Public Schools in accordance with procedures established by the board in collaboration with 
the Associated Student Congress of Baltimore City. 
 
4 Chapter 785 of 2023 authorized the student member of the board to vote on matters relating to capital and 
operating budgets provided the student member completes specified budget training within two months of 
their election. Chapter 786 of 2023 altered the timing of elections for board members such that (1) the 
four appointed members must be appointed by the Governor in presidential election years from a list of 
nominees submitted by the Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission and (2) the 
seven elected members of the county board must continue to be elected in gubernatorial election years. 
 
5 Chapters 404 and 405 of 2021 added two new members to the Charles County Board of Education and 
altered the selection method for board members by requiring that eight board members be elected from the 
county commissioner districts (two from each of the four districts) and one board member be elected from 
the county at large. Previously, the seven board members were all elected from the county at large. All seats 
are subject to election in November 2022; however, the at-large member elected in November 2022 must 
serve a two-year term (instead of the usual four-year term) until a successor is elected to a full term in 
November 2024. Chapters 404 and 405 also provided the student member with voting rights, subject to 
certain restrictions. 
 
6 Chapter 569 of 2022 eliminated the role of the Governor in appointing members to the Harford County 
Board of Education. Instead, beginning with members appointed following the 2022 gubernatorial election, 
the Harford County Executive will appoint board members, subject to the advice and consent of the 
Harford County Council by a vote of at least five members. In appointing members to the board, the county 
executive must ensure, to the extent practicable, that the total makeup of the board reflects the gender, 
ethnic, and racial diversity of the county. Members appointed to the board following the 2022 election must 
serve for a term of two years until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Subsequent board members will 
be appointed following the 2024 presidential election and each presidential election thereafter. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 108/ Page 7 
7 Chapters 674 and 675 of 2023 codify a nonvoting student member of the Kent County Board of Education 
into statute and specify the selection method and responsibilities of the student member. 
 
8 Chapter 217 of 2022 altered the membership of the Prince George’s County Board of Education by 
removing the four appointed members from the board. Effective July 1, 2024, the board will become an 
elected board that consists of nine elected members, each of whom must reside in and be elected from a 
different school board district, and one student member. Chapter 793 of 2023 expanded the voting rights of 
the student member by allowing the student member to vote on, among other matters before the board, 
(1) capital and operating budgets; (2) school closings, reopenings, and boundaries; and (3) student 
disciplinary matters. The student member still may not vote on collective bargaining decisions, teacher and 
administrator disciplinary matters, and other personnel matters. The Act preserved a restriction on the 
student member attending an executive session relating to specified hearings or collective bargaining and 
additionally prohibits the student member from attending an executive session on a personnel matter on 
which the student member may not vote. 
 
9 Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 

END OF PAGE 7