START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 176 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 176 
(Delegate Foley) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Towing or Removal - Insurer of Record - Electronic Notification 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person who undertakes the towing or removal of a vehicle from a 
parking lot to notify the insurer of record electronically, as specified, if that form of notice 
is agreed to by the tower and the insurer of record in writing or by electronic 
communication. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Towing services are required to notify police (with specified information) 
within one hour of the tow or removal of the vehicle from the parking lot. Also, the tower 
must provide specified notice to the owner of the vehicle, as well as any secured party, and 
the vehicle’s insurer, within seven days of the vehicle’s removal from a parking lot, not 
including days that the towing business is closed. The notice sent to any secured party may 
be electronic if that form of notice is agreed to by the tower and the secured party in writing 
or by electronic communication; the agreement to provide notice electronically remains in 
effect until terminated by either party. 
 
A towing service that tows a vehicle from a parking lot is prohibited from charging for the 
actual cost of providing the required notice of the tow if the vehicle’s owner or agent, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 176/ Page 2 
insurer, or any secured party retakes possession of the vehicle within 48 hours of the vehicle 
being received by the storage facility. 
 
The Motor Vehicle Administration must maintain a database of addresses for providing 
notice to an insurer and make the database available to towers free of charge. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed (and has been 
enacted). For example, see SB 731 and HB 870 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 149 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2