START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 146 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 146 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations Boards – Reciprocal Licensure and Certification 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes any health occupations board (that does not otherwise 
have statutory authority to do so) to adopt regulations establishing reciprocity for 
individuals who are licensed or certified in another State that also offers similar reciprocity 
to individuals licensed or certified by the board. Applicants for reciprocity must meet 
specified standards. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in special fund expenditures from additional 
resources to process applications for any health occupations board that chooses to 
implement reciprocity. Any impact on special fund revenues for an implementing board is 
indeterminate, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill only affects State government operations and finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Reciprocity regulations adopted by a health occupations board must 
require that an applicant be licensed or certified in another State under requirements the 
board determines are substantially equivalent to its own licensing or certification 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 146/ Page 2 
requirements. The regulations must also require an applicant to submit a specified 
application on the required form, pay an application fee set by the board, be in good 
standing under the law of the other state, and satisfy any other requirements established in 
law or regulation. 
 
Current Law:  Twenty health occupations boards share responsibility for regulating 
various health professions in Maryland. Exhibit 1 lists the health occupations boards 
within MDH. Four boards have an existing statutory authority to issue a license by 
reciprocity:  Physicians; Morticians and Funeral Directors; Pharmacy; and Environmental 
Health Specialists. Additionally, many health occupations professions participate in 
interstate compacts that offer expedited authorizations to practice in other compact states. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Health Occupations Boards in the Maryland Department of Health 
 
Acupuncture 
Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists 
Chiropractic 
Dental 
Dietetic Practice 
Environmental Health Specialists* 
Long-Term Care Administrators (formerly Nursing Home Administrators) 
Massage Therapy 
Morticians and Funeral Directors* 
Nursing 
Occupational Therapy 
Optometry 
Pharmacy* 
Physical Therapy 
Physicians* 
Podiatry 
Professional Counselors and Therapists 
Psychologists 
Residential Child Care Program Professionals 
Social Work 
 
* Indicates a board with existing statutory authority to issue a license by reciprocity. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 146/ Page 3 
With specified exceptions, an individual must be licensed, certified, registered, or 
permitted by the respective health occupations board before the individual may practice in 
the State. Licensure, certification, registration, and permit requirements vary by profession 
but typically require, among other things, specified education and experience, passage of a 
national and/or State examination, and a criminal history records check. 
 
Background:  Unlike interstate compacts, which require legislation for a particular health 
profession in the State to join, reciprocity agreements are negotiated independently by 
health occupations boards after enabling legislation. This gives each health occupations 
board more control when choosing to enter a reciprocity agreement. MDH advises that 
licensure by reciprocity for health care professionals in surrounding states is needed (1) due 
to the proximity and corresponding geographical relationship of nearby states; (2) to 
improve access to care and treatment, particularly for rural State residents; and (3) to 
address current health care workforce challenges. 
 
State Revenues:  It is unknown whether a specified health occupations board will exercise 
the bill’s authorization and enter a reciprocity agreement with another state. If a health 
occupations board chooses to do so, MDH advises that the impact on special fund revenues 
for the board is indeterminate, as follows:  (1) fees for licensure by reciprocity are usually 
less expensive than the out-of-state fee for regular licensure, which could result in a 
revenue decrease as applicants choose the cheaper path to licensure in the State; or (2) the 
number of applicants who become licensed by reciprocity may be large enough to fully 
offset any loss of revenues from the lower reciprocity licensure fee, which could result in 
a revenue increase. The number of potential applicants who would be affected by a health 
occupations board exercising the bill’s authorization is also unknown. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 221 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 146/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 146/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Health Occupations Boards – Reciprocal Licensure and Certification 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions 
 
 
Bill Number: 
HB0146 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal will have no economic impact. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5