START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 127 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 127 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis (nPEP) Standing 
Order Program - Establishment 
 
   
This departmental bill establishes a Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis (nPEP) 
Standing Order Program. The program must authorize a licensed pharmacist to dispense 
nPEP under specified circumstances. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may 
administer the program, collect fees with specified exception, establish guidelines for 
conducting patient education and training, and collect and report data on the program. 
MDH must adopt regulations necessary for the administration of the program and that 
address the needs of specified populations, as specified. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can implement the program with existing budgeted resources. To the 
extent MDH collects fees, general fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount. To 
the extent the program results in increased utilization of nPEP drugs for Medicaid 
enrollees, Medicaid expenditures (and associated federal matching revenues) increase in 
the near term; however, such expenditures are likely offset by indeterminate savings due 
to the prevention of HIV infections.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
   

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 127/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
“Nonoccupational postexposure prophylaxis” means medication used in accordance with 
the most recent U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Guidelines to 
reduce the chances of a patient developing HIV after potential exposure to the disease. 
“Standing order” means a directive authorizing pharmacists to dispense the nPEP regimens 
listed in the order without a prescription. 
 
Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis Standing Order Program 
 
The program must (1) authorize a pharmacist registered with the program to dispense nPEP 
through a standing order and (2) operate in accordance with the procedures approved by 
MDH with the advice and approval of the State Board of Pharmacy (MBOP).  
 
MDH may (1) collect fees necessary for the administration of the program, unless the 
patient qualifies for nPEP through the Program for Preventing HIV Infection for Rape 
Victims; (2) administer the program and establish a standardized set of guidelines for 
pharmacists participating in the program to use in developing and conducting patient 
education and training on nPEP that includes specified topics; and (3) collect and report 
data on the operation and results of the program. 
 
Pharmacist Dispensing of Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis 
 
The definition of “practice pharmacy” is expanded to include dispensing nPEP approved 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in accordance with CDC guidelines if the 
pharmacist is registered with the program.  
 
At the time of dispensing nPEP, a pharmacist registered with the program must (1) screen 
the patient to determine that HIV exposure occurred within 72 hours before the dispensing; 
(2) determine whether the patient meets clinical criteria consistent with the most recent 
CDC guidelines, including the identification of any contraindicated medications and, if 
applicable, exposure as the result of an alleged rape or sexual offense or alleged child 
sexual abuse; (3) determine whether an available standing order is appropriate for the 
patient and dispense nPEP in accordance with the most recent CDC guidelines; (4) refer 
the patient to a disease intervention specialist within MDH for ongoing treatment; and 
(5) determine whether the patient has a primary care provider and, if so, notify the provider 
that the patient was dispensed nPEP or, if not, provide the patient with a list of local primary 
care providers and clinics provided by MDH. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 127/ Page 3 
If an available standing order is not appropriate for the patient, the pharmacist must refer 
the patient to a primary care provider. A pharmacist may dispense nPEP in accordance with 
a drug therapy management contract. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Practice of Pharmacy  
 
An individual must be licensed by MBOP to practice pharmacy in the State. The practice 
of pharmacy includes compounding, dispensing, or distributing prescription drugs or 
devices; 
monitoring 
prescriptions; 
providing 
information, 
explanation, 
and 
recommendations to patients and health care practitioners about the safe and effective use 
of prescription drugs or devices; providing drug therapy management; administering 
vaccinations; prescribing and dispensing certain contraceptive medications and devices; 
and administering a self-administered drug to a patient in accordance with regulations 
adopted by the board.  
 
Prohibition on Prior Authorization for Postexposure Prophylaxis  
 
Chapter 684 of 2022 prohibits carriers and Medicaid managed care organizations from 
applying a prior authorization requirement for a prescription drug used as postexposure 
prophylaxis (better known as PEP) for the prevention of HIV if the prescription drug is 
prescribed for use in accordance with CDC guidelines. 
 
Program for Preventing HIV Infection for Rape Victims 
 
Chapter 431 of 2019 established the Pilot Program for Preventing HIV Infection for Rape 
Victims to prevent HIV infection for victims of an alleged rape or sexual offense or victims 
of alleged child sexual abuse. Chapter 144 of 2022 made the pilot program permanent. The 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy administers the program. A qualifying 
victim must be provided with a full course of treatment and follow-up care for nPEP for 
the prevention of HIV, at the victim’s request, and as prescribed. 
 
Background:  MDH advises that nPEP is a 28-day course of three antiretroviral 
medications that an individual must begin taking within 72 hours of exposure to HIV in 
order to prevent transmission. However, nPEP currently requires a prescription, which 
presents a barrier to accessing the medication within the window of efficacy. The bill 
allows a licensed pharmacist registered with the program to dispense nPEP.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 127/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 246 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 127/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Public Health - Nonoccupational Postexposure Prophylaxis (nPEP) 
Standing Order Program - Establishment 
 
BILL 
NUMBER: 
 
 
HB 127 
PREPARED 
BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5