START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 213

Chapter 213

(House Bill 131)

AN ACT concerning

Housing Development Permit Applications – Local Reporting Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring certain local jurisdictions to report certain information about
~~housing~~ certain building and development permit applications to the Department of
Housing and Community Development and the Department of Planning on or before
a certain date each year; requiring a local jurisdiction to make a copy of the report
publicly available on its website; and generally relating to housing development
permit applications.

BY adding to
Article – Land Use
Section 7–105
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Land Use

7–105.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO A LOCAL JURISDICTION WITH AT LEAST
~~250,000~~ 150,000 RESIDENTS.

(B) ON OR BEFORE FEBRUARY JULY 1 EACH YEAR, EACH LOCAL
JURISDICTION SUBJECT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION SHALL REPORT
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION FOR EACH TYPE OF
~~PROJECT~~ ~~PERMIT~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~FOR~~ BUILDING OR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATION WHICH INCLUDES A RESIDENTIAL HOUSING ~~DEVELOPMENTS~~
COMPONENT AS PART OF THE DEVELOPMENT CONSIDERED BY THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR:

(1) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF COMPLETE APPLICATIONS RECEIVED BY
TYPE;

(2) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF COMPLETE APPLICATIONS APPROVED
ISSUED BY TYPE;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 213 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF COMPLETE APPLICATIONS REJECTED BY
TYPE;

(4) THE NET TOTAL NUMBER OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS APPROVED;

(5) THE MEAN AND MEDIAN PROCESSING TIMES FOR PERMIT
APPLICATIONS AND THE STANDARD DEVIATION FROM THE MEAN;

(6) THE AMOUNT OF TIME SPENT PROCESSING APPLICATIONS,
INCLUDING THE TIME SPENT BY AGENCIES REVIEWING APPLICATIONS, BY
APPLICANTS MAKING EDITS, AND ANY PUBLIC NOTICE OR COMMENT TIME PERIODS;

(6) (7) ANY TYPE OF EXPEDITED PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS
THAT THE LOCAL JURISDICTION EMPLOYED TO ACCELERATE RESIDENTIAL
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS; AND

(7) (8) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF RESIDENTIAL HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS THAT BENEFITED FROM AN EXPEDITED PERMIT
APPLICATION PROCESS IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION AND WHICH TYPE OF
EXPEDITED PROCESS WAS USED; AND

(9) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THE JURISDICTION CONSIDERS
RELEVANT.

(C) (1) (I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A LOCAL
JURISDICTION SHALL MAKE THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ON ITS WEBSITE.

(II) AN ANNOUNCEMENT POSTED TO A LOCAL JURISDICTION’S
WEBSITE STATING THAT A PERSON SHOULD CONTACT THE RELEVANT LOCAL
DEPARTMENT FOR ACCESS TO THE REPORT DOES NOT FULFILL THE REQUIREMENTS
OF SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) A LOCAL JURISDICTION THAT DOES NOT MAINTAIN A WEBSITE
SHALL MAKE THE REPORT PUBLICLY AVAILABLE THROUGH ANY OTHER
REASONABLE METHOD.

(3) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, A LOCAL JURISDICTION MAY
SUBMIT AND TRANSMIT THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION AS PART OF
ANOTHER REPORT REQUIRED TO BE FILED UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 213

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3