START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 268

Chapter 268

(House Bill 159)

AN ACT concerning

Common Ownership Communities – Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment
(Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of altering certain requirements for procedures relating to electric vehicle
recharging equipment in a condominium or homeowners association ~~to~~ ~~include~~
~~equipment~~ ~~for~~ ~~electric~~ ~~bicycles;~~ establishing certain requirements and procedures
relating to an application to the governing body of a cooperative housing corporation
to install or use electric vehicle recharging equipment; requiring the Department of
Housing and Community Development to provide certain information on its common
ownership community website; and generally relating to electric vehicle recharging
equipment in common ownership communities.

BY adding to
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 5–6B–23.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 2–303
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11–111.4(a) and (g) and 11B–111.8(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11B–111.8(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Corporations and Associations

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 268 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

5–6B–23.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COMMON ELEMENT” MEANS ANY AREA IN A COOPERATIVE
PROJECT IN WHICH MEMBERS HAVE A POSSESSORY INTEREST IN COMMON.

(3) “ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT” MEANS
PROPERTY IN THE STATE THAT IS USED FOR RECHARGING VEHICLES PROPELLED
BY ELECTRICITY, INCLUDING MOTOR VEHICLES AND ELECTRIC BICYCLES.

(B) A RECORDED COVENANT OR RESTRICTION, A PROVISION IN A
DECLARATION, A PROVISION IN A PROPRIETARY LEASE, OR A PROVISION IN THE
BYLAWS OR RULES OF A COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION IS VOID AND
UNENFORCEABLE IF THE COVENANT, RESTRICTION, OR PROVISION:

(1) IS IN CONFLICT WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION; OR

(2) EFFECTIVELY PROHIBITS OR UNREASONABLY RESTRICTS THE
INSTALLATION OR USE OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN A
MEMBER’S PARKING SPACE OR A PARKING SPACE THAT IS SPECIFICALLY
DESIGNATED FOR USE BY A PARTICULAR MEMBER.

(C) (1) IF APPROVAL IS REQUIRED FOR THE INSTALLATION OR USE OF
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN A COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION, THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL PROCESS AND REVIEW AN
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL IN THE SAME MANNER AS AN APPLICATION FOR
APPROVAL OF AN ARCHITECTURAL MODIFICATION TO THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING
CORPORATION.

(2) THE GOVERNING BODY MAY NOT WILLFULLY AVOID OR DELAY
PROCESSING AND REVIEWING AN APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL.

(3) IF AN APPLICATION IS NOT DENIED IN WRITING WITHIN 60 DAYS
AFTER THE GOVERNING BODY RECEIVES THE APPLICATION, THE APPLICATION
SHALL BE DEEMED APPROVED, UNLESS THE DELAY IS THE RESULT OF A
REASONABLE REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.

(4) THE APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF AN APPLICATION SHALL BE IN
WRITING.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 268

(D) (1) THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL APPROVE THE INSTALLATION OF
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN A PARKING SPACE THAT IS
SPECIFICALLY DESIGNATED FOR USE BY A PARTICULAR MEMBER IF:

(I) INSTALLATION:

1. DOES NOT UNREASONABLY IMPEDE THE NORMAL USE
OF AN AREA OUTSIDE THE MEMBER’S PARKING SPACE; AND

2. IS REASONABLY POSSIBLE; AND

(II) THE MEMBER AGREES IN WRITING TO:

1. COMPLY WITH:

A. ALL RELEVANT BUILDING CODES AND SAFETY
STANDARDS TO MAINTAIN THE SAFETY OF ALL MEMBERS WITH A POSSESSORY
INTEREST IN COMMON; AND

B. THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION’S
ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT;

2. ENGAGE A LICENSED CONTRACTOR TO INSTALL THE
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT; AND

3. PAY FOR THE ELECTRICITY USAGE ASSOCIATED WITH
THE SEPARATELY METERED ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT.

(2) THE OWNER AND EACH SUCCESSIVE OWNER OF THE ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR:

(I) INSTALLATION COSTS FOR THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT;

(II) COSTS FOR DAMAGE TO THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT OR COMMON ELEMENT RESULTING FROM THE
INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, REMOVAL, OR REPLACEMENT OF THE
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT;

(III) COSTS FOR THE MAINTENANCE, REPAIR, AND
REPLACEMENT OF THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT UP UNTIL THE
EQUIPMENT IS REMOVED;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 268 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) IF THE MEMBER DECIDES TO REMOVE THE ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT, COSTS FOR THE REMOVAL AND FOR THE
RESTORATION OF THE COMMON ELEMENT AFTER REMOVAL; AND

(V) THE COST OF ELECTRICITY ASSOCIATED WITH THE
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT.

(E) A MEMBER SHALL OBTAIN ANY PERMIT OR APPROVAL FOR ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT THAT IS REQUIRED BY THE COUNTY OR
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION IN WHICH THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION IS
LOCATED.

(F) A GOVERNING BODY MAY GRANT A LICENSE FOR UP TO 3 YEARS,
RENEWABLE AT THE DISCRETION OF THE GOVERNING BODY, ON ANY COMMON
ELEMENT NECESSARY FOR THE INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT OR FOR THE SUPPLY
OF ELECTRICITY TO ANY ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT.

(G) (1) A MEMBER SHALL:

(1) (I) PROVIDE PRIOR TO INSTALLATION OF THE ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT, PROVIDE A CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE
NAMING THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION AS AN ADDITIONAL INSURED;
OR

(2) (II) REIMBURSE THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION
FOR THE COST OF AN INCREASED INSURANCE PREMIUM ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT.

(2) INSURANCE COVERAGE OF THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING
EQUIPMENT SHALL BE MAINTAINED SO LONG AS THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT AND ALL APPURTENANCES TO THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT ARE INSTALLED.

Article – Housing and Community Development

2–303.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Common ownership community” means:

(i) a condominium, as defined in § 11–101 of the Real Property
Article;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 268

(ii) a cooperative housing corporation, as defined in § 5–6B–01 of the
Corporations and Associations Article; or

(iii) a homeowners association, as defined in § 11B–101 of the Real
Property Article.

(3) “Local common ownership community program” means a program
operated by a local jurisdiction for the regulation or oversight of common ownership
communities.

(b) The Department shall establish and maintain a website that provides
information [on the current rights and responsibilities of] FOR individuals living in a
common ownership community.

(c) The Department shall make publicly available on the website:

(1) a hyperlink to the website of each local common ownership community
program in the State; [and]

(2) information on statewide legislation enacted in the prior legislative
session regarding the rights and responsibilities of individuals living in a common
ownership community, including, for each bill that is enacted:

(i) the bill title;

(ii) the bill and chapter number;

(iii) the effective date of the bill; and

(iv) a hyperlink to the bill information on the General Assembly
website;

(3) (I) A SUMMARY OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE GOVERNING
BODY OF A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY AND FOR AN INDIVIDUAL SEEKING TO
INSTALL ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN A COMMON OWNERSHIP
COMMUNITY UNDER § 5–6B–23.1 OF THE CORPORATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS
ARTICLE AND §§ 11–111.4 AND 11B–111.8 OF THE REAL PROPERTY ARTICLE;

(II) INFORMATION ON CONTRACTORS, INCLUDING SPECIFIC
INFORMATION ON CONTRACTORS CERTIFIED THROUGH LABOR–MANAGEMENT
TRAINING PROGRAMS, AND INSURERS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT IN A COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 268 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) A POINT OF CONTACT IN THE DEPARTMENT TO ASSIST
INDIVIDUALS WITH QUESTIONS RELATING TO ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING
EQUIPMENT IN COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES; AND

(4) INFORMATION ON RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO INDIVIDUALS
LIVING IN COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITIES TO AID IN DISPUTE RESOLUTION
BETWEEN THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE COMMON OWNERSHIP COMMUNITY.

(d) The information required under subsection (c)(2) of this section shall be posted
on the Department’s common ownership community website on or before June 1 each year.

Article – Real Property

11–111.4.

(a) In this section, “electric vehicle recharging equipment” means property in the
State that is used for recharging [motor] vehicles propelled by electricity, INCLUDING
MOTOR VEHICLES AND ELECTRIC BICYCLES.

(g) (1) A unit owner shall:

[(1)] (I) [Provide] PRIOR TO THE INSTALLATION OF THE ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT, PROVIDE a certificate of insurance naming the
condominium association as an additional insured; or

[(2)] (II) Reimburse the association for the cost of an increased insurance
premium attributable to the electric vehicle recharging equipment.

(2) INSURANCE COVERAGE OF THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING
EQUIPMENT SHALL BE MAINTAINED SO LONG AS THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT AND ALL APPURTENANCES TO THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT ARE INSTALLED.

11B–111.8.

(a) In this section, “electric vehicle recharging equipment” has the meaning stated
in § 11–111.4 of this article.

(g) (1) A lot owner shall:

[(1)] (I) [Provide] PRIOR TO THE INSTALLATION OF THE ELECTRIC
VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT, PROVIDE a certificate of insurance naming the
association as an additional insured; or

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 268

[(2)] (II) Reimburse the association for the cost of an increased insurance
premium attributable to the electric vehicle recharging equipment.

(2) INSURANCE COVERAGE OF THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING
EQUIPMENT SHALL BE MAINTAINED SO LONG AS THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT AND ALL APPURTENANCES TO THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
RECHARGING EQUIPMENT ARE INSTALLED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7