START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 172 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 172 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- State Police) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Department of State Police - Professional Occupations - Application Process 
 
 
This departmental bill makes technical and procedural changes to (1) the licensing and/or 
certification processes for private detective agencies and private detectives, security 
systems agencies and technicians, security guard agencies, and security guards; (2) the 
commissioning process for special police officers; and (3) the appointment process for 
railroad police officers to facilitate automated processing of applications and payments. 
The bill also makes conforming changes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, the effective 
date of Chapter 763 of 2023. If the effective date of Chapter 763 is amended, the bill 
takes effect on the taking effect of Chapter 763.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease minimally beginning in FY 2025, likely by 
less than $10,000 annually, as discussed below. The Department of State Police (DSP) can 
handle any administrative changes with existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DSP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 172/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Licensing and certification applications must be submitted in the manner 
and format (instead of on a form) designated by the Secretary of State Police. When 
applicants must submit fingerprints, they must do so in a format (instead of on a form) 
approved by the Director of the Central Repository and the Director of the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI). Specified fees must be paid using a method approved by the 
Secretary of State Police. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Regulation of Private Detective Agencies, Private Detectives, Security Systems Agencies, 
Security Systems Technicians, Security Guard Agencies, and Security Guards 
 
The Secretary of State Police is responsible for the licensure of private detective agencies 
and the certification of private detectives, the licensure of security systems agencies and 
registration of security systems technicians, and the licensure of security guard agencies 
and certification of security guards in the State. Generally, applicants must submit to the 
Secretary of State Police an application on the form the Secretary provides, which includes 
initial application and renewal fees, in addition to submitting two sets of fingerprints taken 
on forms approved by the director of the Criminal Justice Information System Central 
Repository (CJIS-CR) and the Director of the FBI for a criminal history records check. The 
terms of licenses and certifications are staggered, and renewals occur every three years.  
 
Chapter 763, among other things, generally required individuals serving as security guards 
and employed by security guard employers to also be certified by the Secretary of State 
Police. 
 
Special Police Officers 
 
A special police officer holds a commission granted by the Governor. The Secretary of 
State Police must investigate the character, reputation, and qualifications of each applicant 
for a special police officer commission. The employer of an applicant for a commission 
must submit an application in the manner and format designed by the Secretary of State 
Police, a complete set of the applicant’s legible fingerprints, and specified fees to cover the 
cost of the criminal history records check. Application fees for special police commissions 
may not be charged to a unit of the State. An initial commission expires three years after 
the date of issuance and is renewable for a three-year term under specified conditions. 
 
Railroad Police Officers 
 
A railroad police officer is an individual appointed by the Governor to act as a police officer 
for a railroad company under the Maryland Railroad Police Act. Each railroad company 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 172/ Page 3 
located wholly or partially in the State may apply for the appointment of railroad police 
officers (1) to protect property, patrons, passengers, tenants, employees, equipment, and 
services, and (2) to preserve peace and order on railroad premises, easements, appurtenant 
property, trains, cars, and other vehicles. An applicant (1) must be of good moral character 
and may not have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(2) must be at least 21 years old; and (3) must be a full-time police officer employed by a 
railroad company on July 1, 1979, or meet all the educational and training requirements 
required by the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission. The chief railroad 
police officer of a railroad company must submit to the Secretary of State Police under oath 
an application for appointment of each railroad police officer on the form the Secretary of 
State Police requires and pay the application fee, as specified. The application fee is 
nonrefundable. An appointment for a railroad police officer remains in effect until 
terminated by the railroad company that employes the railroad police officer or revoked 
for cause by the Governor. 
 
Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository 
 
CJIS-CR within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services is a 
computerized repository of criminal history record information governed by the Code of 
Federal Regulations and Maryland’s statute and regulations. The criminal history record 
information contained in CJIS-CR is used by the courts, law enforcement agencies, 
prosecutors, and correctional agencies for criminal justice purposes. Federal and State law 
prescribe the authorized uses of the data, establish rules for preventing unauthorized access, 
and allow individuals to challenge and correct the database. The use of criminal history 
record information is also allowed for certain noncriminal justice purposes, such as 
employment, licensing, public housing, and research. For a fee, a noncriminal justice entity 
may obtain a criminal history records check through CJIS-CR by submitting an application 
that includes the subject’s fingerprints. 
 
Background:  DSP advises that the current application process for the specified licenses, 
registrations, and commissions under the bill have a paper application process. In addition, 
the payment of the specified application fees must be by check or money order. DSP 
advises that the changes under the bill are broad enough to allow the department to make 
the entire application process electronic and result in operational efficiencies for the 
specified applications affected by the bill. DSP further advises that the department has been 
working on automating its licensure process since 2013 and that professional licenses are 
the last processes to be automated. 
 
State Revenues:  DSP advises that it does not anticipate raising its application fees to 
account for a 3% processing fee from its online processing vendor. Exhibit 1 illustrates 
the number and revenues associated with each type of application affected by the bill 
during calendar 2023. As the exhibit shows, total revenues were approximately $318,000. 
As all licenses, certifications, and commissions are staggered and renew every three years, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 172/ Page 4 
the number of applications, and revenues associated with them, vary from year to year. 
Therefore, a reliable estimate of lost revenues stemming from the 3% third-party 
processing fee cannot be reliably estimated. It is assumed, however, that annual 
fluctuations are not extreme. Therefore, to the extent that DSP fully automates its fee 
payment processes, general fund revenues decrease minimally (estimated at approximately 
$9,500) beginning in fiscal 2025 and annually thereafter due to the payment of a 3% 
processing fee for each application. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Affected Applications and Estimated Revenue 
Calendar 2023 
 
Application Type 
Applications 
Application Fee 
Collected Fees 
Private Detective (Original) 
558 
$15 
$8,370  
Private Detective (Renewal) 
101  
$10 
$1,010  
Private Detective Agency (Original)* 
15  
$287.50 
$4,313  
Private Detective Agency (Renewal)* 
101  
$300 
$30,300  
Railroad Police (Original) 
75  
$160 
$12,000  
Security Guard (Original) 
6,691  
$15 
$100,365  
Security Guard (Renewal) 
4,191  
$10 
$41,910  
Security Guard Agency (Original)* 
60  
$287.50 
$17,250  
Security Guard Agency (Renewal)* 
38  
$300 
$11,400  
Security Systems Agency (Original) 
50  
$150 
$7,500  
Security Systems Agency (Renewal) 
141  
$100 
$14,100  
Security Systems Technician (Original) 
1,322 
$15 
$19,830  
Security Systems Technician (Renewal) 
695 
$15 
$10,425  
Special Police (Original) 
241  
$100 
$24,100  
Special Police (Renewal) 
254  
$60 
$15,240  
 
 
Total Application Fees 
$318,113 
 
* Median application fee assumed for Private Detective Agency and Security Guard Agency applications due to 
differing fees based on non-incorporated and incorporated statuses.  
 
Source:  Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1280 of 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 172/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 287 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Police) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 172/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Department of State Police - Professional Occupations - Application 
Process 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0172 
 
PREPARED BY:  Lt Michael Brady 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation will provide a savings in application processing and costs to the business.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 6