START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 149 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 149 
(Delegate Pippy, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Medical Records - Destruction - Notice and Retrieval 
 
 
This bill prohibits a health care provider from destroying a medical record, laboratory 
report, or x-ray report about a patient for 7 years after the report or record is made (rather 
than 5 years under current law or, for a minor patient, the later of 3 years after the patient 
reaches majority or 5 years as under current law). A specified notice must be sent by 
first-class mail (as specified under current law) and email to the last known email address 
of the patient (or a minor patient’s parent/guardian with limited exception). The health care 
provider must make the record or report available for retrieval by the patient or the patient’s 
parent/guardian within 60 days (rather than 30 days under current law) before the date of 
destruction at the location designated in the specified notice. The bill also corrects 
terminology.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill has an operational impact on the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH) to update records retention schedules for all MDH hospitals and facilities, 
MDH can likely implement such changes using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that a local health department does not have the capacity to 
retain records for a longer period of time and does not utilize the authorization to destroy 
records after providing a specified notice expenditures increase to store additional medical 
records for a longer period of time. Any effect is anticipated to be minimal. Revenues are 
not affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. To the extent that a small business health care 
provider does not utilize the authorization to destroy records after providing a specified 
notice, records must be stored for a longer period of time.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 149/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A health care provider is prohibited from destroying a medical record, 
laboratory report, or x-ray report about (1) a patient for five years after the record or report 
is made or (2) a minor patient for three years after the patient reaches the age of majority 
or five years after the record or report is made, whichever is later.  
 
A health care provider may destroy a medical record sooner if the patient, a minor patient’s 
parent/guardian, or, in specified limited circumstances, the minor patient is notified. The 
notice must be made by first class mail to the last known address of the patient, include the 
date on which the record will be destroyed, and include a statement that the record or a 
synopsis of the record, if wanted, must be retrieved at a designated location within 30 days 
of the proposed date of destruction.          
 
A health care provider or any other person who knowingly violates medical record 
destruction provisions is liable for actual damages. A health care facility, provider, or its 
agent, employee, officer, or director that violates medical record maintenance and 
destruction provisions is subject to an administrative fine up to $10,000 for all violations 
cited in a single day.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2