START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 143 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Condominiums - Sales Contracts - Asbestos Disclosure 
 
 
This bill establishes that a contract for the sale of a condominium unit is unenforceable if 
the contract does not contain specified notices related to the presence of asbestos. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Initial Contracts of Sale  
 
Under current law, a contract for the initial sale of a condominium unit to a member of the 
public is not enforceable by the vendor unless:   
 
 
the purchaser is given – on or before the time a contract is entered into between the 
vendor and the purchaser – a current public offering statement (as amended and 
registered with the Secretary of State) containing specified information; and 
 
the contract of sale, in conspicuous type, contains a notice of (1) the purchaser’s 
right to receive a public offering statement and the purchaser’s recission right, as 
specified and (2) specified warranties provided under § 11-131 of the Real Property 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 143/ Page 2 
Article, and whether the council of unit owners has entered into any agreement that 
settles or releases the council of unit owners’ claims related to these warranties. 
 
The bill adds that the notice must include a statement as to whether the vendor has actual 
knowledge of the presence of asbestos in the condominium, including a description of the 
location of the asbestos and whether abatement has been performed (including the date of 
any abatement). 
 
Certificates and Notices for the Resale of Condominiums  
 
Under current law, a contract for the resale of a unit by a unit owner other than the 
developer is not enforceable unless the owner provides specified information (within a 
required certificate/notice) to the purchaser no later than 15 days prior to closing. For 
example, in addition to other items, the unit owner must provide a certificate containing:   
 
 
a statement detailing the common expense assessment and any unpaid common 
expense or special assessment adopted by the council of unit owners that is due; 
 
a statement of any other fees payable by the unit owners to the council of unit 
owners; 
 
the most recent regularly prepared balance sheet and income expense statement, if 
any, of the condominium; 
 
a statement of any judgments or pending lawsuits to which the council of unit 
owners is a party, excluding assessment collection actions; and 
 
a statement as to whether the council of unit owners has knowledge of any violation 
of the health or building codes, as specified. The bill specifies that this statement 
must include any violation of health or building codes related to asbestos. 
 
The bill adds that the required information provided to the purchaser must also include a 
statement as to whether the unit owner has knowledge of the presence of asbestos in the 
unit (including a description of the location), and whether abatement has been performed 
during the occupancy of the owner. 
 
For more information on condominiums, which, along with cooperative housing 
corporations and homeowners associations are commonly known as common ownership 
communities, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
Similar Disclosure Requirements 
 
Statute includes additional provisions specifically regarding the disclosure of asbestos in 
other types of residential property contracts. For example, § 10‐702 of the Real Property 
Article (which generally governs single family residential real property disclosure 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 143/ Page 3 
requirements) specifies that the residential property disclosure statement required to be 
provided to a purchaser must include a specified list of defects of which the vendor has 
actual knowledge. Among those items that must be disclosed are defects related to 
hazardous or regulated materials, including asbestos, lead‐based paint, radon, underground 
storage tanks, and licensed landfills. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 52 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 46 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; Office of 
the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 143/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 143/ Page 5 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5