START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 165 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 165 
(Delegate J. Lewis) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Local Government – Annual Audit Reporting Requirements – Alterations 
 
 
This bill imposes a financial penalty through the reduction of 20% of State funding for 
local highway user revenues and disparity grants if a local government fails to submit 
required audited financial reports within two calendar years after the deadline. The bill 
applies prospectively beginning with the fiscal year 2024 audits. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent that State funding for local highway user revenues is withheld 
and reverted back to the State, Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures decrease. 
TTF revenues are not affected under the bill. To the extent that State funding for disparity 
grants is withheld and reverted back to the State, general fund expenditures decrease. Due 
to the delay in the bill’s penalty provision, any impact on State aid to local governments 
will not occur until FY 2027. 
  
Local Effect:  State aid to local governments may be reduced by a significant amount to 
the extent local governments fail to submit required local government audited financial 
reports. Any potential impact will not occur until FY 2027. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Counties, municipalities, and special taxing districts must file a financial 
report covering the full period of the previous fiscal year by October 31 to the  
Department of Legislative Services (DLS). Local jurisdictions with a population greater 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 165/ Page 2 
than 400,000 may take until December 31 to file their financial report. This deadline 
extension applies to Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties. Due to legislation passed by the General Assembly, the reporting 
deadlines have been extended for several other jurisdictions. The annual financial report 
for Howard County is due by November 30; whereas, the annual financial reports for 
11 counties (Allegany, Calvert, Caroline, Charles, Frederick, Garrett, Queen Anne’s, 
St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, and Wicomico) are due by December 31. The 
annual financial report due to DLS is commonly known as the Uniform Financial Report 
(UFR). It has been common practice for DLS to grant an extension of the annual financial 
report upon receipt of a reasonable request from a local jurisdiction. 
 
Local jurisdictions must also submit an annual audit report covering the full period of the 
previous fiscal year to the State Legislative Auditor. Chapter 493 of 2008 tied the due date 
for the annual audit report to the due date for the annual financial report. 
 
If a local jurisdiction does not submit its annual UFR on time, the Comptroller, on notice 
from the Executive Director of DLS may order the discontinuance of all money, grants or 
State aid the local jurisdiction is entitled to receive under State law, including (1) the 
income tax; (2) the tax on racing; (3) the recordation tax; (4) the admissions and amusement 
tax; and (5) the license tax. 
 
If a local jurisdiction does not submit its annual audit report on time, as specified, the 
Comptroller, on notice from the Executive Director of DLS may order the discontinuance 
of all money, grants or State aid that the local jurisdiction is entitled to receive under State 
law that are distributed by the Comptroller, the clerks of the court, or any other unit of State 
government. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that State funding for local highway user revenues is 
withheld and reverted back to the State, TTF expenditures decrease under the bill. To the 
extent that State funding for disparity grants is withheld and reverted back to the State, 
general fund expenditures decrease. Due to the delay in the bill’s penalty provision, any 
impact on State aid to local governments will not occur until fiscal 2027. As shown in 
Exhibit 1, there is one county (Dorchester) and nine municipalities that are at least one year 
late in submitting the required audited financial reports as of January 31, 2024.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 165/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Jurisdictions Late in Filing Required Audited Financial Reports 
Fiscal 2025 State Aid Amounts 
 
Local Government  
Highway 
User 
Revenues 
Disparity 
Grant 
Total 
20% of Total 
Dorchester County1 
$1,501,444  
$4,442,984  $5,944,428  
$1,188,886  
Town of Barclay2 
12,831 
n/a 
12,831  
   2,566  
Town of Berwyn Heights1 
212,215 
n/a 
212,215  
  42,443  
Town of Deer Park1 
42,469 
n/a 
42,469  
8,494  
Town of Forest Heights2 
154,268 
n/a 
154,268  
30,854  
City of Hyattsville2 
767,685 
n/a 
767,685  
153,537  
Town of Lonaconing1 
85,451 
n/a 
85,451  
   17,090  
Town of Rock Hall1 
145,836 
n/a 
145,836  
   29,167  
City of Seat Pleasant2 
186,112 
n/a 
186,112  
    37,222  
Town of Sudlersville2 
27,398 
n/a 
27,398  
     5,480  
 
1 As of January 31, 2024, the local jurisdiction had not submitted required reports for FY 2022. 
2 As of January 31, 2024, the local jurisdiction had not submitted required reports for FY 2021 and FY 2022. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill specifies that if local jurisdictions are more than two years 
late in filing specified audited financial reports with DLS, the department must notify the 
Comptroller, who must then discontinue 20% of all State aid payments for the current 
fiscal year for local highway user revenues and disparity grants that the jurisdiction is 
otherwise entitled to receive. The discontinuance of funds will remain in effect until the 
jurisdiction submits the required reports. Payments may resume if the required audited 
financial reports are submitted in the same year that the payments were discontinued. 
Additionally, the discontinued funds for any fiscal year in which the local jurisdiction 
failed to file the audited financial report as specified, will revert to the State’s general fund 
for discontinued disparity grants and to the TTF for discontinued highway user revenues. 
Due to the delay in the bill’s penalty provision, any impact on State aid to local 
governments will not occur until fiscal 2027. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 165/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 116 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 747 (Senators Guzzone and Benson) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Association of Counties; cities of 
Baltimore and Salisbury; Maryland Municipal League; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4