START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 153 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 153 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Medical Records - Fees - Attorneys Representing Patients 
 
 
This bill prohibits a health care provider or a representative of the health care provider from 
charging a fee for providing copies of a medical record requested by an attorney who is 
representing the patient if the records will be used for the purpose of filing a claim for or 
appealing a denial of Social Security Disability Income (SSDI) or Social Security benefits. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on State operations or 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that a local health department charges a fee for providing 
copies of medical records, local revenues may decrease. Expenditures are not likely 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to § 4-304 of the Health-General Article, a health care provider 
must respond within a reasonable time after receiving a written request for a copy of or to 
see and copy a medical record. 
 
With specified exceptions, a health care provider may charge a fee for copying and mailing 
requested medical records of up to 76 cents per page, which may be adjusted annually for 
inflation. In addition, a health care provider may charge a preparation fee of up to $22.88 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 153/ Page 2 
for medical record retrieval and preparation and the cost for postage and handling of the 
medical record. 
 
The fee that may be charged for an electronic copy of a medical record includes a maximum 
preparation fee of $22.88, a per-page fee of 75% of the per-page fee charged for a 
nonelectronic copy or a maximum of $80, and the actual cost for postage and handling of 
the electronic copy. 
 
A health care provider may not charge a fee exceeding $20.00 per 100 pages (or portion of 
100 pages) for a copy of a medical record associated with an individual enrolled in 
Medicaid unless a lawfully appointed attorney makes the request. 
 
Chapter 157 of 2021 prohibits a health care provider or a representative of the health care 
provider from charging a fee for providing copies of a medical record (1) requested by the 
patient, the patient’s personal representative, or an employee or other representative of a 
nonprofit legal services entity or other volunteer or nonprofit program and (2) that will be 
used to support a claim or appeal for SSDI or Social Security benefits. 
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business health care provider will be unable to charge a 
fee for providing copies of a medical record that will be used to support a claim or appeal 
for SSDI or Social Security benefits when requested by a patient’s attorney. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 144 (Senators Hettleman and Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Office of the Public Defender; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
Enrolled - April 8, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 8, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2