START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 178 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 178 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Disabled Veteran Registration Plates - Issuance 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to issue a special disabled 
veteran registration plate to an individual who is between 50% and 99%, inclusive, 
service-connected disabled, as designated or classified by the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA). MVA is authorized to adopt regulations to govern the issuance of the special 
disabled veteran registration plates.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although additional special registration plates may be issued under the bill, 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures are not materially affected as 
newly qualifying individuals are not exempt from vehicle registration fees and MVA has a 
supply of plates available. The bill’s fee exemptions for replacement plates likely have no 
material effect on TTF revenues. Reprogramming changes can be handled with existing 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To be eligible to receive the plate, the vehicle for which the plate is to be 
affixed must be a Class A (passenger), Class E (truck with a rated capacity of one ton or 
less), Class M (multipurpose), or Class D (motorcycle) vehicle. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 178/ Page 2 
An applicant must provide satisfactory proof to MVA that the individual is a  
U.S. Armed Forces veteran who is between 50% and 99%, inclusive, service-connected 
disabled as designated or classified by the VA. Additionally, the bill authorizes MVA to 
issue a special disabled veteran registration plate that does not display the international 
symbol of access to a qualified applicant. 
 
Special disabled veteran registration plates issued under the bill may consist of any 
combination of letters, numerals, or both and must state “Disabled Veteran” on the plates. 
 
Issuance of Plate and Transfer Provisions 
 
MVA must charge the annual registration fee and surcharge otherwise required by State 
law for special disabled veteran registration plates issued pursuant to the bill’s 
authorization and may not charge (or retain) any additional fee for the plates. 
 
Transfers (Generally):  If the ownership of a motor vehicle assigned special disabled 
veteran registration plates under the bill is transferred from the qualified disabled veteran 
to an individual who does not qualify for the plates, the transferor must return the plates to 
MVA and the transferee must obtain vehicle title, registration, and registration plates as 
required by law. However, if the transferor and the transferee were joint owners of the 
vehicle before the transfer, MVA may not charge the transferee the fee otherwise required 
for replacement plates. 
 
Transfers Between Spouses:  If the ownership of a motor vehicle assigned special disabled 
veteran registration plates under the bill is transferred from the qualified disabled veteran 
to the disabled veteran’s spouse who does not qualify for the plates, the transferor must 
return the plates to MVA and the transferee must obtain vehicle title, registration, and 
registration plates as required by law. MVA may not charge the transferee the fee otherwise 
required for replacement plates. 
 
Current Law:  The contribution of the U.S. Armed Forces is recognized through several 
provisions within the Maryland Vehicle Law. Specifically, Maryland has exemptions from 
registration fees for veterans with certain disabilities and vehicles owned by national 
veterans’ organizations as well as special registration plates for honorably discharged 
veterans; recipients of individually earned, combat-related U.S. Armed Forces medals; and 
recipients of a U.S. Department of Defense Gold Star indicating status as a surviving 
spouse, parent, or next of kin of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who lost his or her 
life in combat. 
 
Most classes of vehicle are currently registered biennially, although some less common 
classes are registered on an annual basis. Registration fees also include a yearly 
$17.00 surcharge for the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services System. A 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 178/ Page 3 
portion of that surcharge ($2.50) is reserved for the Trauma Physician Services Fund. MVA 
advised for a prior introduction of the bill that, under current practice, if an individual 
presents documentation from the VA showing the individual is 100% disabled, the 
individual is not subject to a registration fee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 250 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 55 (Senators Smith and James) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3