START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 758

Chapter 758

(House Bill 115)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Victims’ Rights – Notification of Release From
Confinement
(Jaycee Webster Victims’ Rights Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring a certain commitment unit to include in a notification given
to a victim, victim’s representative, or witness regarding the release from
confinement of a sentenced defendant or child respondent the ~~name~~ ~~and~~ telephone
number of ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~victim~~ ~~services~~ ~~employee~~ the Maryland Crime Victims Resource
Center; and generally relating to victims’ rights.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–508
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–508.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Commitment unit” means a unit that a court orders to retain custody
of a defendant or a child respondent and that receives a notification request form under §
11–104(g)(1) or (h) of this title.

(3) “Release from confinement” means work release, home detention, or
other administrative or statutorily authorized release of a defendant or child respondent
from a confinement facility.

(4) “Witness” means a person who:

(i) knows of facts relating to a crime of violence or conspiracy or
solicitation to commit a crime of violence; and

(ii) 1. makes a declaration under oath that is received as
evidence for any purpose; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 758 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. has been served with a subpoena issued under the
authority of a court of this or any other state or of the United States.

(b) This section applies to a victim or victim’s representative who has submitted
a notification request form under § 11–104 of this title.

(c) This section applies if a witness requests in writing that a commitment unit
notify the witness in writing of the release from confinement of a defendant or child
respondent.

(d) On receipt of a notification request form under § 11–104(g)(1) or (h) of this
title or a written request from a witness for notification, a commitment unit, if practicable,
shall notify the victim, victim’s representative, or witness of:

(1) receipt of the notification request form;

(2) the date when the defendant or child respondent was placed in the
custody of the commitment unit;

(3) how to change the address to receive notice for the victim, victim’s
representative, witness, or the person to receive notice for the victim; and

(4) how to elect not to receive future notices.

(e) (1) The commitment unit shall notify a victim, victim’s representative, or
witness, in advance if practicable, if any of the following events occur concerning the
defendant or child respondent:

[(1)] (I) an escape;

[(2)] (II) a recapture;

[(3)] (III) a transfer to another commitment unit;

[(4)] (IV) a release from confinement and any conditions attached to the
release; and

[(5)] (V) the death of the defendant or child respondent.

(2) WHEN A SENTENCED DEFENDANT OR CHILD RESPONDENT IS
BEING RELEASED FROM CONFINEMENT, THE COMMITMENT UNIT SHALL INCLUDE IN
THE NOTIFICATION REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION THE
~~NAME~~ ~~AND~~ TELEPHONE NUMBER OF THE ~~LEAD~~ ~~VICTIM~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~EMPLOYEE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
STATE’S ATTORNEY’S OFFICE OF THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE SENTENCED

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 758

DEFENDANT OR CHILD RESPONDENT WAS PROSECUTED MARYLAND CRIME VICTIMS
RESOURCE CENTER.

(f) A commitment unit may not disclose to a defendant or child respondent the
address or telephone number of a witness, victim, victim’s representative, or person who
receives notice for the victim.

(g) An elected public official, public employee, or public unit has the immunity
described in §§ 5–302 and 5–522 of the Courts Article regarding civil liability for damages
arising out of an action relating to this section, unless the official, employee, or unit acts
with gross negligence or in bad faith.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3