START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 131 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 131 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing Development Permit Applications - Local Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each local jurisdiction with at least 150,000 residents to annually report 
to the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) and the Maryland 
Department of Planning (MDP) specified information relating to building or development 
permit applications considered by the local jurisdiction that include a residential housing 
component as part of the development. A local jurisdiction must make the report publicly 
available on its website. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHCD and MDP can implement the bill with existing resources, as discussed 
below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase in some jurisdictions, as 
discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires each local jurisdiction with at least 150,000 residents to 
report to DHCD and MDP, by July 1 each year, the following information for each building 
or development permit application considered by the local jurisdiction during the 
immediately preceding calendar year that includes a residential housing component as part 
of the development: 
 
 
the total number of complete applications received, issued, and rejected, by type; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 131/ Page 2 
 
the net total number of residential units approved; 
 
the mean and median processing times for permit applications and the standard 
deviation from the mean; 
 
the amount of time spent processing applications, including the time spent by 
agencies reviewing applications, by applicants making edits, and any public notice 
or comment time periods; 
 
any type of expedited permit application process that the local jurisdiction employed 
to accelerate residential housing development projects;  
 
the total number of residential housing development projects that benefited from an 
expedited permit application process in the local jurisdiction and which type of 
expedited process was used; and 
 
any other information the jurisdiction considers relevant. 
 
Pursuant to the existing definition under the Land Use Article, “local jurisdiction” means 
a county or municipal corporation and the territory within which its powers may be 
exercised.  
 
A local jurisdiction must make the report required by the bill publicly available on its 
website unless it does not maintain a website, in which case the report must be made 
available through any other reasonable method. An announcement posted to a local 
jurisdiction’s website stating that a person should contact the relevant local department for 
access to the report does not meet this requirement. To the extent practicable, a local 
jurisdiction may submit and transmit the report required under the bill as part of another 
report required to be filed under the Land Use Article. 
  
Current Law:  A local planning commission must file an annual report with the local 
legislative body and the Secretary of Planning by July 1 of each year. Among other 
requirements, as specified, the report must (1) index and locate on a map any changes in 
development patterns, as specified; (2) contain recommendations for improving the 
planning and development process within the local jurisdiction; and (3) state which local 
laws or regulations have been adopted or changed to implement planning visions, as 
specified. In addition, for jurisdictions that issue 50 or more building permits for new 
residential units each year, the annual report must contain certain “measures and 
indicators,” including (1) the amount, share, and net density of growth inside and outside 
priority funding areas; (2) the creation of new lots and the issuance of residential and 
commercial building permits inside and outside priority funding areas; and (3) a 
development capacity analysis, updated every three years and whenever there is a 
significant change in zoning or land use patterns. MDP must report on the measures and 
indicators collected from the local jurisdictions each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 131/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect:  Since the bill does not affirmatively require DHCD or MDP to 
analyze, report, or publish the data submitted by local jurisdictions, this analysis assumes 
the bill can be implemented with existing resources. MDP indicates that conducting 
analysis and research to produce a report from the data and/or make the data available as 
an interactive geographic information system map, would require additional part-time 
staff; however, these tasks are not required under the bill. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Some local jurisdictions that are subject to the bill’s requirements 
may incur programming costs to collect and report certain data under the bill. For example, 
Charles County expects to incur one-time programming costs of $10,000 to create new 
fields/reports in their software, and Anne Arundel County has also indicated a potential 
need for programming changes.  
 
Additional Comments:  Based on information provided by MDP, the following counties 
(including Baltimore City) have at least 150,000 residents within the area of the county in 
which the county exercises planning and zoning authority (excluding any area of a county 
consisting of municipalities that exercise planning and zoning authority):  Anne Arundel, 
Baltimore, Charles, Frederick, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties, and Baltimore City. No municipalities have at least 150,000 residents. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, 
Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3