START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 120 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 120 
(Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry 
Development Corporation - Loans 
 
 
This bill alters eligibility for loans from the Maryland Oyster Shucking House Loan Fund 
(MOSHLF) and the Maryland Watermen’s Microloan Program (MWMP), which are 
administered by the Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry Development 
Corporation (MARBIDCO). The bill also establishes a related reporting requirement for 
MOSHLF loan recipients and repeals the minimum and maximum loan amounts under 
MWMP. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for MARBIDCO increase 
beginning in FY 2025 to the extent that the bill’s expanded eligibility increases interest in 
MOSHLF, as discussed below. Altering MWMP eligibility and potential loan amounts 
does not affect overall State finances; however, program funds are likely reallocated to 
different recipients, and potentially at different amounts, beginning in FY 2025. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under MOSHLF, to finance the costs of eligible seafood processing 
projects, MARBIDCO may provide a loan of up to $10,000 for each “seasonal full-time 
job” that is projected to be created or retained, still subject to the existing overall limit of 
$250,000 per project. “Seasonal full-time job” means a position for which an individual is 
required to work a minimum of 420 hours during 12 weeks of a three-month period. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 120/ Page 2 
Beginning one year after the receipt of a loan from MOSHLF, a loan recipient must report 
each year, for three consecutive years, to MARBIDCO to certify the number of full-time 
jobs and seasonal full-time jobs that were created or retained by the recipient during the 
previous 12-month period. 
 
Under MWMP, the definitions of “beginner waterman” and “generational waterman” are 
altered so that such an individual (1) must be a resident of the State but (2) may hold a 
commercial license to catch finfish, crabs, clams, and oysters issued by the Potomac River 
Fisheries Commission (PRFC) instead of just a tidal fish license issued by the Department 
of Natural Resources (DNR). 
 
Current Law:  MARBIDCO is a quasi-public economic development organization 
chartered by the State; MARBIDCO employees are not State employees. 
 
Maryland Oyster Shucking House Loan Fund 
 
Chapters 30 and 574 of 2022 required MARBIDCO to provide loans of up to $250,000 to 
licensed seafood dealers to finance costs of eligible seafood processing projects that 
support the goal of increasing the amount of oyster shells retained in the State and returned 
to the Chesapeake Bay (with specified loan forgiveness available that is based on the value 
of bushels of oyster shells returned to DNR at no cost or $25 per bushel of spat-on-shell 
planted on a public fishery bottom).  
 
Subject to other specified requirements, loan amounts range from $25,000 to $250,000, 
with up to $25,000 provided for each full-time job that is projected to be created or retained. 
Loan proceeds can be used to renovate or construct a new oyster processing facility or 
expand an existing facility, as well as to purchase oyster processing equipment. 
 
The Acts also required the Governor to include an appropriation of $1.0 million in the 
annual budget bill for fiscal 2024 to MARBIDCO to provide the loans and administer and 
operate the loan program. Also, although the Acts did not establish a name for the loan 
program, it is administratively known as MOSHLF. 
 
Maryland Watermen’s Microloan Program 
 
Chapter 384 of 2022 established MWMP in MARBIDCO. The purpose of MWMP is to 
provide loans to qualified commercial fishermen to continue commercial operations in the 
State, including for purchasing boats, mechanical equipment, fishing gear, fishing quota, 
and any other item used in commercial seafood harvesting. 
 
For fiscal 2024 through 2026, the Governor must include in the annual State budget bill an 
appropriation of $500,000 to the program; the appropriation must be distributed to a special 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 120/ Page 3 
fund that may only be used to make loans and pay the necessary costs to administer and 
operate the program. The Act did not create a new special fund or specify an existing 
special fund; in practice, the fiscal 2024 and 2025 appropriations of $500,000 have been 
part of MARBIDCO’s overall general fund appropriation. 
 
Through June 30, 2025, only “generational watermen” are eligible to receive an MWMP 
loan. “Generational watermen” are individuals with a tidal fish license issued by DNR that 
can demonstrate through tax returns and other supporting documents that at least 50% of 
their annual income is derived from commercial seafood harvesting. Beginning 
July 1, 2025, “beginner watermen” and seafood processing businesses are also eligible for 
loans. “Beginner watermen” are individuals with a tidal fish license who have between 
2 and 10 years of experience in commercial seafood harvesting. 
 
MARBIDCO must determine the eligibility of an applicant, the loan amount to be given to 
a borrower, the terms and conditions for a loan contract, and the amount of debt forgiveness 
that may be provided for loan repayment performance. A loan must be between $7,000 and 
$15,000, and a borrower may not have more than one outstanding loan from the program 
during any time period. MARBIDCO has structured the loans so that the final year of the 
four-year loan term is forgiven if all other payments are made. 
 
Tidal Fish License 
 
In general, DNR issues a single commercial fishing license known as the tidal fish license. 
A tidal fish license authorizes the holder to engage in each authorization indicated on the 
license. DNR sets targets for the number of each tidal fish authorizations to be issued 
annually and maintains a waiting list of qualified applicants.  
 
Potomac River Fisheries Commission 
 
PRFC, comprising representatives of Maryland and Virginia, was established by the 
Potomac River Compact of 1958 and regulates fisheries (including recreational and 
commercial licensing) in the mainstem tidal Potomac River, from Washington, DC, to the 
Chesapeake Bay. The commission’s regulations are jointly enforced by DNR’s Natural 
Resources Police and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission Marine Police. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MARBIDCO advises that the full-time job eligibility requirement 
under current law limits interest in MOSHLF; despite receiving a $1.0 million general fund 
appropriation in fiscal 2024 as required under Chapters 30 and 574, MARBIDCO has 
received few applications and has approved no loans. The bill does not alter the amount of 
general funds that must be provided to MARBIDCO for MOSHLF under current law, and 
subsequent lending activity under the program is nonbudgeted. Accordingly, nonbudgeted 
expenditures (and subsequent revenues, as loans are only partially forgivable) for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 120/ Page 4 
MARBIDCO increase beginning in fiscal 2025 to the extent that the bill’s expanded 
eligibility increases interest in the program. 
 
MARBIDCO advises that MWMP is nearly fully subscribed. As such, the bill generally 
reallocates program expenditures between eligible recipients but does not affect the overall 
amount of funding provided under the program. In practice, MARBIDCO currently limits 
eligibility for its programs to State residents, so most likely, some watermen licensed solely 
by PRFC will receive loans that would have otherwise been available to watermen licensed 
solely by DNR. Alternatively, some individuals may receive larger or smaller loans than 
under current law. In any case, the bill does not alter the amount of general funds that must 
be provided to MARBIDCO for MWMP under current law, and subsequent lending 
activity under the program is nonbudgeted. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Eligible small businesses benefit from increased eligibility for 
loans under MOSHLF beginning in fiscal 2025. MWMP funding is likely reallocated 
beginning in fiscal 2025 due to altered program eligibility and loan amounts. Most likely, 
some small watermen licensed solely by PRFC will receive loans that would have 
otherwise been available to watermen licensed solely by DNR, and some small watermen 
may receive larger or smaller loans than under current law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 32 (Senators Bailey and Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Agricultural and Resource-Based Industry 
Development Corporation; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Food Center Authority; Potomac 
River Fisheries Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 120/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 15, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 17, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5