START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 144 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 144 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Employee Relations Board) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Public Employee Relations Act – Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters provisions of the Public Employee Relations Act (PERA) by 
defining the term “interested employee organization” as an employee organization already 
representing employees in a bargaining unit or a petitioner who has met the showing of 
interest requirement under current law. The bill alters the timing of exclusive representative 
access to new employees under PERA. Additionally, the bill clarifies responsibilities of 
specified deputy directors and the process for investigations under PERA. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The changes are generally procedural in nature and do not directly 
affect governmental finances, although the bill may have an operational impact on agencies 
as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Public Employee Relations Board (PERB) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Current law requires PERB to appoint three deputy 
directors (one for Executive Branch labor relations, one for public school labor relations, 
and one for public higher education labor relations). The bill clarifies that the deputy 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 144/ Page 2 
directors that PERB must appoint for Executive Branch labor relations, public school labor 
relations, and public higher education labor relations are each primarily responsible for 
their respective areas. 
 
Current law generally requires a public employer to provide the exclusive representative at 
least 10 days’ notice of the start date of a new employee in its bargaining unit, and the 
notice must be provided electronically to the president or exclusive representative designee 
within 5 days of the employee’s first check-in. The bill specifies that the electronic notice 
must be within 5 days of the start of any check-in event that the employer obligates the 
employee to attend. 
 
Current law authorizes PERB to investigate and take appropriate action in response to 
complaints of unfair labor practices, and the bill changes this to charges of unfair labor 
practices and makes other technical changes. 
 
Current law requires the appropriate deputy director to provide relevant information 
gathered in the investigation of a charge or complaint of unfair labor practices to PERB 
and the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). Under the bill, the appropriate deputy 
director must only provide relevant information gathered in the investigation of a charge 
of unfair labor practices to PERB. 
 
Background:  Chapter 114 of 2023, PERA, established PERB to oversee collective 
bargaining for all public employees. Prior to PERA, the collective bargaining rights of 
State employees, employees of public institutions of higher education, employees of 
community colleges, or public school employees, including teachers, were administered 
by one of three labor relations boards, depending on the nature of the employees’ employer:  
the State Labor Relations Board (SLRB); the State Higher Education Labor Relations 
Board (SHELRB); and the Public School Labor Relations Board (PSLRB). PERA 
consolidated different collective bargaining laws that apply to different employees into 
one set of rules and procedures for public employees. The Act also repealed SLRB, 
SHELRB, and PSLRB, and instead established PERB to oversee collective bargaining for 
all the previously mentioned public employees. 
 
In addition to consolidating three labor boards into one, the Act consolidated different 
collective bargaining laws into one law, including provisions regarding employee access, 
unfair labor practices, management and employee rights, prohibited employer and 
employee actions, designation of bargaining units, elections, and certification of exclusive 
representatives. 
 
State Expenditures:  PERB advises that broadening the scope of deputy directors to be 
“primarily responsible” for their labor relations cases provides flexibility when 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 144/ Page 3 
investigating cases and that defining “interested employee organization” clarifies with 
whom PERB should be in contact during an election process. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that, while there is no fiscal effect, 
changing the notice requirement to the start of any check-in event the employer obligates 
the employee to attend may place a human resources burden on some agencies. 
 
OAH notes that it needs to train administrative law judges on substantive aspects of the 
bill, which it can do with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 232 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Employee Relations Board) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Employee Relations Board; Department of Budget and 
Management; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 144/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Public Employee Relations Act – Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0144 
 
PREPARED BY:  Erica L. Snipes 
Acting Executive Director, PERB 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 4