START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 972

Chapter 972

(House Bill 154)

AN ACT concerning

~~Homeowners’~~ ~~Property~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Credit~~ ~~–~~ ~~Application~~ ~~Filing~~ ~~Deadline~~ ~~–~~ ~~Extension~~ ~~for~~
~~Homeowner~~ ~~Protection~~ ~~Program~~ ~~Enrollees~~
Homeowners’ and Homestead Property Tax Credits – Application Filing Deadline
– Extension

FOR the purpose of authorizing the State Department of Assessments and Taxation to
accept an application for the homeowners’ property tax credit submitted by a certain
homeowner within a certain period of time if the homeowner is enrolled in the
Homeowner Protection Program; providing for the calculation of the homestead
property tax credit for certain homeowners under certain circumstances; and
generally relating to the homeowners’ and homestead property tax ~~credit~~ credits.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–104(u)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–105(d)(8)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

9–104.

(u) (1) Under the conditions set forth in this subsection, the Department may
accept an application from a homeowner within:

(i) 1 year after April 15 of the taxable year for which the property
tax credit under this section is sought, if the homeowner:

1. is applying for the first time; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 972 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. has filed an application on or before October 1 in each of
the 3 taxable years immediately preceding the taxable year for which the credit is sought;
or

(ii) 3 years after April 15 of the taxable year for which a credit is
sought, if the homeowner IS:

1. A. [is] at least 70 years old as of the taxable year for
which a credit is sought; [and] OR

B. ENROLLED IN THE HOMEOWNER PROTECTION
PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 8, PART VII OF THIS ARTICLE;
AND

2. was eligible for the credit under this section for the taxable
year for which the credit is sought.

(2) A homeowner may apply to the Department for a property tax credit
under this section by filing an application on the form that the Department provides.

(3) The homeowner shall state under oath that the facts in the application
are true.

(4) To substantiate the application, the Department may require the
homeowner to provide a copy of an income tax return, or other evidence detailing gross
income or net worth.

(5) On certification by the Department, the Comptroller shall pay to the
homeowner the property tax credit due under this section.

9–105.

(d) (8) (I) THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE INTERPRETED BROADLY TO
APPLY TO ANY HOMEOWNER WHO:

1. IS AT LEAST 70 YEARS OF AGE;

2. WAS ELIGIBLE FOR THE CREDIT IN THE PRIOR
TAXABLE YEAR BUT FAILED TO FILE AN APPLICATION FOR THE CREDIT; AND

3. APPLIES FOR A CREDIT FOR THE CURRENT TAXABLE
YEAR.

(II) FOR HOMEOWNERS THAT MEET THE CRITERIA UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CALCULATE THE

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 972

CURRENT YEAR’S TAXABLE ASSESSMENT AS IF THE CREDIT HAD BEEN GRANTED FOR
THE PRIOR TAXABLE YEAR.

(III) A HOMEOWNER WHO MEETS THE CRITERIA UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IS NOT DUE A REIMBURSEMENT OF
PROPERTY TAXES PAID IN PRIOR TAXABLE YEARS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision in § 9–105 of the Tax – Property Article
as enacted under Section 1 of this Act, this Section shall be interpreted broadly to apply to
any homeowner, as defined under § 9–105 of the Tax – Property Article, who:

(1) is at least 70 years of age;

(2) was eligible for the homestead credit in the second prior taxable year but
failed to file an application for the credit; and

(3) on or before May 31, 2025, applies for a credit for the current taxable
year.

(b) For homeowners that meet the criteria under subsection (a) of this section, the
State Department of Assessments and Taxation shall calculate the current year’s taxable
assessment as if the credit had been granted for the two prior taxable years.

(c) A homeowner who meets the criteria of this Section is not due a reimbursement
of property taxes paid in prior taxable years.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall be
applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall be
applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2022.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
June 1, 2024,. ~~and~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~applicable~~ ~~to~~ ~~all~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~years~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~after~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2024.~~
Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end
of June 30, 2025, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3