START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 109 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 109 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Submerged Aquatic Vegetation - Alteration or Removal 
Requirements 
 
   
This departmental bill modifies requirements related to the removal of submerged aquatic 
vegetation (SAV).   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) can handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. The bill does not otherwise materially 
affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations.      
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Submerged Aquatic Vegetation Removal 
 
Current Law:  Generally, before a person may harvest, cut, or otherwise remove or 
eradicate SAV from any land under the tidal waters of the State below the mean high tide, 
the person must submit to DNR for approval a description of (1) why the removal of SAV 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 109/ Page 2 
is necessary; (2) the proposed method of removal; (3) a plan showing the site at which the 
activity is proposed; and (4) the extent of SAV to be removed. A person may only harvest, 
cut, or otherwise remove or eradicate SAV in accordance with a plan approved by DNR. 
 
There are several exemptions to the requirement to seek DNR approval for SAV removal:  
(1) for a person to create access from property to a navigable channel; (2) for a person who 
owns a marina to create access for boat slips in a marina to navigable channels servicing 
the marina; and (3) for a utility or telecommunications company in order to maintain utility 
crossings in the water of the State. In each case, the entity may harvest, cut, or otherwise 
remove or eradicate SAV in a strip up to 60 feet wide. Even so, exempt entities are 
encouraged to contact DNR for information on best harvesting methods and to use those 
methods. 
 
Generally, a person may not use a chemical to harvest, cut, or otherwise remove or 
eradicate SAV. 
 
The Bill:  The plan submission and approval requirement for SAV removal is expanded to 
also include trimming, along with various conforming changes. 
 
The exemptions for property and marina access are altered to encompass the tidal waters 
of the State (incorporating the Atlantic Coastal Bays) and allow only trimming or cutting 
of SAV, as opposed to harvesting, cutting, or otherwise removing or eradicating SAV. The 
utility exemption adds trimming, but still allows for harvesting, cutting, or otherwise 
removing. The maximum allowable width of the access strip is reduced to 20 feet in all 
cases except utility emergency work. Finally, exempt entities must contact DNR for 
information on best harvesting methods, must use those methods, and must provide DNR 
with the SAV location and removal or alteration date. 
 
The general prohibition against using chemicals to remove or eradicate SAV is expanded 
to include trimming. 
 
Approvals Generally Required for Projects in Wetlands 
 
Current Law:  Wetlands in the State are protected, and the Wetlands and Waterways 
Program within the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) administers a 
statewide program for the management, conservation, and protection of Maryland’s tidal 
wetlands and nontidal wetlands and waterways. Generally, a person must obtain a permit 
or license before working in wetlands in the State. Regulations define the criteria for 
evaluating tidal wetlands licenses and permits, as well as the property information that 
permit and license applicants must provide as part of the application process. The Board of 
Public Works (BPW) has the authority to determine whether to issue a license to dredge, 
fill, or alter State wetlands; MDE must assist BPW in making such a determination and, in 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 109/ Page 3 
some cases, BPW delegates the authority to issue such a license to MDE. Authorizations 
granted to work in privately owned wetlands are issued by MDE. 
 
Background:  Because it responds quickly to improvements in water quality, SAV is an 
important measure of the health of the Chesapeake Bay and an indicator in setting and 
evaluating progress for Maryland’s restoration goals and water clarity attainment. DNR 
advises that, currently, SAV coverage is 47% of the 2025 target established in regulation 
and only 33% of historical levels.    
 
DNR advises that the bill strengthens and clarifies what can be done within the scope of 
the SAV removal statute and that requiring, rather than encouraging, DNR notification 
allows the department to have a better grasp of SAV removal in the State. Also, 
incorporation of the term “trim” is intended to further separate the removal of SAV (with 
minimal or no disturbance to the river bottom) from removal of SAV during activities such 
as dredging, filling, and shoreline alterations, which are regulated by MDE’s Wetlands and 
Waterways Program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 281 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Anne Arundel, Dorchester, Kent, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Worcester 
counties; City of Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 109/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Natural Resources - Submerged Aquatic Vegetation - Alteration or 
Removal Requirements 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 109 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Dylan Behler 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The Department does not believe that this will have an economic impact on small 
businesses. 

END OF PAGE 4