START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 186 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 186 
(Delegate Hartman) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Eastern Shore Code Counties - Maximum Hotel Rental Tax Rate - Alteration 
 
 
This bill authorizes code counties on the Eastern Shore to set a hotel rental tax rate up to 
6%. Under current law, the hotel rental tax rate for these counties is capped at 5%. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  County revenues increase by approximately $501,000 annually for the 
four affected counties on the Eastern Shore and municipal revenues increase by 
approximately $5.4 million annually. This estimate assumes that the maximum authorized 
hotel rental tax rate is imposed in each jurisdiction. Expenditures are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There are six counties that operate under code home rule:  Allegany, 
Caroline, Charles, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Worcester. Four of these jurisdictions are 
located on the Eastern Shore. As shown in Exhibit 1, all four code home rule counties on 
the Eastern Shore have a hotel rental tax rate of 5% for fiscal 2024. Code counties on the 
Eastern Shore are required to collect and distribute the revenues attributable to a hotel 
located in a municipality to the municipal government. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 186/ Page 2 
Collection of Hotel Rental Taxes in Maryland 
 
Hotel rental taxes are imposed in all counties in Maryland. In several jurisdictions, 
revenues collected from the hotel rental tax are shared with municipalities and community 
organizations. A few municipalities are also authorized to impose a hotel rental tax or to 
collect the county tax within their jurisdiction. In fiscal 2024, county governments will 
collect $123.8 million in revenue from the hotel rental tax. 
 
Additional information on local hotel rental tax rates and revenues can be found in the 
County Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Increasing the maximum hotel rental tax rate that certain county 
governments on the Eastern Shore can impose will result in additional county and 
municipal revenues. 
 
If the four county governments on the Eastern Shore (with the code home rule form of 
government) increase their hotel rental tax rates to 6%, county revenues will increase by 
approximately $501,000 each year, as shown in Exhibit 1. This estimate is based on 
estimated revenue collections as reported in each county’s fiscal 2024 budget. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Hotel Rental Tax Rates and County Revenues 
 
County 
Current 
Tax Rate 
FY 2024 
Revenue 
New 
Tax Rate 
Additional 
Revenue 
Caroline 
5.0% 
$0 
6.0% 
$0 
Kent 
5.0% 
120,000 
6.0% 
24,000 
Queen Anne’s 
5.0% 
885,000 
6.0% 
177,000 
Worcester 
5.0% 
1,500,000 
6.0% 
300,000 
Total 
 
$2,505,000 
 
$501,000 
 
Source:  County Budgets; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Along with the increase in county revenues, municipalities in the affected jurisdictions will 
also realize an increase in local revenues from the hotel rental tax. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 186/ Page 3 
Caroline County is projected to collect approximately $44,000 in hotel rental tax revenues 
for its municipalities in fiscal 2024. Assuming the maximum tax rate is imposed, municipal 
revenues could increase by approximately $8,800 annually. 
 
Rock Hall in Kent County reported hotel rental tax revenues totaling $50,167 in 
fiscal 2021. Assuming the maximum tax rate is imposed, municipal revenues could 
increase by approximately $10,000 annually. 
 
Worcester County collected $27.1 million in hotel rental tax revenues for its municipalities 
in fiscal 2023. Of this amount, $26.9 million was collected within Ocean City. Assuming 
the maximum tax rate is imposed, municipal revenues could increase by approximately 
$5.4 million annually as shown in Exhibit 2. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Potential Increase in Municipal Revenues 
Worcester County 
 
 
Municipality 
FY 2023 
Actual Revenue 
 
Potential Increase 
Berlin 
$89,674 
$17,935 
Ocean City 
26,875,539 
5,375,108 
Pocomoke City 
154,089 
30,818 
Snow Hill 
10,338 
2,068 
Total 
$27,129,640 
$5,425,928 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Worcester County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 612 and HB 931 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 95 (Senator Carozza) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline, Kent, Queen Anne’s, and Worcester counties; 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 186/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4