START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 102 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 102 
(Delegate Miller) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Motorcycles - Passenger Restrictions 
 
 
This bill prohibits a motorcycle passenger from riding on a seat at the rear of the operator 
if the passenger cannot position their feet firmly on the footrests while seated. This 
prohibition does not apply if a motorcycle passenger cannot position their feet as required 
due to a permanent physical disability. A violation is a misdemeanor and is subject to a 
maximum fine of $500.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues from fines collected in 
the District Court. Enforcement of the bill’s restrictions, as well as any increase in the 
District Court’s caseload, can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The operator of a motorcycle may not carry a passenger, and a passenger 
may not ride on a motorcycle, unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than 
one person. If the motorcycle is so designed, a passenger may ride on the permanent and 
regular seat (if the seat is designed for two persons), or on another seat firmly attached to 
the rear or side of the operator. A passenger must wear specified protective headgear and 
sit astride, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. Additionally, an 
operator may not carry a passenger, and a passenger may not ride in, a position that 
interferes with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the operator’s view. Any 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 102/ Page 2 
motorcycle that does not have a sidecar or an enclosed cab but carries a passenger must 
have passenger footrests.  
 
A violation of any of the above provisions is a misdemeanor with a maximum fine of $500, 
for which the District Court has established a prepayment penalty of $80 (except for a 
failure to wear protective headgear, which carries a $110 prepayment penalty). For all but 
the passenger footrest and protective headgear requirements, the prepayment penalty 
increases to $120 if the violation contributes to an accident. Likewise, for all violations 
(except the passenger footrest and headgear requirements), the Motor Vehicle 
Administration must assess one point against the driver’s license of any motorcycle driver 
or passenger or three points if the violation contributes to an accident.  
  
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1207 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 730 (Senator Carter) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 14, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2