START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 159 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 159 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Common Ownership Communities - Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment 
(Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill establishes standards relating to the installation and use of electric vehicle 
recharging equipment in cooperative housing corporations. The bill also (1) extends 
existing procedures related to electric vehicle recharging equipment in condominiums and 
homeowners associations (HOAs) to include electric bicycles and (2) requires the 
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to include additional 
information on its website related to common ownership communities (COC). 
Furthermore, the bill alters standards and procedures for insurance coverage related to the 
installation and use of electric vehicle recharging equipment in condominiums and HOAs. 
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DHCD increase by $41,700 in FY 2025; 
future years reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
41,700 
46,000 
48,100 
50,300 
52,500 
Net Effect 
($41,700) 
($46,000) 
($48,100) 
($50,300) 
($52,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill defines “electric vehicle recharging equipment” as 
property in the State that is used for recharging vehicles propelled by electricity, including 
motor vehicles and electric bicycles. The bill alters an existing definition applicable to  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 159/ Page 2 
Titles 11 (Maryland Condominium Act) and 11B (Maryland Homeowners Association 
Act) of the Real Property Article related to electric vehicle recharging equipment in 
condominiums and HOAs to conform to this definition. 
 
The general requirements for members of cooperatives and their governing body under the 
bill are shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Installation of Electric Vehicle Recharging Equipment by Members in  
Cooperative Housing Corporations 
 
Co-op 
Member 
Co-op 
Board 
Bylaws, covenants, or other restrictions against recharging equipment are 
void 
Yes 
Must use process for approval of architectural modifications  
Yes 
Must provide approval or denial in writing 
Yes 
Must approve installation in a member’s designated parking space if 
installation does not unreasonably impede normal use of the area and is 
reasonably possible and if the member agrees, in writing, to comply with 
specified restrictions and standards 
 
Yes 
May grant a license for up to three years, renewable at the discretion of 
the governing body, on any common element necessary for installation 
of equipment or supply of electricity 
 
Yes 
Request is deemed approved after 60 days unless reasonably delayed for 
additional information 
Yes 
Yes 
Must agree, in writing, to comply with relevant building codes and with 
safety standards to maintain the safety of all members with possessory 
interest in common, engage a licensed contractor, and pay for separately 
metered electricity usage 
Yes 
 
Must obtain necessary permits 
Yes 
 
Must pay costs associated with installation, maintenance, damage, repair, 
replacement, removal, and electricity  
Yes 
Must, prior to installation, provide certificate of insurance naming the 
cooperative as an additional insured or reimburse cooperative for cost 
of an increased insurance premium attributable to the equipment 
Yes 
 
 
Co-op:  Cooperative Housing Corporation 
 
Note:  “Board” refers to the governing body of a Cooperative Housing Corporation. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 159/ Page 3 
As referenced above, statute includes similar standards relating to the installation and use 
of electric vehicle recharging equipment in condominiums and HOAs. Under current law, 
a unit/lot owner must provide a certificate of insurance naming the condominium 
association/HOA as an additional insured or reimburse the association for the cost of an 
increased insurance premium attributable to the electric vehicle recharging equipment. The 
bill requires a unit/lot owner to provide the certificate of insurance before the installation 
of the equipment (consistent with the bill’s requirement as shown above for cooperative 
members). 
 
Furthermore, the bill requires, in condominiums, cooperative housing corporations, and 
HOAs, for insurance coverage of the electric vehicle recharging equipment to be 
maintained for as long as the equipment and all appurtenances to the equipment are 
installed. 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development – Website 
 
Under current law, DHCD is required to maintain a website that provides specified 
information on rights and responsibilities for individuals living in a COC. The bill also 
expands the information that DHCD must include on its website by requiring the following:  
 
 
a summary of the requirements for the governing body of a COC and for an 
individual seeking to install electric vehicle recharging equipment in a COC; 
 
information on contractors (including specific information on contractors certified 
through labor-management training programs) and insurers for the installation of 
electric vehicle recharging equipment in a COC; 
 
a point of contact in DHCD to assist individuals with questions relating to electric 
vehicle recharging equipment in COCs; and 
 
information on resources available to individuals living in COCs to aid in dispute 
resolution between the individual and the COC. 
 
For more information on COCs, the common term for cooperative housing corporations, 
HOAs, and condominiums, see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $41,686 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part‐time development officer within DHCD to serve as the point of contact for 
inquiries, update the website, and provide information and resources to aid in dispute 
resolution. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 159/ Page 4 
Position  
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$34,834 
Operating Expenses 
   6,852 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$41,686 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 465 (Senator Kelly) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Energy Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 159/ Page 5 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 159/ Page 6 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6