START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 197 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 197 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Unemployment Insurance - Work Search Requirement - Exemption for Federal 
Civilian Employees During a Federal Government Shutdown 
 
   
This departmental bill authorizes the Secretary of Labor to exempt a federal civilian 
employee who has been furloughed from the requirement to be actively seeking work for 
unemployment insurance (UI) benefits eligibility if, during the furlough, the employee 
remains able to work, available for work, and work-attached. For purposes of the bill, a 
federal civilian employee is furloughed if, during a full or partial federal government 
shutdown caused by a lapse in federal appropriations, the employee is temporarily barred 
from working and placed in a temporary nonpay status. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) can handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. The bill does not materially affect the 
Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF), as discussed below.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations.   
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 197/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  UI provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of up to $430 per 
week to eligible unemployed individuals. For additional general information about the 
State UI program, see the Appendix – Unemployment Insurance.    
 
Eligibility for Unemployment Insurance 
 
Generally, to be eligible for UI benefits, an individual must be able to work, available for 
work, and actively seeking work. There are several possible exemptions to these general 
requirements under § 8-904 of the Labor and Employment Article. For example, when an 
employer closes for inventory, vacation, or another purpose that will cause unemployment 
for a definite period of up to 10 weeks, the Secretary of Labor may exempt affected 
employees from the requirement to actively seek work during that period if the Secretary 
finds that circumstances and labor market conditions justify the exemption.  
 
As described in a November 2021 Unemployment Insurance Program Letter, during a 
federal government shutdown, generally, furloughed workers are eligible to receive 
UI benefits, while those working without pay are not eligible.  
 
Background:  MDL advises that furloughed federal civilian employees who are barred 
from working during a full or partial federal government shutdown due to a lapse in 
appropriations and who are placed in a nonpay status may be eligible for UI benefits. 
However, while on furlough, an individual remains a federal government employee to 
whom Executive Branchwide standards of ethical conduct and rules regarding outside 
employment continue to apply.  
 
The current exemptions in § 8-904 of the Labor and Employment Article can apply to 
furloughed federal civilian employees who remain work-attached, but the employees do 
not have knowledge at the beginning of a shutdown regarding the exact duration of 
temporary unemployment. Expressly exempting furloughed federal civilian employees 
from the active work search requirement eases the administrative burden on the Division 
of Unemployment Insurance during federal shutdowns and allows the division to more 
readily provide UI benefits to these employees.  
 
Under a 2019 federal law, both furloughed federal employees and those working without 
pay during a federal government shutdown must be paid back wages when the shutdown 
ends.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Furloughed federal employees are eligible to receive State UI benefits 
under current law, provided that they are able to work, available for work, and actively 
seeking work. The bill expressly allows the Secretary of Labor to exempt a federal civilian 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 197/ Page 3 
employee who has been furloughed during a federal government shutdown from the 
requirement to be actively seeking work if, during the furlough, the employee remains able 
to work, available for work, and work-attached. This facilitates the ability of MDL to 
provide UI benefits to such workers.  
 
There is no material effect on UITF. When a furloughed federal employee receives backpay 
after a shutdown ends, the employee must reimburse UITF for the benefits received during 
the shutdown. At most, there may be a slight increase in UITF expenditures and revenues 
during and immediately following federal government shutdown, which may occur across 
one or two fiscal years, with no net effect on the trust fund balance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 234 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Labor) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 197/ Page 4 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. State 
UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly; however, Chapter 39 of 2021 
allowed employers with fewer than 50 employees to defer 2021 State UI tax payments or 
reimbursements until January 31, 2022, and authorized the Secretary of Labor to offer a 
similar deferment in 2022. The Act, in conjunction with a 2020 executive order, also 
prevented UI claims made during the COVID-19 pandemic from increasing an employer’s 
taxes, although employers still paid broadly higher rates under Table F in 2021 and Table C 
in 2022 and 2023. With the UITF balance restored, the State is in Table A again in 2024.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 197/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from… 
Annual Tax Per Employee  
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
N/A 
$1,074.6 
N/A 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
967.2 
$1,074.6 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
859.7 
967.2 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
752.2 
859.7 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
644.8 
752.2 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
644.8 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2022 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with 
nonzero (.0001 to .0027) benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; 
compensation less than that amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C was in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. A preexisting State law requiring a federal solvency goal to be met prior 
to moving to a tax table with lower rates again applies beginning in 2024. The federal solvency goal, which is designed 
to ensure the State’s ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately $1.7 billion and 
varies with the total wages paid in the State and benefits paid during recessions. 
 
As of January 1, 2024, the trust fund balance was $1.9 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the first four 
of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit 
year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most recently 
completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 
 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 197/ Page 6 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MDL-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 
Broadly, the new laws (1) required Table C to apply in 2022 and 2023; (2) made 
administrative changes to assist employers in paying their taxes, specifically allowing them 
to defer payments under certain circumstances; (3) exempted certain UI benefit payments 
from being subject to the State income tax; (4) temporarily modified benefit calculations 
to assist claimants working on a part-time basis; (5) made system administrative changes 
that must be implemented by MDL; and (6) enhanced the State’s work sharing program, 
which allows an employee to continue working at reduced hours and obtain UI benefits 
under certain circumstances. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 197/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Unemployment Insurance – Work Search Requirements – 
Exemptions for Federal Civilian Employees During a Federal 
Government Shutdown 
 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0197 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Department of Labor 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7