START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 123 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 123 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Division of Parole and Probation - Criteria for Earned Compliance Credit - 
Exception for Supervision Fees 
 
 
This departmental bill alters the definition of “earned compliance credit” to exclude 
specified monthly supervision fees in order to allow an individual under the supervision of 
the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP) to accrue earned compliance credit to reduce 
the period of active supervision of the individual without the individual being current on 
the payment of the supervision fee. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  By shortening the supervisory period for affected individuals, the bill likely 
reduces the caseload for DPP and the amount of outstanding supervision fees that would 
otherwise be transferred by DPP to the Central Collection Unit (CCU) within the 
Department of Budget and Management. While the bill could result in a decrease in general 
fund revenues from supervision fees that would otherwise be collected, any such decrease 
is speculative, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 123/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Earned Compliance Credit:  Chapters 564 and 565 of 2012 require DPSCS to (1) establish 
a program of earned compliance credits to create a reduction in the period of active 
supervision for a “supervised individual” and (2) develop policies and procedures for 
implementation. 
 
With certain exceptions, a “supervised individual” means an individual placed on probation 
by a court or one who is serving a period of parole or mandatory release supervision after 
release from a correctional facility. “Supervised individual” does not include (1) a person 
incarcerated, on probation, or convicted in the State for a crime of violence; (2) a person 
incarcerated, on probation, or convicted in the State for a crime under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of 
the Criminal Law Article (sexual crimes); (3) a person incarcerated, on probation, or 
convicted in the State for a violation of § 2-503 (homicide by motor vehicle or vessel while 
under the influence of alcohol or alcohol per se), § 5-612 (controlled dangerous substances 
(CDS) – volume dealer), § 5-613 (CDS – drug kingpin), § 5-614 (CDS – importer), 
§ 5-627 (CDS near school), or § 5-628 (CDS – use of minor) of the Criminal Law Article; 
(4) a person registered or eligible for registration under Title 11, Subtitle 7 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article (sex offender registration); (5) a person who was convicted in any other 
jurisdiction of a crime and the person’s supervision was transferred to this State; or (6) a 
person who was convicted in this State of a crime and the person’s supervision was 
transferred to another state. Chapter 515 of 2016, also known as the Justice Reinvestment 
Act, requires DPP to place specified individuals on probation, parole, or mandatory 
supervision on abatement when a combination of time served on probation, parole, or 
mandatory supervision and earned compliance credits satisfy the specified individual’s 
active term of supervision. 
 
An “earned compliance credit” is a 20-day reduction from the period of active supervision 
of the supervised individual for every month that a supervised individual meets specified 
conditions. 
 
DPP must develop an automated application for the tracking and awarding of earned 
compliance credits. Further, a supervised individual who is placed on abatement is not 
required to regularly report to a parole or probation agent or pay a supervision fee. 
Twenty-five percent of the savings realized by DPSCS as a result of the application of 
earned compliance credits must revert to the department, and any remaining savings must 
be allocated to the Performance Incentive Grant Fund, as specified. 
 
Supervision Fees:  Unless a supervisee is exempted by the court or the Maryland Parole 
Commission (MPC), the court or MPC must assess a monthly fee of $50 as a condition of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 123/ Page 3 
supervision for each supervisee to be paid to DPP. The fee is in addition to court costs and 
fines. DPP must pay all supervision fees collected into the general fund. The court or MPC 
may exempt a supervisee wholly or partly from the fee if:   
 
 
the supervisee has diligently attempted but has been unable to obtain employment 
that provides sufficient income for the supervisee to pay the fee; 
 
the supervisee is a student in a school, college, or university or is enrolled in a course 
of vocational or technical training designed to prepare the supervisee for gainful 
employment and the institution in which the supervisee is enrolled supplies 
certification of student status to the court or MPC, as applicable; 
 
the supervisee has a disability that limits possible employment, as determined by a 
physical or psychological examination that the court or MPC (as applicable) accepts 
or orders; 
 
the supervisee is responsible for the support of dependents and the payment of the 
fee constitutes an undue hardship on the supervisee; or 
 
other extenuating circumstances exist. 
 
If a supervisee does not comply with the fee requirement, DPP must notify the court or 
MPC (as applicable). The court may revoke probation and MPC may revoke parole or 
mandatory supervision for failure to make the required payment. 
 
Background:  In April 2023, the U. S, Department of Justice issued a letter to state courts 
and justice agencies regarding the imposition and enforcement of fines and fees for adults 
and youth. The letter addresses common court-imposed fines and fees practices and 
cautions against those practices that may be unlawful, unfairly penalize individuals who 
are unable to pay, or otherwise have a discriminatory effect. The letter addresses the 
importance of conducting a meaningful ability-to-pay assessment before imposing adverse 
consequences for failure to pay, considering alternatives to fines and fees, guarding against 
excessive penalties, and ensuring due process protections, including the assistance of 
counsel when appropriate. DPSCS advises that the issues raised regarding fine imposition 
falling disproportionately on already overrepresented low-income communities and people 
of color, exacerbating existing inequities, are present in Maryland’s data. According to 
DPSCS, individuals in the State experience extended periods of probation and parole solely 
based on the imposition of these financial obligations, without which their law-abiding 
behavior would have exempted them from the additional supervision and financial 
obligations. DPSCS reports that during fiscal 2023, earned compliance credits were held 
back from 17,181 supervised individuals due solely to “not current on all ordered 
payments.” A total of approximately 1.2 million credits were withheld from these 
supervised individuals, with a potential average impact of two fewer months of supervision 
for each individual.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 123/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  By reducing the period of active supervision for affected individuals, 
the bill is anticipated to result in a decrease in caseload for DPP, enabling DPP to focus on 
higher risk individuals. In addition, because affected individuals would no longer be on 
active supervision due to the bill’s changes, they would no longer be subject to the monthly 
supervision fee. In theory, this reduces general fund revenues; however, as noted above, 
many of these individuals do not pay the fee in full (and therefore remain in supervision 
under current law), so any effect on general fund revenues is speculative. 
 
Under the bill, a supervisee is still obligated to pay the supervision fees owed during the 
supervision period. Under current law and under the bill, when the supervision case is 
closed, the outstanding fees transfer to CCU for collection. Because the bill reduces the 
supervisory period for affected individuals, DPSCS anticipates that the amount of 
outstanding fees that would otherwise be transferred to CCU for collection decreases. The 
extent to which CCU would otherwise collect these outstanding fees is unknown. By 
reducing the amount of outstanding fees transferred to CCU, however, the bill likely results 
in a decrease in workload for CCU. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 260 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Safety and Correctional Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
U.S. Department of Justice; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 123/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Division of Parole and Probation - Criteria for Earned Compliance 
Credit - Exception for Supervision Fees 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0123 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jennifer Beskid 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 5