START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 117 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 117 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Natural Resources - Maryland Geological Survey Fund - 
Establishment 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes the Maryland Geological Survey (MGS) Fund in the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to finance the direct and indirect costs of 
administering MGS, including long-term budgeting and planning for survey projects, 
procurements, and equipment purchases. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall special fund revenues for DNR are not materially affected, although 
special fund expenditures for DNR may be delayed into future fiscal years, as discussed 
below. The effect on special fund expenditures in any particular fiscal year is unknown. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The MGS Fund is established in DNR as a special, nonlapsing fund, 
consisting of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, and any 
other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of MGS. The fund may only 
be used for (1) covering the costs of the operation of MGS; (2) purchasing and maintaining 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 117/ Page 2 
equipment for use by the department or MGS; (3) funding projects undertaken and 
overseen by MGS; (4) administering MGS; and (5) specified administrative expenses. 
 
Current Law:  MGS is established in DNR, with a director appointed by the Governor 
with the advice of the Secretary of Natural Resources. MGS must:   
 
 
conduct topographic, geologic, hydrographic, and geophysical surveys; 
 
prepare topographic, geologic, and other types of maps to meet specific needs; 
 
prepare reports on the extent and character of the State’s geology, mineral, and water 
resources; and 
 
periodically assess the paleontological resources of the State and coordinate the 
assessment with interested persons and public agencies. 
 
Within MGS is a five-member commission, appointed by the Secretary, to advise the 
director with respect to any matter within MGS jurisdiction. 
 
Background:  MGS is a scientific-investigative organization charged with investigating 
the geologic and water resources of the State through the application of the various 
disciplines within earth science. Its primary mission includes investigation and monitoring 
of water resources, geologic, topographic, and geophysical mapping, environmental 
geology, mineral resources, and coastal and estuarine geology. MGS clients include local 
governments, nonprofits, and private companies. MGS has approximately 30 total 
positions and its annual appropriation is a combination of general, special, reimbursable, 
and federal funds. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
approximately $6.5 million total for MGS (approximately $4.3 million in general funds, 
$986,800 in special funds, $836,300 in reimbursable funds, and $342,100 in federal funds). 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DNR advises that the intent of the bill is not to allocate all existing 
funds that support MGS operations into the MGS Fund. Instead, the intent is to only 
allocate to the MGS Fund certain monies paid to MGS for services that it provides to local 
governments and nonprofits. Currently, such payments are allocated to a “catch all” fund 
in DNR that makes it difficult to track the specific MGS payments and does not allow MGS 
to carry forward any accrued amounts into subsequent fiscal years or earn interest on those 
amounts (in the Governor’s Budget Books, the fund is labeled “Maryland Geological 
Survey Account”). 
 
MGS intends to use the flexibility provided by the bill to complete larger projects and to 
purchase and replace expensive equipment with funds accrued over multiple fiscal years. 
For context, had the bill been in effect in fiscal 2023, reallocated revenues would have been 
approximately $156,000. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 117/ Page 3 
Consequently, the bill does not materially affect overall special fund revenues for DNR, 
although accrued funds can earn and retain minor interest revenues. Special fund 
expenditures for DNR may be delayed into future fiscal years; however, the effect on 
expenditures in any particular year is unknown since it depends on the timing of future 
spending decisions. 
 
In fiscal 2025, these effects may be mitigated to some extent by the bill’s October 1, 2024 
effective date. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 305 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 14, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 117/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Department of Natural Resources - Maryland Geological Survey 
Fund - Establishment 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 117 
 
PREPARED BY:  Dylan Behler 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The Department does not believe that this will have an economic impact on small 
businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4