START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 154 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 154 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Homeowners' and Homestead Property Tax Credits - Application Filing 
Deadline - Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
(SDAT) to accept an application for the homeowners’ property tax credit submitted by a 
homeowner within three years after April 15 of the taxable year for which the credit is 
sought if the homeowner is enrolled in the Homeowner Protection Program. The bill also 
requires SDAT to grant a homestead property tax credit to a homeowner who is at least 
70 years old if the homeowner applies for the credit in the current taxable year and was 
eligible for the credit in the prior taxable year but failed to file an application for the credit. 
The bill also provides these homeowners with a retroactive homestead property tax credit 
under certain circumstances. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable 
years beginning after June 30, 2024. The provisions of the bill regarding the 
retroactive homestead property tax credit apply to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2022, and sunset on June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the homeowners’ property tax credit increase 
beginning in FY 2025. The amount of the expenditure increase depends on the number of 
eligible homeowners who receive a retroactive property tax credit. Annuity Bond Fund 
(ABF) revenues decrease beginning in FY 2025 as a result of additional homestead 
property tax credits. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that more homeowners become eligible for the homeowners’ 
property tax credit, local governments that provide a supplement to the State homeowners’ 
property tax credit will realize a decrease in revenues. Local government property tax 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 154/ Page 2 
revenues decrease beginning in FY 2025 as a result of additional homestead property tax 
credits. 
 
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services disagrees with this 
assessment as the bill does not directly impact small businesses in the State. (This 
assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SDAT may accept an application for the homeowners’ property tax credit 
from a homeowner within (1) one year after April 15 of the taxable year for which the 
property tax credit is sought, if the homeowner is applying for the first time or has filed an 
application on or before October 1 in each of the three taxable years immediately preceding 
the taxable year for which the credit is sought or (2) three years after April 15 of the 
taxable year for which a credit is sought, if the homeowner is at least 70 years old as of the 
taxable year for which a credit is sought and was eligible for the homeowners’ property tax 
credit for the taxable year for which the credit is sought. 
 
Chapters 129 and 130 of 2022 required SDAT to retroactively grant the homestead property 
tax credit for the prior taxable year, upon receiving an application from the homeowner, if 
the homeowner is determined to be eligible for the property tax credit. 
 
Background:   
 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman 
 
Chapter 730 of 2019 established the State Tax Sale Ombudsman within SDAT to, among 
other things, (1) actively assist eligible homeowners to apply for tax credits, discount 
programs, and other public benefits that may assist the homeowners to pay delinquent taxes 
and improve their financial situation; (2) refer eligible homeowners to legal services, 
housing counseling, and other social services that may assist the homeowners to pay 
delinquent taxes and improve their financial situation; and (3) maintain a toll-free 
telephone number that a homeowner may call to obtain individualized personal assistance 
with delinquent taxes. 
 
SDAT must annually publish on its website and submit to the Senate Budget and Taxation 
Committee and the House Committee on Ways and Means a report that includes (1) an 
analysis and summary of tax sale information collected through a required annual survey 
of the counties and (2) information on the activities of the ombudsman, including a 
summary of the implementation of the Homeowner Protection Program. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 154/ Page 3 
Homeowner Protection Program and Fund 
 
Chapter 382 of 2021 established the Homeowner Protection Program administered by the 
State Tax Sale Ombudsman, and the Homeowner Protection Fund to support the program. 
The program diverts vulnerable homeowners from the private tax lien sale process into an 
alternative program – through the purchase of a homeowners’ lien, whether before or after 
the lien is sold at a tax sale – in order to (1) minimize tax collection costs to homeowners; 
(2) assist homeowners to pay their taxes; and (3) allow homeowners to remain in their 
homes. 
 
By June 30 each year, SDAT must determine the maximum number of homeowners who 
may be enrolled in the program in the next succeeding fiscal year based on the amount of 
funding available for the program in the Homeowner Protection Fund. 
 
The ombudsman must (1) prominently advertise the program and make applications 
available on the ombudsman’s website and (2) collaborate with local governments, 
community organizations, and public and private providers of social services and benefits 
to raise awareness of the program and disseminate applications. 
 
The Homeowner Protection Fund consists of (1) tax and interest payments made to the 
department by homeowners enrolled in the program; (2) money appropriated in the State 
budget to the fund; (3) interest earnings; and (4) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. For each of fiscal 2023 through 2025, the Governor is 
required to include an appropriation of $750,000 for the fund in the annual budget bill. The 
fund may be used only for any expenses associated with the program. The fund may not be 
used for any expenses of the tax sale ombudsman’s office that are not directly related to 
the program. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State 
budget, and the fund is the exclusive source of funding for the program. 
 
Chapter 316 of 2023 established that it is the intent of the General Assembly that at least 
2% of the balance in the Homeowner Protection Fund be spent each year to conduct 
specified outreach to encourage homeowners in tax sale to enroll in the Homeowner 
Protection Program. Chapter 316 also (1) established authority of the State Tax Sale 
Ombudsman to conduct the outreach and gather related information and (2) required that a 
summary of the outreach conducted by the ombudsman be included in a specified 
annual report. 
 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program 
 
The Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program is a State-funded program that provides 
credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who qualify based on 
a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. Counties and municipalities have the 
authority to enact local supplements to the program; the cost of such supplemental credits 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 154/ Page 4 
must be borne by the local governments. The fiscal 2024 State budget includes 
$56.5 million in funding for the program. 
 
Generally, homeowners must apply to SDAT each year in order to be eligible for the 
property tax credit. The application is available on the department’s website; current 
applications may be filed through October 1, 2024. 
 
Chapters 528 and 529 of 2023 altered the application requirements for the Homeowners’ 
Property Tax Credit Program for individuals who receive income only from social security, 
a pension, or an annuity. In these situations, the homeowner must submit a regular 
application in the first year that the individual applies for the property tax credit and a more 
abbreviated certification for the next two years. In the following third year, the homeowner 
will once again have to submit a regular application in order to remain eligible for the 
property tax credit. 
 
Approximately 45,000 individuals receive the property tax credit each year. 
 
Homestead Property Tax Credit 
 
The homestead property tax credit program (assessment caps) provides tax credits against 
State, county, and municipal real property taxes for owner-occupied residential properties 
for the amount of real property taxes resulting from an annual assessment increase that 
exceeds a certain percentage or “cap” in any given year. The State requires the cap on 
assessment increases to be set at 10% for State property tax purposes; however, local 
governments have the authority to lower the cap. A majority of local subdivisions have 
assessment caps below 10%. 
 
Subject to submitting a specified application to SDAT and having the application approved, 
the department must authorize and the State, a county, or a municipality must grant a 
homestead property tax credit for a taxable year unless during the previous taxable year 
(1) the dwelling was transferred for consideration to new ownership; (2) the value of the 
dwelling was increased due to a change in the zoning classification of the dwelling initiated 
or requested by the homeowner or anyone having an interest in the property; (3) the use of 
the dwelling was changed substantially; or (4) the assessment of the dwelling was clearly 
erroneous due to an error in calculation or measurement of improvements on the real 
property. In addition, in order to qualify for the property tax credit, a homeowner must 
actually reside in the dwelling by July 1 of the taxable year for which the property tax credit 
is to be allowed. A homeowner may claim a property tax credit for only one dwelling. 
 
State Revenues:  ABF revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2025 depending on the 
number of homeowners who receive additional homestead property tax credits. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 154/ Page 5 
SDAT reports that approximately 1.2 million homeowners currently receive the homestead 
property tax credit and that there are approximately 1.9 million residential real property 
accounts, as shown in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 2 shows the average homestead property tax 
credit for State and county purposes for fiscal 2024 as well as the value of the property tax 
credit, based on fiscal 2024 county real property tax rates and the State property tax rate of 
$0.112 per $100 of assessment. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Residential Property Accounts and Homestead Property Tax Credit Recipients 
Fiscal 2024 
 
County 
Homestead Recipients 
Residential Accounts 
Allegany 
11,820 
25,358 
Anne Arundel 
141,453 
188,767 
Baltimore City 
97,658 
196,915 
Baltimore 
173,682 
246,815 
Calvert 
19,919 
32,760 
Caroline 
7,268 
10,326 
Carroll 
41,986 
55,342 
Cecil 
21,324 
34,621 
Charles 
30,297 
53,572 
Dorchester 
6,903 
13,545 
Frederick 
56,398 
88,059 
Garrett 
6,952 
16,057 
Harford 
56,086 
84,367 
Howard 
71,054 
96,160 
Kent 
4,972 
8,127 
Montgomery 
207,050 
305,891 
Prince George’s 
155,338 
248,215 
Queen Anne’s 
13,569 
18,966 
St. Mary’s 
23,531 
36,281 
Somerset 
3,202 
8,297 
Talbot 
11,092 
15,812 
Washington 
27,037 
45,731 
Wicomico 
14,128 
32,297 
Worcester 
15,951 
54,555 
Total 
1,218,670 
1,916,836 
 
Source:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 154/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 2 
Average State and County Homestead Property Tax Credits 
Fiscal 2024 
 
County 
Average 
County 
Homestead 
Average State 
Homestead 
County 
Homestead 
Value 
State 
Homestead 
Value 
Allegany 
$8,419 
$4,341 
$82 
$5 
Anne Arundel 
91,533 
17,823 
897 
20 
Baltimore City 
26,032 
19,360 
585 
22 
Baltimore 
19,449 
16,290 
214 
18 
Calvert 
15,514 
15,514 
144 
17 
Caroline 
17,794 
11,414 
174 
13 
Carroll 
14,888 
9,617 
152 
11 
Cecil 
10,852 
14,304 
108 
16 
Charles 
14,351 
8,190 
173 
9 
Dorchester 
9,458 
9,996 
95 
11 
Frederick 
20,792 
8,920 
220 
10 
Garrett 
18,293 
33,441 
193 
37 
Harford 
6,586 
14,018 
64 
16 
Howard 
21,722 
15,231 
272 
17 
Kent 
12,657 
9,891 
129 
11 
Montgomery 
25,217 
25,217 
262 
28 
Prince George’s 
84,046 
14,415 
1,155 
16 
Queen Anne’s 
17,799 
9,347 
148 
10 
St. Mary’s 
17,013 
11,615 
144 
13 
Somerset 
9,040 
9,040 
90 
10 
Talbot 
137,256 
18,510 
1,020 
21 
Washington 
16,819 
9,548 
156 
11 
Wicomico 
13,155 
7,996 
116 
9 
Worcester 
36,146 
14,656 
305 
16 
 
Source:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Impact on Debt Service Payments 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s general obligation (GO) bonds are paid from the ABF. 
Revenue sources for the fund include State property taxes, premium from bond sales, and 
repayments from certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General 
funds may be appropriated directly to the ABF to make up any differences between the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 154/ Page 7 
debt service payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. The 
fiscal 2025 State budget includes $1.5 billion for GO debt service costs, including 
$376.1 million in general funds, $1.1 billion in special funds from the ABF, $7.0 million 
in transfer tax revenues, and $4.9 million in federal funds. 
 
To offset the reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could 
increase in an amount equal to the decrease in the ABF revenues, or the State property tax 
rate would have to be increased to meet debt service payments. This assumes that the ABF 
does not have an adequate fund balance to cover the reduction in State property tax 
revenues. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit 
Program increase beginning in fiscal 2025 depending on the number of eligible 
homeowners who receive a retroactive property tax. 
 
SDAT indicates that nine homeowners are currently enrolled in the Homeowner Protection 
Program, with another seven homeowners expected to be enrolled by the end of 
January 2024. The department estimates that up to 75 homeowners will be enrolled in the 
program by the end of fiscal 2024. The average homeowners’ property tax credit for 
fiscal 2020 through 2022 totaled $1,461. 
 
As a point of reference, if 25 homeowners enrolled in the Homeowner Protection Program 
qualify for a one-year retroactive property tax credit, general fund expenditures will 
increase by approximately $36,500. If these individuals qualify for a three-year retroactive 
tax credit, general fund expenditures will increase by approximately $109,500. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments are authorized to grant a local supplement to the 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program. While SDAT administers the local program, 
local governments are responsible for covering the cost of the local supplement. Currently, 
Baltimore City and 13 counties (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Calvert, Caroline, Carroll, 
Charles, Frederick, Garrett, Harford, Howard, Kent, Montgomery, and Washington) 
provide a local supplement to the State program. In addition, several municipalities also 
provide a local supplement. 
 
Local government revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2025 depending on the number of 
homeowners who receive additional homestead property tax credits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 154/ Page 8 
Designated Cross File:  SB 286 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
Enrolled - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 154/ Page 9 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Homeowners' Property Tax Credit - Application Filing Deadline - 
Extension for Homeowner Protection Program Enrollees 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 154 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Bob Yeager 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
           
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
    X    
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposed bill supports small businesses because it helps prevent homeowners from being 
displaced through tax sale, which can create neighborhood instability and negatively impact local 
small businesses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9