START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 119 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 119 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Giving Infants a Future Without Transmission (GIFT) Act 
 
 
This departmental bill alters terminology and requirements relating to HIV testing and 
reporting, including requiring (1) universal syphilis and HIV testing for all pregnant 
women at the time of delivery; (2) newborn HIV testing when the mother’s HIV status is 
unknown; and (3) inclusion of pregnancy status when reporting an HIV diagnosis. A 
hospital must determine the syphilis serologic status of a mother before discharging the 
newborn for the purposes of neonatal evaluation and treatment. The Maryland Department 
of Health (MDH) may adopt rules, regulations, and standards regarding syphilis testing. 
The bill also increases specified fines relating to the disclosure of personal identifying 
health information acquired for the purpose of HIV and AIDS reporting under current law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $783,600 (85% 
federal funds, 15% general funds) in FY 2025 for additional syphilis and HIV testing of 
pregnant women. Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. Out-years reflect 
annualization and 3% growth in Medicaid enrollment. Expenditures are offset by 
significant but indeterminate savings, as discussed below. Any impact on fine revenues is 
assumed to be minimal. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FF Revenue 
$667,700 
$916,900 
$944,400 
$972,800 
$1,002,000 
GF Expenditure 
$115,900 
$159,200 
$163,900 
$168,900 
$173,900 
FF Expenditure 
$667,700 
$916,900 
$944,400 
$972,800 
$1,002,000 
Net Effect 
($115,900) 
($159,200) 
($163,900) 
($168,900) 
($173,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Minimal increase in workload for local health department (LHD) personnel, 
as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 119/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
HIV Testing 
 
Under § 18-336 of the Health-General Article, before obtaining a sample for HIV testing, 
a health care provider must (1) inform the individual that HIV testing will be performed 
unless the individual refuses; (2) provide the individual information or show a video 
explaining HIV infection and the meaning of positive and negative test results; (3) offer 
the individual an opportunity to ask questions and decline testing; and (4) if the individual 
refuses testing, document the refusal in the medical record.  
 
The bill requires, subject to existing provisions for informed consent, that a health care 
provider obtain a fluid or tissue sample to test for the presence of HIV infection from a 
pregnant woman during delivery and a newborn when the pregnant woman’s HIV status is 
unknown.  
 
Provider and Institutional Reporting of HIV 
 
Under § 18-201.1 of the Health-General Article, a physician who has diagnosed a patient 
with HIV or AIDS must immediately submit a report to the local health officer that states 
the name, age, race, sex, and address of the patient. An institution (including a hospital, 
nursing home, hospice, correctional medical clinic, inpatient psychiatric facility, and 
inpatient drug rehabilitation facility) must submit the same report to the local health officer 
within 48 hours. For an infant whose mother has tested positive for HIV, a physician must 
submit such a report within 48 hours of the infant’s birth. All reports filed by physicians or 
institutions are confidential, are not medical records, and are neither discoverable nor 
admissible in evidence in any civil action. 
 
The bill updates terminology (changing “physician” to “health care provider” and “patient” 
to “individual”); requires that HIV reports state the pregnancy status of the individual, if 
applicable; and requires health care providers to submit a report within 48 hours of a 
pregnant woman testing positive for HIV for the purpose of intervention. The bill also 
specifies that all reports filed by physicians or institutions are neither discoverable nor 
admissible in evidence in any criminal, civil, or administrative action. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 119/ Page 3 
HIV Registry 
 
Under current law, if a newborn born to a mother who tested positive for HIV does not 
become HIV positive after 18 months from the date that the HIV report was submitted, the 
Secretary of Health must have the infant’s name removed from the HIV registry. 
 
The bill clarifies that removal of a name from the HIV registry must occur if an infant does 
not become HIV positive after 18 months from the infant’s date of birth. 
 
Syphilis Testing 
 
Under § 18-307 of the Health-General Article, an individual attending a woman for 
pregnancy must submit to a medical laboratory a blood sample taken from the woman at 
(1) the time of the first examination and (2) during the third trimester of the pregnancy. 
The medical laboratory must do a standard serological syphilis test that is approved by 
MDH. These provisions do not apply to a woman who objects to such testing due to her 
religious beliefs and practices. 
 
The bill changes the term “individual” to “health care provider” and specifies that the blood 
sample taken during the third trimester must be taken at the prenatal visit at 28 weeks of 
gestation or the first prenatal visit after 28 weeks of gestation. A health care provider must 
submit a blood sample from a woman who delivers a (1) live born infant at the time of 
delivery or (2) a stillborn infant at 20 weeks of gestation or later or weighing at least 
500 grams. The bill also requires a hospital to determine the syphilis serologic status of the 
mother before discharging the newborn for the purposes of neonatal evaluation and 
treatment. MDH may adopt rules, regulations, and standards regarding syphilis testing. 
 
Disclosure of Personal Identifying Information 
 
Under § 18-215 of the Health-General Article, a health care provider (or any other person, 
including an officer or employee of a governmental unit) who knowingly and willfully 
discloses personal identifying health information acquired for purposes of HIV and AIDS 
reporting to any person who is not authorized to receive such information is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, subject to a fine of up to $1,000 for the first offense and 
up to $5,000 for each subsequent conviction, as specified. 
 
The bill increases these maximum fines to $2,000 and $10,000, respectively. 
 
Background:  MDH advises that the bill is intended to protect Maryland infants by 
addressing recent increases in congenital syphilis (CS) and perinatal HIV transmission in 
Maryland. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 119/ Page 4 
Congenital Syphilis  
 
From 2012 to 2021, CS cases in Maryland increased by more than 200% (from 12 to 
37 cases). Screening during delivery helps identify pregnant women with syphilis who 
were not tested and/or treated during their pregnancy or who were infected after the 
currently required test during the third trimester.  
 
Infants with CS who are not evaluated and treated within the first three months of life are 
more likely to have lifelong, severe complications such as deafness, blindness, and 
intellectual disability. The majority of infants with a reported CS diagnosis in 2020 and 
2021 were covered by Medicaid. MDH advises that the Medicaid fee-for-service costs for 
treating infants with a CS diagnosis from birth to age 23 months increased more than 
fivefold from 2020 to 2021 (from $233,503 to $1,186,980) and the average cost 
per member per month for a child with CS in a Medicaid managed care organization nearly 
doubled during the same period (from $1,366 to $2,552). 
 
Perinatal HIV Transmission 
 
Historically, perinatal HIV transmission was rare in Maryland with only six confirmed 
cases from 2016 to 2020. However, since July 2022, five infants from four different 
jurisdictions have acquired HIV through perinatal transmission. MDH notes that pregnant 
women are becoming infected with HIV after the currently required third trimester test. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $783,563 (85% 
federal funds, 15% general funds) in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of one HIV and one syphilis 
test at delivery as required under the bill, as well as any confirmatory testing required as a 
result of syphilis testing. The information and assumptions used in calculating the estimate 
are stated below:   
 
 
Medicaid covered 31,238 live births in calendar 2020. 
 
Medicaid enrollment is assumed to have increased by 3% since calendar 2020. 
 
Effective July 1, 2023, Medicaid covers noncitizen pregnant women (who comprise 
an estimated 19.75% of total Medicaid births). 
 
Medicaid will cover 32,175 births in fiscal 2025, including 6,355 noncitizen 
pregnant women. 
 
The average reimbursement per HIV test for pregnant women is $24.31. 
 
The average reimbursement per syphilis test for pregnant women is $8.16. 
 
1.31% of individuals require an additional confirmatory syphilis test, which is 
reimbursed at a rate of $4.32. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 119/ Page 5 
 
Federal matching funds are provided at a rate of 65% for noncitizen pregnant 
women and 90% for other pregnant women. 
 
Expenditures increase by an additional indeterminate amount if newborns are tested in 
addition to the pregnant woman and to the extent that the bill results in increased screenings 
of partners covered by Medicaid. It is assumed that, if a pregnant woman’s HIV status is 
unknown, the newborn will be tested at approximately the same rate per test. This estimate 
does not reflect any increases in managed care organization capitation rates. 
 
Future years reflect annualization and 3% annual growth in the Medicaid population. 
Accordingly, Medicaid expenditures increase by $1,076,093 (85% federal funds, 
15% general funds) in fiscal 2026, increasing to $1,175,876 (85% federal funds, 15% 
general funds) in fiscal 2029. 
 
Any expenditures for additional testing of pregnant women are likely offset by significant 
long-term savings due to the early identification and treatment of CS and HIV. MDH 
advises that a 2017 modeling study found that the cost savings between prompt and delayed 
CS treatment is more than $650,000 per infant. Furthermore, according to a 2019 study, 
the estimated average lifetime HIV-related medical cost for an individual with HIV ranged 
from $420,285 to $1,079,999. 
 
Local Expenditures:  LHDs are required to conduct partner services for all new cases of 
syphilis and HIV. This includes (1) contacting the delivery hospital to follow up on 
treatment provided to the newborn if that information is not available in the statewide 
electronic health information exchange; (2) contacting the mother diagnosed with syphilis 
or HIV to elicit names of partners to ensure they are tested and treated and coordinate 
referrals for supportive services; and (3) completing the Congenital Syphilis Case Report 
form. Thus, the bill may result in a minimal increase in workload for LHD staff. Any such 
workload is assumed to be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 211 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 119/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 119/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE:  Public Health - Giving Infants a Future Without Transmission (GIFT) Act 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0119 
 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit):  Prevention and Health Promotion Administration 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
 
 
OR 
 
       
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact. 
 

END OF PAGE 7