START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 161 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 161 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Driver's Licenses, Learner's Instructional Permits, and 
Identification Cards 
 
 
This departmental bill exempts certain applicants for identification cards who present 
appropriate documentation to the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) from paying the 
required fee. The bill also extends the term of a learner’s instructional permit from 180 days 
to one year. Finally, the bill establishes that a driver’s license issued to certain 
U.S. government contractors (and any dependents) must remain in full force and effect 
during an absence from the State if specified criteria are met. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Transportation Trust Fund 
finances or operations. Reprogramming changes can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 161/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Identification Cards 
 
Under current law, on application, MVA must issue an identification card to any applicant 
who is a Maryland resident, does not have a driver’s license, presents a birth certificate or 
other acceptable proof of age and identity, and provides satisfactory documentary evidence 
that the applicant has a valid Social Security number or is not eligible for a Social Security 
number. MVA may issue an identification card to an applicant without lawful status under 
specified circumstances if the applicant would otherwise be eligible for that document. 
 
MVA must establish a fee for the issuance of identification cards (and duplicates). 
However, a fee is not currently required if the applicant:   
 
 
is age 65 or older; 
 
is legally blind; 
 
has permanently lost the use of a leg or an arm; 
 
is permanently disabled so severely that the applicant cannot move without the aid 
of crutches or a wheelchair; or 
 
has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a “major life activity” 
as defined in the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
 
In addition, MVA must issue an identification card at no cost to an individual who applies 
for an identification card and presents (1) an identification card issued by the Division of 
Correction (DOC) that displays specified information and a photograph of the individual 
and (2) the individual’s Social Security card. 
 
The bill expands the fee exemption to any applicant who presents documentation showing 
that the applicant (1) was released from any correctional facility (not just a DOC facility) 
within the prior 60 days; (2) is a youth under the care of the Department of Juvenile 
Services; (3) is a youth between 15 and 20 years of age, inclusive, who is a participant in 
a Department of Human Services program, as approved by MVA; (4) is currently 
homeless; (5) is currently under the care of the Maryland Department of Health; or (6) is 
participating in another program administered by a State agency that requires the applicant 
to possess an identification card.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 161/ Page 3 
Learner’s Instructional Permits 
 
Under current law, a learner’s instructional permit held by an individual who currently 
holds a driver’s license to operate one class of motor vehicle and desires a driver’s license 
for another class of vehicle expires 180 days after the date of issuance of the permit. The 
bill extends this period to one year. 
 
License Validity During Periods Abroad  
 
Under current law, a license held by a member of the armed forces of the United States 
who is absent from the State on active service in the armed forces of the United States (or 
a dependent of the member who is residing with the member outside of the State) must 
remain in full force and effect during such absence. 
 
The bill applies the same requirement to a contract employee working on behalf of a federal 
agency or branch of the armed services who is absent from the State in service of the 
contract (or a dependent of the contract employee who is residing with the employee 
outside the State). 
 
Background:   
 
Identification Cards 
 
MVA notes that the bill expands current identification card fee exemptions to many 
categories of individuals who are currently subject to a $1 fee (pursuant to State 
regulations). However, MVA advises that the cost of collecting and accounting for the 
$1 fee exceeds the revenue generated. Under the bill, MVA can provide needed 
identification credentials to applicants while also realizing administrative efficiencies. 
 
Learner’s Instructional Permits 
 
MVA notes that, pursuant to Chapter 442 of 2023, the term of a commercial driver’s 
instructional permit was extended from 180 days to one year (in part, to allow applicants 
additional training time). The bill extends the same one-year term to other types of learner’s 
permits, allowing applicants more time to practice and acclimate themselves to Maryland 
highways and roads. 
 
License Validity During Periods Abroad 
 
MVA advises that some applicants’ licenses expire while they are working on years-long 
government contracts overseas (including for the armed services). While such applicants 
may have documentation indicating they are civilians and have been out of the country for 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 161/ Page 4 
purposes related to government contracting work, there is no provision in State law 
allowing such individuals to maintain a valid license if they are absent at the required time 
of renewal. MVA receives several requests each month from individuals in these types of 
situations; the bill’s changes provide a remedy to those who find themselves abroad in such 
circumstances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 277 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 161/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Vehicle Laws – Driver’s Licenses, Learner’s Instructional 
Permits, and Identification Cards 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0161 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A. 

END OF PAGE 5