START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 102

Chapter 102

(House Bill 197)

AN ACT concerning

Unemployment Insurance – Work Search Requirement – Exemption for Federal
Civilian Employees During a Federal Government Shutdown

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Secretary of Labor to exempt a federal civilian
employee who has been furloughed from the requirement to be actively seeking work
for unemployment insurance benefits eligibility if, during the furlough, the employee
remains able to work, available for work, and work–attached; and generally relating
to unemployment insurance eligibility.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 8–903(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 8–903(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

8–903.

(a) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, to be eligible for benefits
an individual shall be:

(i) able to work;

(ii) available for work; and

(iii) actively seeking work.

(D) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS TITLE, THE
SECRETARY MAY EXEMPT A CIVILIAN EMPLOYEE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
FROM THE WORK SEARCH REQUIREMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1)(III) OF THIS

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 102 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION DURING A PERIOD IN WHICH THE CIVILIAN EMPLOYEE IS FURLOUGHED
DUE TO A FULL OR PARTIAL FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN CAUSED BY A LAPSE
IN FEDERAL APPROPRIATIONS IF, DURING THE FURLOUGH, THE CIVILIAN
EMPLOYEE REMAINS ABLE TO WORK AND AVAILABLE FOR WORK IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THIS SECTION AND WORK–ATTACHED.

(2) FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS SUBSECTION, A CIVILIAN EMPLOYEE
OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS FURLOUGHED IF, DURING A FULL OR PARTIAL
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN CAUSED BY A LAPSE IN FEDERAL
APPROPRIATIONS, THE EMPLOYEE IS:

(I) TEMPORARILY BARRED FROM WORKING; AND

(II) PLACED IN A TEMPORARY NONPAY STATUS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2