START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 112 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 112 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Secretary of State) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Persons Doing Public Business – Disclosure Requirements 
 
   
This departmental bill repeals provisions under the State Finance and Procurement Article 
that require a business that enters into contracts, leases, or other agreements with the State 
totaling $200,000 or more in a calendar year to disclose to the Secretary of State specified 
information, including, if known, each person who has beneficial ownership of the 
business. Correspondingly, the bill makes changes to Title 14 of the Election Law Article 
(“Disclosure by Persons Doing Public Business”), including requiring a person that does 
public business with the State or a local government to file a registration statement with 
the State Board of Elections (SBE) that includes, if known, each person who has beneficial 
ownership of the business entity. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The affected agencies can handle any administrative changes within existing 
budgeted resources. Special fund revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2025 
due to any late fees or civil penalties imposed under the bill. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Secretary of State has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment.     
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 112/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Disclosure of Beneficial Ownership 
 
The bill repeals provisions under the State Finance and Procurement Article (described in 
more detail under Current Law) that require a business that enters into contracts, leases, or 
other agreements with the State under which the business receives a total of $200,000 or 
more in a calendar year, to disclose to the Secretary of State specified information, 
including, if known, each person who has beneficial ownership of the business. 
Correspondingly, under Title 14 of the Election Law Article, the bill requires a person that 
does public business with the State or a local government (defined as making or having a 
single contract with a State or local governmental entity involving cumulative 
consideration of at least $200,000) to file a registration statement with SBE that includes, 
if known, each person who has beneficial ownership of the business entity. 
 
Under Title 14, the bill defines “beneficial ownership” as (1) any ownership interest of 5% 
or more in a business; (2) any ownership interest of 5% or more in one or more entities in 
a chain of parent and subsidiary entities, any one of which participates in at least 5% of the 
capital or profits of a business; or (3) possession of an interest that exists under a contract, 
a relationship, an understanding, or any other arrangement and entitles a person to benefits 
substantially equivalent to an ownership interest of 5% or more of a business.      
 
Registration Statement 
 
A person must file the registration statement with SBE within 15 business days after the 
award of a contract that causes the person to be doing public business. The registration 
statement must include (1) the person’s name and address; (2) any resident agent of the 
business located in the State; (3) if known, each person who has beneficial ownership of 
the business entity; and (4) any other information required by SBE. If a registration 
statement does not include all the information required, SBE must notify the person in 
writing of the particular deficiencies and the person must file an amended statement within 
30 days after service of the notice.  
 
A person doing public business must update the information on beneficial ownership 
included in the registration statement in accordance with regulations adopted by SBE.  
 
The bill authorizes SBE to impose fees for late filing of registration statements or amended 
registration statements in the same amounts and in the same manner as authorized under 
Title 13 (“Campaign Finance”) of the Election Law Article for late filing of campaign 
finance reports (fees of $20 to $50 per day, up to a maximum of $1,000 total). The bill also 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 112/ Page 3 
authorizes SBE to impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for a failure to report current 
information on beneficial ownership as required by the bill. Late filing fees and civil 
penalties collected under Title 14 are distributed to the Fair Campaign Financing Fund, 
which holds funds for public campaign financing of gubernatorial tickets under the Public 
Financing Act. 
 
Initial Statement of Contributions 
 
The bill establishes that an initial statement of contributions (covering the preceding 
24 months), that a person doing public business must file under Title 14 under current law, 
must be filed within 15 business days after filing the registration statement.  
 
Also, in addition to existing requirements applicable to a governmental entity that has 
awarded a contract that causes a person to be doing public business, the bill establishes that 
the governmental entity must also, if the contract is subject to approval by the Board of 
Public Works (BPW), require the person to certify to BPW that the person has filed the 
initial statement of contributions. 
 
Current Law:           
 
Persons Doing Public Business 
 
Under Title 14 of the Election Law Article, persons who do public business (defined as 
making or having a single contract with a State or local governmental entity involving 
cumulative consideration of at least $200,000) are required to file statements with SBE 
regarding any applicable contributions of a cumulative amount of $500 or more to a 
candidate during a reporting period. An initial statement of contributions is filed when a 
contract is awarded that causes the person to be doing public business and semi-annually 
thereafter as long as performance on the contract remains uncompleted.  
 
 
Filing of Registration Statements and Initial Statements of Contributions 
 
SBE regulations require a person doing public business to file a registration statement 
containing specified information with SBE within 15 business days after the award of a 
contract by a governmental entity. The regulations require a person doing public business 
to file the initial statement of contributions required under Title 14 within 15 business days 
of filing the registration statement. 
 
 
Requirements of Governmental Entities 
 
A governmental entity that has awarded a person a contract that causes the person to be 
doing public business must require the person to certify that the person has filed an initial 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 112/ Page 4 
statement of contributions. The governmental entity must also provide SBE with the 
person’s name, address, and any other contact information required by SBE; however, a 
governmental entity may comply with this requirement by sending SBE quarterly reports.  
 
 
Late Fees and Penalties 
 
SBE is authorized to impose fees for late filing of a statement of contributions or an 
amended statement in the same amounts and manner as late filing fees imposed on 
campaign finance entities under Title 13 of the Election Law Article for late filing of 
campaign finance reports. SBE may impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for (1) failure 
to report all applicable contributions made and (2) failure to maintain detailed and accurate 
records and reports.  
 
The State Prosecutor may also impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000, for an unknowing 
violation of Title 14, and a person is who knowingly and willfully violates Title 14 is guilty 
of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
one year.  
 
Disclosures to the Secretary of State 
 
Under the State Finance and Procurement Article, if, during a calendar year, a business 
enters into contracts, leases, or other agreements with the State or its units or both under 
which the business is to receive a total of $200,000 or more, the business must file with the 
Secretary of State, within a specified timeframe, a list that discloses the name and address 
of (1) any resident agent of the business; (2) each officer of the business; and (3) if known, 
each person who has beneficial ownership of the business.  
 
“Unit” means an officer or other entity in the Executive Branch of State government that 
is authorized by law to enter into a procurement contract. “Unit” does not include a political 
subdivision or a bistate, multistate, bicounty, or multicounty governmental agency. 
 
“Beneficial ownership” is defined in a similar manner as it is defined in the bill under 
Title 14; however, in addition, unless there are special circumstances, an individual is 
deemed to hold an ownership interest that is held by the individual’s spouse, the 
individual’s child, or other relative of the individual who lives in the individual’s home. 
 
If a person who has beneficial ownership is unknown to a business, it is sufficient for the 
business to disclose the legal ownership or the identity of the nominee who holds title for 
the unknown person. A business or officer of a business who violates the disclosure 
provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine up to $10,000.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 112/ Page 5 
Background:  The Office of the Secretary of State indicates that the disclosures filed with 
the office under current law, containing beneficial ownership and other information, are 
not reviewed frequently, except by SBE to cross-reference in its administration of Title 14. 
The office indicates that the bill will streamline the process for reporting by businesses 
engaging in business with the State by moving the disclosures into the Title 14 disclosure 
process administered by SBE. DLS notes that, by shifting the beneficial ownership 
disclosure requirement to Title 14, the bill also makes that requirement applicable to 
businesses engaging in business with local governments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 291 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Secretary of State) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Board of Public Works; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 112/ Page 6 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Persons Doing Public Business – Disclosure Requirements 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 112 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Lore 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__x 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Some businesses that have large contracts with local government may have an additional 
reporting requirement with the State Board of Elections. 
 

END OF PAGE 6