START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 739

Chapter 739

(House Bill 195)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Missing Persons ~~With~~ ~~Cognitive~~ ~~Impairment~~ – Purple Alert
Program

FOR the purpose of establishing a Purple Alert Program to disseminate information to
assist in locating a certain missing person ~~with~~ ~~certain~~ ~~cognitive~~ ~~impairments;~~ and
generally relating to the establishment of a Purple Alert Program.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–608
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

3–608.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CAREGIVER” MEANS A PARENT, SPOUSE, GUARDIAN, LEGAL
CUSTODIAN, OR PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE SUPERVISION OF ANOTHER ADULT.

(3) “DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–101(G) OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(4) “INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–101(N) OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(5) “LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY” MEANS A STATE, COUNTY, OR
MUNICIPAL POLICE DEPARTMENT OR AGENCY OR A SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT.

(6) “MENTAL DISORDER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–101 OF
THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(6) (7) “MISSING PERSON” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 739 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) WHOSE WHEREABOUTS ARE UNKNOWN;

(II) 1. WHO SUFFERS HAS A COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT,
MENTAL DISORDER, INTELLECTUAL OR DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY, OR BRAIN
INJURY THAT IS NOT:

~~1.~~ A. ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE;

2. B. DEMENTIA; OR

3. C. A PHYSICAL, MENTAL, OR EMOTIONAL DISABILITY
RELATED TO SUBSTANCE ABUSE; OR

2. WHO IS DEAF, DEAFBLIND, HARD OF HEARING, OR
LATE–DEAFENED;

(III) WHOSE DISAPPEARANCE POSES A CREDIBLE THREAT TO
THE HEALTH AND SAFETY OF THE INDIVIDUAL DUE TO AGE, HEALTH, MENTAL OR
PHYSICAL DISABILITY, ENVIRONMENT, OR WEATHER CONDITIONS, AS DETERMINED
BY A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; AND

(IV) WHO DOES NOT MEET THE CRITERIA FOR ACTIVATION OF A
SILVER ALERT UNDER § 3–604 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE SHALL ESTABLISH A
PURPLE ALERT PROGRAM TO PROVIDE A SYSTEM FOR RAPID DISSEMINATION OF
INFORMATION TO ASSIST IN LOCATING A MISSING PERSON.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE SHALL:

(I) ADOPT GUIDELINES AND DEVELOP PROCEDURES FOR
ISSUING A PURPLE ALERT FOR A MISSING PERSON;

(II) PROVIDE TRAINING TO LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES ON THE GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES TO BE USED TO HANDLE A
REPORT OF A MISSING PERSON;

(III) PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY, AS NECESSARY, TO ASSIST IN THE SAFE RECOVERY OF A MISSING PERSON;

(IV) RECRUIT PUBLIC AND COMMERCIAL TELEVISION AND
RADIO BROADCASTERS, LOCAL VOLUNTEER GROUPS, AND OTHER MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO ASSIST IN DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING A PURPLE ALERT;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 739

(V) CONSULT WITH THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION TO
ESTABLISH A PLAN FOR PROVIDING INFORMATION RELEVANT TO A PURPLE ALERT
TO THE PUBLIC THROUGH THE DYNAMIC MESSAGE SIGN SYSTEM LOCATED ACROSS
THE STATE; AND

(VI) CONSULT WITH THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
TO DEVELOP A PROGRAM THAT:

1. ALLOWS HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS TO ASSIST IN THE
SEARCH FOR A MISSING PERSON UNDER THIS SECTION;

2. COMPLIES WITH COMAR 13A.03.02.06; AND

3. IS CONSISTENT WITH THE STUDENT
SERVICE–LEARNING GUIDELINES DEVELOPED BY THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE MAY CONSULT WITH
RELEVANT STAKEHOLDERS REPRESENTING CITIZENS WITH DISABILITIES TO
DEVELOP REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(C) A CAREGIVER OR PERSON FILING A REPORT REGARDING A MISSING
PERSON IMMEDIATELY SHALL NOTIFY THE LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
WITH WHICH THE REPORT WAS FILED AND THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE IF:

(1) THE MISSING PERSON WHO WAS THE SUBJECT OF THE REPORT IS
LOCATED; AND

(2) IT IS UNLIKELY THAT THE LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR
THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE HAS KNOWLEDGE THAT THE MISSING PERSON
HAS BEEN LOCATED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3