START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 838

Chapter 838

(House Bill 153)

AN ACT concerning

Medical Records – Fees – Attorneys Representing Patients

FOR the purpose of adding an attorney representing a patient to the list of individuals to
whom a health care provider is prohibited from charging a fee for providing copies of
a medical record that will be used for the purpose of filing a claim regarding or
appealing a denial of Social Security disability income or Social Security benefits;
and generally relating to fees for medical records.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–304(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–304(c)(5)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

4–304.

(a) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, a health care provider
shall comply within a reasonable time after a person in interest requests in writing:

(i) To receive a copy of a medical record; or

(ii) To see and copy the medical record.

(c) (5) A health care provider or a representative of the health care provider
may not charge a fee for providing copies of a medical record:

(i) Requested by:

1. The patient;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 838 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. The patient’s personal representative; [or]

3. An employee or other representative of a nonprofit legal
services entity or other volunteer or nonprofit program representing the patient; [and] OR

4. AN ATTORNEY WHO PROVIDES DOCUMENTATION
~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ATTORNEY~~ ~~IS~~ REPRESENTING THE PATIENT ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURPOSE~~
DESCRIBED IN ITEM (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH; AND

(ii) That will be used for the purpose of filing a claim regarding or
appealing a denial of Social Security disability income or Social Security benefits under
Title II or Title XVI of the Social Security Act.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2