START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 125 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 125 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Courts – Military Records – Recordation and Inspection 
 
 
This bill authorizes the clerk of the circuit court of each county to keep an electronic record 
instead of a book for purposes of recording and indexing the discharge papers of a person 
who has served in the uniformed services of the United States. The bill also alters specified 
provisions related to (1) the exceptions to the mandatory denial of inspection of a discharge 
record and (2) certified copies of a discharge record. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled by the Judiciary with existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, the clerk of the circuit court of each 
county must keep a book to record and index the discharge papers of any person who (at 
any time) has served in the Armed Forces of the United States and presents the discharge 
papers for recording. A clerk may not charge a fee for the recording or indexing of the 
discharge papers. The bill allows the clerk of circuit court to keep an electronic record 
instead of a book for purposes of recording and indexing discharge papers of any person 
who has served in the uniformed services of the United States. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 125/ Page 2 
Currently, a clerk must deny inspection of the book (and the book’s record and index), 
except:   
 
 
to a party in a civil, administrative, or criminal proceeding in a federal or state court 
or government agency, or the party’s attorney, as specified; 
 
to a person in interest; 
 
in accordance with a subpoena or court order; or 
 
for good cause shown, to a relative of the person who is the subject of the discharge 
papers, if the request for inspection is made at least 70 years after the discharge 
papers were presented for recording. 
 
The bill alters the last exception that allows inspection under certain circumstances when 
a request is made at least 70 years after the discharge papers were presented for recording 
by: 
 
 
removing the requirements that (1) good cause be shown and (2) the individual 
requesting inspection be a relative of the person who is the subject of the discharge 
papers; and 
 
adding as a prerequisite to disclosure that the clerk of the circuit court has redacted 
the Social Security number of the person in interest from any portion of the book or 
electronic record. 
 
Under current law, a clerk may provide a certified copy of the discharge record in 
accordance with the above exceptions. The bill does not alter the requirement that in order 
to receive a certified copy of records that were presented for recording at least 70 years 
ago, the requesting individual must be a relative of the person who is the subject of the 
discharge papers; however, the bill does remove the requirement for good cause to be 
shown. 
 
A “person in interest” means a person or governmental unit (or designee), that is the subject 
of a public record; the parent or legal representative of the person if the person has a legal 
disability; or the spouse, adult child, parent, adult sibling, grandparent, or guardian of the 
person of the deceased at the time of the deceased’s death who make requests for correction 
of death certificates, as specified. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 125/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 159 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3