START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 193 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 193 
(Delegates Lehman and Pena-Melnyk) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Anne Arundel County - Speed Limits - Establishment 
 
 
This bill authorizes Anne Arundel County and municipalities within the county to decrease 
the maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH on a highway after performing an 
engineering and traffic investigation; however, they may not implement a new speed 
monitoring system to enforce speed limits on any portion of a highway for which the speed 
limit has been decreased pursuant to this authorization. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase minimally due to more citations for 
speeding, assuming local authorities use the authorization granted by the bill to decrease 
speed limits in designated areas. The District Court can handle any additional caseload with 
existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Within Anne Arundel County, county and municipal expenditures increase 
to the extent that engineering and traffic investigations are performed to lower speed limits 
under the bill; county and municipal revenues may increase to the extent that speed limits 
are reduced, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Speed Limits – Generally 
 
Unless there is a special danger that requires a lower speed, the maximum lawful speeds 
on a State highway are (1) 15 MPH in alleys in Baltimore County; (2) 30 MPH on all 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 193/ Page 2 
highways in a business district and on undivided highways in a residential district; 
(3) 35 MPH on divided highways in a residential district; (4) 50 MPH on undivided 
highways in other locations; and (5) 55 MPH on divided highways in other locations. A 
maximum speed limit of more than 70 MPH may not be established on any highway in the 
State. 
 
If, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, a local authority determines that 
a maximum speed is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under existing conditions on 
any part of a highway in its jurisdiction, the local authority may establish a reasonable and 
safe maximum speed limit for that part of the highway, which may:   
 
 
decrease the limit at an intersection; 
 
increase the limit in an urban district to no more than 50 MPH 
 
decrease the speed limit in an urban district; or 
 
decrease the limit outside an urban district to no less than 25 MPH. 
 
An engineering and traffic investigation is not required to conform a speed limit in effect 
on December 31, 1974, to one of the specified speed limits established by statute. 
 
Altered Speed Limits 
 
Montgomery County and municipalities within the county may decrease the 
maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH on a highway but only after performing an 
engineering and traffic investigation. However, a local authority may not implement a new 
speed monitoring system to enforce speed limits on any portion of a highway for which the 
speed limit has been decreased pursuant to this authorization. 
 
Calvert County is authorized to decrease the maximum speed limit to no less than 15 MPH 
on Lore Road and, except for Solomons Island Road, each highway south of Lore Road 
without performing an engineering and traffic investigation, regardless of whether the 
highway is inside an urban district. 
 
Altered speed limits are effective when posted on appropriate signs giving notice of the 
limit. Any alteration by a local authority (except in Baltimore City) of a maximum speed 
limit on a part (or extension) of a State highway is not effective until approved by the State 
Highway Administration (SHA). 
 
A local authority may establish a reasonable and safe maximum speed limit for an alley if 
it determines that the maximum speed limit under State law is greater than is reasonable or 
safe. However, the local authority must post a speed limit on appropriate signs giving 
notice of the speed limit. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 193/ Page 3 
Speed Monitoring Systems 
 
Speed monitoring systems must be authorized in a local jurisdiction by the governing body 
of the jurisdiction (but only after reasonable notice and a public hearing). Before activating 
a speed monitoring system, a local jurisdiction must publish notice of the location of the 
speed monitoring system on its website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the 
jurisdiction. In addition, the jurisdiction must also ensure that each sign that designates a 
school zone is proximate to a sign that (1) indicates that speed monitoring systems are in 
use in the school zone and (2) conforms with specified traffic control device standards 
adopted by SHA. Similar requirements apply to speed cameras established on 
Maryland Route 210 (Indian Head Highway), grounds of institutions of higher education 
in Prince George’s County, Interstate 83 in Baltimore City, Maryland Route 175 in 
Anne Arundel County (Jessup Road) between the Maryland Route 175/295 interchange 
and the Anne Arundel County-Howard County line, and at the intersection of 
Maryland Route 333 (Oxford Road) and Bonfield Avenue in Talbot County. 
 
From the fines generated by a speed monitoring system, the relevant jurisdiction may 
recover the costs of implementing the system and generally may spend any remaining 
balance solely for public safety purposes, including for pedestrian safety programs. 
However, if the balance of revenues after cost recovery for any fiscal year is greater than 
10% of the jurisdiction’s total revenues, the excess must be remitted to the Comptroller. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Within Anne Arundel County, county and municipal expenditures 
increase to the extent that engineering and traffic investigations are performed to 
lower speed limits, pursuant to the bill’s authorization. 
 
Although local authorities in Anne Arundel County are prohibited from installing new 
speed camera systems on any portion of a highway for which the speed limit has been 
decreased pursuant to the bill’s authority, the bill appears to allow any cameras that are 
already in operation to continue operation on such highways, even if the speed limits are 
reduced. Thus, to the extent that local authorities in Anne Arundel County choose to 
lower speed limits on highways with existing speed camera systems in place when they 
would not have done so absent the bill, local revenues increase to the extent more 
automated enforcement citations are issued. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 193/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; City of Annapolis; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4