START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 139 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 139 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Notice of Utility Bills in Residential Leases - Gas and 
Electric Services 
 
 
This bill generally (1) extends statutory provisions requiring landlords to provide certain 
notice and documentation to tenants that are required to make payments to the landlords 
for specified utility services to be applicable to gas and electric services; (2) restricts the 
aforementioned provisions to landlords of buildings with six or more residential dwelling 
units; and (3) establishes specific notice and documentation requirements for landlords of 
buildings with five or fewer residential dwelling units. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
Under current law, “utility service provider” means a public service company or a unit of 
State or local government that provides water or sewer utility services. The bill adds gas 
and electric to this definition. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 139/ Page 2 
“Ratio utility billing system” means allocation of one or more of a landlord’s utility 
charges, collected via a master meter, among the tenants by any method that does not 
measure actual per-tenant usage for the utility. 
 
Payments for Utilities to Landlord – Requirements 
 
Under current law, a landlord that requires a tenant to make payments for water or sewer 
utility services to the landlord must (1) use a written lease that provides notice that the 
tenant is responsible for making payments for water or sewer utility services to the landlord 
and (2) provide a copy of the water or sewer bill to the tenant.  
 
The bill also extends these provisions to be applicable to gas and electric services. Instead 
of providing a copy of the utility bill to the tenant, the bill also authorizes a landlord, before 
the beginning of the initial lease and each term thereafter for the duration of the tenancy, 
to notify the tenant in writing of the total utility costs billed to the landlord in the 
immediately preceding year for water, sewer, gas, or electric utility services, disaggregated 
by utility type. 
 
Under current law, the aforementioned requirements do not apply if a landlord requires a 
tenant, under an oral or written lease, to pay water or sewer bills directly to the utility 
service provider. The bill extends this exemption to gas and electric bills and exempts any 
utility that is allocated using a ratio utility billing system. Under current law, the statutory 
requirements are applicable to a landlord of a building that contains one or two residential 
dwelling units. The bill establishes that these requirements only apply to a landlord of a 
building that contains six or more residential dwelling units. 
 
The bill establishes that a landlord of a building that contains five or fewer residential 
dwelling units (and who requires a tenant to make payments for water, sewer, gas, or 
electric utility services to the landlord) must (1) use a written lease that provides notice that 
the tenant is responsible for making payments for water, sewer, gas, or electric utility 
services to the landlord and (2) provide a copy of the water, sewer, gas, or electric utility 
bill to the tenant. However, these provisions do not apply to a landlord that requires a 
tenant, under an oral or written lease, to pay water, sewer, gas, or electric bills directly to 
the utility service provider. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 171 (Senator Augustine) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 139/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3