START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 357

Chapter 357

(House Bill 108)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore County Board of Education – Nonstudent Member Compensation and
Student Member Scholarships – Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the annual compensation of certain nonstudent members of
the Baltimore County Board of Education; providing that the chair of the county
board is entitled to a certain annual compensation; altering the amount that a
student member of the board is granted for a certain scholarship; and generally
relating to annual compensation and scholarship amounts for members of the
Baltimore County Board of Education.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–2B–01(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–2B–06(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–2B–01.

(a) The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of:

(1) Seven nonpartisan elected members;

(2) Four appointed members; and

(3) One student member.

3–2B–06.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 357 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) (I) Each nonstudent member of the county board WHO IS NOT THE
CHAIR OF THE COUNTY BOARD is entitled to receive [$7,500] $16,500 annually as
compensation.

(II) THE CHAIR OF THE COUNTY BOARD IS ENTITLED TO
RECEIVE $17,500 ANNUALLY AS COMPENSATION.

(2) A student member who completes a full term on the county board shall
be granted a scholarship of [$7,500] $10,000 to be applied toward the student’s higher
education costs.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, pursuant to Article III, § 35
of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend or apply to the salary
or compensation of the nonstudent members of the Baltimore County Board of Education
or the scholarship amount for the student member of the Baltimore County Board of
Education while serving in a term of office beginning before the effective date of this Act,
but the provisions of this Act concerning the salary or compensation of the nonstudent
members of the Baltimore County Board of Education and the scholarship amount for the
student member of the Baltimore County Board of Education shall take effect at the
beginning of the next following term of office. This limitation does not apply to an individual
appointed or elected after the effective date of this Act to fill out an unexpired term.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, ~~2024~~ 2026.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2