START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 637

Chapter 637

(House Bill 102)

AN ACT concerning

Motor Vehicles – Motorcycles – Passenger Restrictions

FOR the purpose of requiring a rear passenger on a motorcycle to be able to firmly position
the passenger’s feet on the footrests of the motorcycle, subject to a certain exception;
and generally relating to passenger restrictions for motorcycles.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–1302
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–1302.

(a) The operator of a motorcycle may ride the motorcycle only on the permanent
and regular seat attached to it.

(b) The operator of a motorcycle may not carry any other person unless the
motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
on the permanent and regular seat, if designed for two persons, or on another seat firmly
attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.

(c) (1) A person other than the operator of a motorcycle may not ride on a
motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event
a passenger may ride on the permanent and regular seat, if designed for [2] TWO persons,
or on another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A PASSENGER MAY NOT RIDE ON A MOTORCYCLE ON A SEAT AT THE
REAR OF THE OPERATOR UNLESS THE PASSENGER IS ABLE TO POSITION THE
PASSENGER’S FEET FIRMLY ON THE FOOTRESTS WHILE SEATED.

(II) SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY
TO A PASSENGER ON A MOTORCYCLE WHO IS UNABLE TO POSITION THE
PASSENGER’S FEET FIRMLY ON THE FOOTRESTS DUE TO A PERMANENT PHYSICAL
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 637 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DISABILITY.

(d) A person may ride on a motorcycle operated under a Class M driver’s license
only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the
motorcycle.

(e) A person may not operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle,
or other article that prevents the person from keeping both hands on the steering
mechanism.

(f) The operator of a motorcycle may not carry any person in a position that
interferes with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator.

(g) A person other than the operator of a motorcycle may not ride in a position
that interferes with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2