START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 426

Chapter 426

(House Bill 183)

AN ACT concerning

Human Services – Food Supplement Program and
~~(Summer~~ ~~SNAP~~ ~~for~~ ~~Children~~ ~~Act)~~ Human Services Careers Scholarships –
Alterations

FOR the purpose of making technical and clarifying changes to the administration of
certain food supplement benefits for children; ~~increasing~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~
~~is~~ ~~required~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~budget~~ ~~bill~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~food~~ ~~supplement~~ ~~benefits~~
~~for~~ ~~children;~~ authorizing the Department of Human Services to use certain funding
to provide certain matching funds to a county to supplement certain benefits and to
offset certain administrative costs; altering certain eligibility criteria and certain
requirements for the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers Scholarships;
authorizing the Maryland Higher Education Commission to prorate scholarship
repayment under certain circumstances; and generally relating to the food
supplement program and scholarships for human services careers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 2–303(a)(1) and (b)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 2–303(a)(6) and 5–501.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–3901(d) and 18–3903(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–3901(e) and 18–3902(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 426 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Section 18–3903(e) and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

2–303.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(6) (I) “Service obligation” means to work in a targeted position for a
minimum [of 5 years] PERIOD OF TIME, AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, during the 8–year period immediately following [high school graduation]
THE AWARDING OF A SCHOLARSHIP UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR HUMAN
SERVICES CAREERS SCHOLARSHIP ESTABLISHED UNDER § 18–3902 OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE.

(II) THE SERVICE OBLIGATION PERIOD SHALL BE 15 MONTHS
FOR EACH ACADEMIC YEAR THAT THE SCHOLARSHIP IS AWARDED, REGARDLESS OF
THE CREDIT HOURS OR SEMESTERS COMPLETED BY THE RECIPIENT DURING THE
ACADEMIC YEAR.

(b) (1) There is a Pilot Program for Human Services Careers.

5–501.1.

(a) In this section, “child” means an individual who is under the age of 19 years
at any time during a calendar year.

(b) (1) Subject to subsections (e) and (f) of this section, if a household includes
an individual who receives a federally funded benefit under the food supplement program,
the State shall provide matching funds to a county to supplement benefits received under
§ 5–501 of this subtitle for each child in the household.

(2) For each child in the household, the combined State and county
supplement under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall equal at least:

(i) $30 per month in the months of June, July, and August; and

(ii) $10 in the month of December.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 426

(c) (1) A supplement provided under subsection [(b)] (B)(2)(I) of this section
shall be added to the household food supplement program benefit account [15 days after
the federally funded benefit is added to the account] in June, July, and August.

(2) A supplement provided under subsection [(b)] (B)(2)(II) of this section
shall be added to the household food supplement program benefit account [7 days after the
federally funded benefit is added to the account] in December.

(d) A household may not receive more than one supplement per child under
subsection (b) of this section.

(e) (1) (i) To receive funding in the following fiscal year for the
supplements under subsection (b) of this section, a county shall submit an application to
the Department on or before [December 1] THE DATE ESTABLISHED BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

(ii) The application shall include the following information:

1. [a proposed plan to successfully implement distribution of
supplements awarded to the county] THE NUMBER OF PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS TO BE
SERVED;

2. [a proposed plan to communicate the availability of food
supplement program benefits and supplements to eligible families] THE COUNTY’S
COMMITMENT TO CONDUCTING AN EVALUATION TO ASSESS THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
THE PROGRAM;

~~3.~~ ~~the~~ ~~process~~ ~~by~~ ~~which~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~will~~ ~~evaluate~~ ~~the~~ ~~impact~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~supplements;~~

[4. food supplement program eligibility and enrollment rates
~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~county;~~

5.] 4. 3. certification of the [maximum amount]
AVAILABILITY of local share funds [available]; and

[6.] 5. 4. any other relevant information required by the
Department.

(2) (i) On or before [January 15 each year] THE DATE ESTABLISHED
BY THE DEPARTMENT, the Department shall notify each county that submitted a
complete application of the amount of funding available in the next fiscal year for
supplements under subsection (b) of this section.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 426 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Receipt of available funding under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph is contingent on approval by the Department of a county’s final plan submitted
in accordance with paragraph (3) of this subsection.

(3) On or before [March 1 each year] THE DATE ESTABLISHED BY THE
DEPARTMENT, a county that is notified of available funding shall submit a final plan to
the Department that includes:

(i) a communication plan, COORDINATED WITH THE
DEPARTMENT, to inform eligible families of the food supplement program and the
supplements available under this section;

(ii) if funding is not sufficient to provide a minimum supplement of
$100 to all children in the county receiving food supplement program benefits in the fiscal
year, a designation of which children will be eligible to receive the supplements under this
section;

(iii) the criteria used to determine eligibility under item (ii) of this
paragraph; and

(iv) an evaluation plan to measure:

1. the impact of the supplements on recipients;

2. food supplement program participation; and

3. any other relevant information required by the
Department.

(4) (i) The Department shall review a final plan submitted under
paragraph (3) of this subsection and approve or reject the final plan.

(ii) The Department shall notify a county of its decision under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph on or before April 1.

(iii) If the Department rejects a county’s final plan, the county may
submit a revised final plan for approval on or before April 15.

(iv) If the Department approves a county’s final plan, the
Department shall certify the amount of funding that will be provided for the county in the
following fiscal year.

(5) Each county with an approved final plan shall be awarded funding in
accordance with subsection (f) of this section.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 426

(f) (1) The State and local shares of funding required for a county with an
approved final plan shall be equal to the State and local share percentages established by
the State and local cost–share formula for that county required under § 5–303(d)(3)(i) of
the Education Article.

(2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, in
each fiscal year, the Department shall provide the State share of funds for each county with
an approved final plan for the fiscal year in an amount equal to the product of:

1. the total amount of funds appropriated under subsection
(g) of this section; and

2. the number of children in households that receive a federal
benefit under the food supplement program in the county, divided by the total number of
children in households that receive a federal benefit under the food supplement program in
all counties with an approved final plan.

(ii) The amount of funds provided to a county under subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph may not be greater than the State share amount that corresponds to
the maximum available local share funds certified under subsection (e)(1)(ii)5 of this
section.

(3) (i) A county may provide funding in addition to the funding required
under paragraph (1) of this subsection to increase the number of supplements provided in
the county.

(ii) Funding provided by a county under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph may not affect the amount of funding the Department is required to provide
under paragraph (2) of this subsection.

~~(g)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~year,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~shall~~ ~~include~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~budget~~ ~~bill~~ ~~an~~
appropriation of at least [$200,000] $5,000,000 for the supplements under subsection (b)
~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~

(G) SUBJECT TO THE STATE BUDGET, THE DEPARTMENT MAY USE THE
FUNDING THE STATE IS REQUIRED TO PROVIDE UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1) OF THIS
SECTION TO:

(1) PROVIDE FUNDS TO A COUNTY TO SUPPLEMENT BENEFITS; AND

(2) OFFSET ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF THE FEDERAL SUMMER
ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER PROGRAM.

Article – Education

18–3901.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 426 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) “Scholarship” means the Pilot Program for Human Services Careers
Scholarship established under this subtitle.

(e) (1) (I) “Service obligation” means to work in a targeted position for a
minimum [of 5 years] PERIOD OF TIME, AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, during the 8–year period immediately following [high school graduation]
THE AWARDING OF A SCHOLARSHIP.

(II) THE SERVICE OBLIGATION PERIOD SHALL BE 15 MONTHS
FOR EACH ACADEMIC YEAR THAT THE SCHOLARSHIP IS AWARDED, REGARDLESS OF
THE CREDIT HOURS OR SEMESTERS COMPLETED BY THE RECIPIENT DURING THE
ACADEMIC YEAR.

(2) “Service obligation” includes work in a targeted position while a student
is attending an eligible institution.

18–3902.

(c) A Scholarship recipient shall:

(1) Be a Maryland resident or a graduate of a Maryland high school;

(2) Be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible institution
in a program that will enable the recipient to obtain a credential or degree that is necessary
to work in or further a career in a targeted position in the Department of Human Services;

(3) [Sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion
of the recipient’s required studies] ENTER INTO A WRITTEN AGREEMENT WITH THE
COMMISSION, IN THE FORM AND MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THE OFFICE, TO MEET
THE CONDITIONS OF THE SCHOLARSHIP UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

(4) Maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale
or its equivalent; and

(5) Satisfy any additional criteria established by the Office or the
Department of Human Services.

18–3903.

(d) A Scholarship recipient shall repay the Office the funds received under this
subtitle as set forth in § 18–112 of this title if the recipient does not:

(1) Satisfy the degree requirements of the eligible course of study or
program or fulfill other requirements as provided in this subtitle; or

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 426

(2) Perform the service obligation after graduation.

(E) THE AMOUNT TO BE REPAID FOR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE SERVICE
OBLIGATION SHALL BE:

(1) EQUAL TO THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF FUNDS RECEIVED; OR

(2) AS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(F) (1) THE SCHOLARSHIP IS NONREFUNDABLE.

(2) THE AMOUNT OF THE SCHOLARSHIP SHALL BE REDUCED IF THE
TOTAL AMOUNT OF SCHOLARSHIP FUNDS AND ADDITIONAL RESOURCES EXCEED
TUITION AND MANDATORY FEES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7