START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 24

Chapter 24

(House Bill 231)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Special Registration Plates – Gold Star and Next of Kin Families

FOR the purpose of authorizing the recipient of a U.S. Department of Defense Next of Kin
lapel button to apply for special registration plates; waiving the initial vehicle
registration fee associated with, ~~and~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~name~~ ~~and~~ ~~rank~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~deceased~~
~~service~~ ~~member~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~included~~ ~~on,~~ special registration plates issued to the recipient
of a Gold Star or a Next of Kin lapel button; and generally relating to special
registration plates for recipients of Gold Stars and Next of Kin lapel buttons.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–619.1(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–619.1(a)(4), (b), and (c)(2)(iii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

13–619.1.

(a) (1) The owner of a motor vehicle, or a lessee of the vehicle under a lease not
intended as security, or a director, officer, employee, or partner of a business entity that
owns the vehicle may apply to the Administration for the assignment of a special
registration number and special registration plates under this section for a vehicle included
in one of the following classes:

(i) A Class A (passenger) vehicle;

(ii) A Class E (truck) vehicle with a one ton or less manufacturer’s
rated capacity;

(iii) A Class M (multipurpose) vehicle; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 24 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) A Class D (motorcycle) vehicle.

(4) To be eligible for a special registration described under subsection
(c)(2)(iii) of this section, an applicant shall provide proof that is satisfactory to the
Administration that the applicant is a recipient of the U.S. Department of Defense Gold
Star OR NEXT OF KIN LAPEL BUTTON for surviving spouses, parents, and next of kin of
members of the armed forces who lost their lives [in combat] WHILE SERVING ON ACTIVE
DUTY OR WHILE ASSIGNED TO A RESERVE OR NATIONAL GUARD UNIT IN A DRILL
STATUS.

(b) (1) [In] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, IN addition to the annual registration fee otherwise required under this
title, an owner of a vehicle assigned a special registration under this section shall pay a fee
as determined by the Administration each time new registration plates are issued for the
vehicle.

(2) The fee shall be calculated to:

(i) Recover the costs incurred by the Administration in carrying out
the provisions of this section; and

(ii) Result in a surplus of at least $10 for each issuance of new
registration plates under this section.

(3) (i) The portion of the additional fee charged under paragraph (2)(i)
of this subsection shall be retained by the Administration for the purpose of recovering the
Administration’s costs under this section.

(ii) The portion of the additional fee charged under paragraph (2)(ii)
of this subsection:

1. May not be retained by or transferred to any agency of the
State for any purpose; and

2. Shall be credited to the Maryland Veterans Trust Fund
established under § 9–913 of the State Government Article.

(iii) No portion of the additional fee charged under this subsection
may be credited to the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle Revenue Account for distribution under
§ 8–403 or § 8–404 of this article.

(4) A FEE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CHARGED FOR THE
ISSUANCE OF NEW SPECIAL REGISTRATION PLATES DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION
(C)(2)(III) OF THIS SECTION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 24

(c) Special registration plates issued under this section:

(2) Shall include:

(iii) An emblem or logo indicating that the registration plate holder
is the recipient of the U.S. Department of Defense Gold Star OR NEXT OF KIN LAPEL
BUTTON AND THE GIVEN NAME AND RANK OF THE DECEASED SERVICE MEMBER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3