START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 229 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 229 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Motor Vehicle Insurance Companies - Requirements 
 
   
This departmental bill requires each insurer (or other provider) of required motor vehicle 
security to (1) participate in the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) online verification 
program (OLV) for vehicle insurance policies for law enforcement and administrative 
purposes and (2) electronically provide MVA with all active insurance policies in the 
format and at the interval required by MVA. The bill takes effect January 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or 
finances, MVA is likely to experience administrative efficiencies, as discussed below.  
 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF) Effect:  MAIF can meet the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Transportation has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Required Security 
 
Maryland law requires an owner of a motor vehicle that is required to be registered in the 
State to maintain insurance for the vehicle during the registration period. MVA may not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 229/ Page 2 
issue or transfer the registration of a motor vehicle unless the owner or prospective owner 
of the vehicle provides satisfactory evidence to MVA that the required security is in effect. 
 
If the required security for a vehicle lapses at any time, the registration of that vehicle is 
suspended automatically as of the date of the lapse, effective within 60 days after 
notification to MVA. After receiving this notice, MVA must make a reasonable effort to 
notify the owner of the vehicle that registration on the vehicle has been suspended. The 
registration remains suspended until the vehicle owner submits evidence of replaced 
security on a designated MVA form, certified by the insurance provider, along with the 
uninsured motorist penalty fee. Additionally, Chapter 549 of 2022 prohibits MVA from 
assessing a penalty for a vehicle if the vehicle’s registration plates are returned within 
10 days after the termination or lapse and other specified conditions are met. 
 
Requirements for Insurers 
 
To assist MVA in its duty to ensure vehicles operated in Maryland maintain the required 
insurance, each insurer of motor vehicles registered in the State must immediately notify 
MVA electronically of new motor vehicle insurance policies issued for such vehicles and, 
for each fleet policy, electronically notify MVA every 30 days of any additions, deletions, 
or modifications to the fleet policy, including those policy numbers affected. 
 
Background:  MVA advises that the bill is needed to improve and modernize the process 
by which insurance companies for vehicles registered in the State notify MVA of new and 
canceled automobile insurance policies.  
 
MVA advises that 66% of motor vehicle insurers currently use OLV while the remainder 
still track and submit the information through transaction data manually, which can more 
often lead to delays and mistakes. Through OLV, participating insurers automatically 
submit all relevant policy data to MVA on a nightly basis, allowing MVA to match expired 
and lapsed policies to vehicles and granting both MVA and law enforcement officers access 
to this information in real time to determine whether any given vehicle is insured. 
 
State Expenditures:  While the bill is not anticipated to materially affect MVA operations 
or finances, MVA is anticipated to experience administrative efficiencies in its operations, 
most notably during its investigations into motor vehicle insurance lapses. 
 
For example, MVA advises that, in fiscal 2022, 201,549 lapse cases were closed without 
payment of an uninsured motorist penalty and, of that total, 77.4% of the cases (156,042) 
were closed after MVA determined the vehicle in question did not actually have a lapse in 
its insurance coverage that warranted a penalty. With each insurer participating in OLV 
and more accurate and consistent data available to MVA as a result, these false positive 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 229/ Page 3 
cases will be much less common, allowing MVA to direct its staff time and resources to 
investigating actual insurance lapses and other duties. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been considered within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 254 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of State Police; Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 229/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Vehicle Laws – Motor Vehicle Insurance Companies – 
Requirements  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0229 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4