START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 265 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 265 
(Delegate Qi) 
Economic Matters and Health and 
Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Insurance - Producer Licensing Requirements - Education and Experience 
 
   
This bill repeals specified education and experience requirements necessary for an 
individual applicant to obtain an insurance producer license from the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) for most applicants, specifically those that require an individual to 
take a prelicensing course and work for at least one year prior to applying for an insurance 
producer license. The bill also makes a series of technical and conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  To act as an insurance producer in the State, a person must 
generally obtain a license from MIA. To obtain an insurance producer license as an 
individual (as opposed to a business), the individual must meet specified requirements, 
including that the applicant (1) be trustworthy and of good character; (2) be at least 
18 years old; (3) pass a written examination related to the type of insurance for which the 
license is being requested; and (4) pay the initial license fee.  
 
Under current law, an individual applicant must also meet the following requirements; 
however, these requirements are repealed by the bill. An individual applicant must:  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 265/ Page 2 
 
successfully complete a program of studies that has been established or approved 
by the Insurance Commissioner, as specified; and  
 
have been regularly employed for periods totaling at least one year during the 
three years immediately preceding the date of application, as specified, and working 
in connection with the kind or subdivision of insurance for which the applicant 
wants to be licensed (with specified exceptions for applicants previously in the 
Armed Forces and who belong to specified professional organizations).  
 
However, the bill keeps in place the requirement that an applicant for a license to act as an 
insurance producer for limited line credit insurance must successfully complete a 
prelicensing course as a condition of licensure.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Some insurance producers in the State are or work directly for 
small businesses, and the bill removes a barrier to entry for most individuals seeking to be 
licensed as an insurance producer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 336 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2