START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 251 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 251 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Unemployment Insurance - Covered Employment - Employees of Governmental 
Entities or Charitable, Educational, or Religious Organizations 
 
   
This departmental bill specifies that certain limitations on the payment of benefits to 
employees of governmental entities or charitable, educational, or religious organizations 
do not apply with respect to service in other covered employment, even if the service is 
provided exclusively for a governmental entity or a charitable, educational, religious, or 
other organization. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations, including the 
Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF). The bill is clarifying in nature and continues 
existing practice, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under § 8-909 of the Labor and Employment Article, 
benefits based on service in covered employment with governmental entities or charitable, 
educational, or religious organizations are generally payable in the same amount, on the 
same terms, and subject to the same conditions as benefits payable on the basis of other 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 251/ Page 2 
service in covered employment. However, there are circumstances under which benefits 
may not be paid during established time periods, such as between successive academic 
terms or years when the individual has a reasonable assurance that the individual will 
perform the services in the second term or year. 
 
The bill specifies that the limitations related to successive academic terms and other 
established time periods do not apply with respect to service in other covered employment, 
including covered employment for a for-profit employing unit, even if the service is 
provided exclusively for a governmental entity or a charitable, educational, religious, or 
other organization. 
 
Background:  MDL advises that the Division of Unemployment Insurance (DUI) has 
historically interpreted § 8-909 of the Labor and Employment Article to provide that 
individuals engaged in covered employment for for-profit organizations, even if those 
entities provide services exclusively for educational institutions, do not have reasonable 
assurance that they will perform the services in a second term or academic year and are, 
therefore, eligible for benefits during periods of unemployment.  
 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government granted DUI flexibility to use 
non-State merit staff to adjudicate issues on unemployment insurance (UI) claims, and DUI 
contracted with a vendor for adjudication assistance. A vendor staff adjudicated a 
reasonable assurance issue contrary to DUI’s longstanding interpretation and denied a 
contract employee (not employed by a school district directly) UI benefits on the basis of 
reasonable assurance. The claimant appealed, and the adjudication decision was confirmed 
by the Lower Appeals Division and the Board of Appeals (the division’s appellate bodies), 
and, ultimately, the circuit court.  
 
However, since that time, DUI has continued to apply its historic interpretation of the 
reasonable assurance provision, as the appeals decisions were not precedential decisions. 
As such, further reasonable assurance issues have been dealt with the way DUI has 
historically done so, i.e., claimants who are employees of private employers that contract 
with school districts have not been denied benefits under the reasonable assurance 
provision. 
 
As such, the bill simply provides clarity to DUI, the Lower Appeals Division, and the 
Board of Appeals so that “reasonable assurance” is interpreted and applied consistently 
going forward, while having no material effect on State finances or operations, including 
those of UITF.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 251/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 251/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Unemployment Insurance - Covered Employment - Employees of 
Governmental Entities or Charitable, Educational, or Religious 
Organizations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 251 
 
PREPARED BY: 
MDL 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 

END OF PAGE 4