START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 260 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 260 
(Delegate Chang) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Personnel - Collective Bargaining - Supervisory Employees 
 
 
This bill repeals the statutory exclusion from collective bargaining for most supervisory 
State employees in Executive Branch agencies, excluding higher education institutions, 
thereby establishing collective bargaining rights for those employees. Eligible supervisory 
employees must be defined by regulations, adopted by the Secretary of Budget and 
Management, and are subject to the Maryland Public Employee Relations Act. Generally, 
supervisory employees must have a separate bargaining unit. Additionally, the bill excludes 
managerial or confidential employees of the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) from 
collective bargaining. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $86,500 in FY 2025, as 
discussed below; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. State 
expenditures (all funds) may increase beginning in FY 2025 for additional human 
resources/labor relations employees within State agencies and increase further, potentially 
significantly, likely beginning in FY 2026 to the extent collective bargaining negotiations 
result in additional rights, benefits, or compensation for affected employees, as discussed 
below. Any such impact (or any resultant impact on revenues) cannot be reliably estimated 
or predicted and is not shown below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
86,500 
103,700 
108,300 
113,000 
118,000 
Net Effect 
($86,500) 
($103,700) 
($108,300) 
($113,000) 
($118,000) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 260/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Employees and Collective Bargaining 
 
Title 3 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article establishes statutory collective 
bargaining rights for a large number of State employees. Employees, employers, and 
exclusive representatives subject to Title 3 are also subject to the provisions of the 
Maryland Public Employee Relations Act. 
 
Maryland’s collective bargaining law generally applies to employees of the 
Executive Branch departments, the Maryland Insurance Administration, the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation, the State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency, 
the University System of Maryland (USM), the Office of the Comptroller, the Maryland 
Transportation Authority (MDTA) (for those who are not police officers), the State 
Retirement Agency, the Maryland State Department of Education, the Maryland 
Environmental 
Service, 
the 
Maryland 
School 
for 
the 
Deaf 
(MSD), 
Morgan State University (MSU), St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC), along with specified firefighters for the 
Martin State Airport and all full-time MDTA police officers at the rank of first sergeant 
and below. Chapter 46 of 2022 applied the State’s collective bargaining laws to employees 
of OPD as well, but it did not specifically exclude supervisory, managerial, or confidential 
employees of OPD from collective bargaining. 
 
The State’s collective bargaining law does not apply to:   
 
 
Maryland Transit Administration employees; 
 
Legislative and Judicial Branch personnel; 
 
elected and appointed officials; 
 
the Governor’s and Lieutenant Governor’s staff; 
 
an employee assigned to, or with access to records of, the Public Employee 
Relations Board (PERB); 
 
special appointees and executive service personnel in the State Personnel 
Management System (SPMS); 
 
senior administrators, faculty members, student employees, and other designated 
employees of USM, MSU, SMCM, or BCCC; 
 
the chief, deputy, or assistant administrator of a unit with an independent personnel 
system; 
 
temporary or contractual employees in SPMS; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 260/ Page 3 
 
temporary, contractual, or emergency employees in a unit of the Executive Branch 
with an independent personnel system; 
 
an employee who is entitled to participate in collective bargaining under another 
law; 
 
an employee whose participation in a labor organization is contrary to the State’s 
ethics laws; and 
 
any supervisory, managerial, or confidential employee as defined by regulation. 
 
Parties to the collective bargaining process must make every reasonable effort to conclude 
their negotiations by January 1 for any item requiring appropriation for the fiscal year that 
begins the following July 1. The Governor must include in the annual budget bill submitted 
to the General Assembly any amounts in the budgets of the principal units required to 
accommodate any additional cost resulting from the negotiations for the fiscal year 
beginning the following July 1, if the legislative changes have been negotiated to become 
effective in that fiscal year. 
 
Rights of Employees 
 
Employees subject to the State’s collective bargaining law have the right to (1) take part or 
refrain from taking part in forming, joining, supporting, or participating in any employee 
organization or its lawful activities; (2) be fairly represented by their exclusive 
representative, if any, in collective bargaining; and (3) generally, engage in other concerted 
activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection. 
 
Public Employee Relations Board and Bargaining Units 
 
The Public Employee Relations Act of 2023 established PERB, which oversees collective 
bargaining activities for certain public employees in Maryland. The Act repealed the State 
Labor Relations Board, the State Higher Education Labor Relations Board, and the Public 
School Labor Relations Board, consolidating their duties under PERB. PERB is a 
five-member independent unit of State government responsible for administering and 
enforcing the State’s collective bargaining law (the Maryland Public Employee Relations 
Act), particularly the establishment of new collective bargaining units and the certification 
of exclusive employee representatives for those units. In that capacity, the board holds 
elections for exclusive employee representatives, when petitioned to do so, and adjudicates 
dispute resolution cases related to the collective bargaining process. 
 
Each institution of higher education must have a separate bargaining unit, and for these 
institutions, appropriate bargaining units must consist of (1) all eligible nonexempt 
employees except sworn police officers; (2) all eligible exempt employees; and (3) all 
eligible sworn police officers. Additionally, MDTA police officers at the rank of 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 260/ Page 4 
first sergeant and below must have a separate bargaining unit, and faculty at MSD must 
have a separate bargaining unit. 
 
Generally, the Secretary of Budget and Management has the authority to assign 
classification titles and positions to bargaining units as appropriate. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Public Employee Relations Board 
 
If a petition is filed to form a union or unions, PERB must determine appropriate unit 
members and either run an election, or, depending on the showing of interest, certify a 
particular union as the bargaining unit representative. PERB incurs postage expenses to 
mail ballots, and, to the extent on-site elections are necessary, PERB may incur travel and 
other administrative expenses. Thus, general fund expenditures for PERB increase 
minimally to hold elections, if warranted, to determine whether affected employees will be 
represented by a particular union for collective bargaining purposes. 
 
Once an election process is concluded and the petitioning union is successful, the collective 
bargaining process begins. PERB advises that most disputes between parties occur in the 
first three years of the collective bargaining relationship, so PERB may experience an 
increase in filings of unfair labor practice charges, impasse claims, or negotiability 
disputes. Additionally, PERB receives reimbursable funds from public higher education 
institutions based on the percentage of work time PERB employees spend on those 
institutions. Thus, to the extent that PERB employees spend more time on collective 
bargaining matters or processing cases for State agencies/State employees/exclusive 
representatives as a result of the bill and less time on those same matters or cases for public 
higher education institutions (and/or their employees/exclusive representatives), 
reimbursable expenditures decrease and general fund expenditures increase. 
 
Collective Bargaining Costs for State Agencies 
 
The bill increases State expenditures (all funds) in two ways if a union is formed for a 
bargaining unit. First, adding more bargaining units may increase the workload of 
human resources/labor relations units within State agencies to respond to additional union 
matters, such as inquiries on memoranda of understanding, grievances, performance 
management, and other labor matters. Collective bargaining of supervisors may create 
conflicts of interest when participating in decision making and personnel actions, such as 
the disciplinary process of employees, thereby making some processes more complex. 
Thus, to the extent the additional workload within human resources/labor relations units 
increases, additional staff may be needed. While several agencies anticipate needing 
one additional human resources/employee relations employee, others estimate needing 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 260/ Page 5 
even more. For example, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
anticipates needing four additional employees to handle the additional grievances, appeals, 
administration, and advocacy stemming from supervisors joining a union. The Department 
of Legislative Services notes, however, that the extent to which the workloads of human 
resources/employee relations functions increase as a result of the bill cannot be reliably 
predicted, as it depends on whether supervisors elect to participate in collective bargaining 
and the demands of the unions, among other factors. To the extent that additional personnel 
are needed to manage increased responsibilities under the bill, expenditures (all funds) 
increase beginning as early as fiscal 2025 if a petitioning union is successful. 
 
Second, State agencies may incur potentially significant costs depending on the rights, 
benefits, and/or salaries negotiated. Any such costs cannot be reliably predicted or 
estimated at this time, as they depend wholly on the outcome of any subsequent 
negotiations. The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) estimates that 
approximately 3,900 supervisors in SPMS and 1,400 supervisors in the Maryland 
Department of Transportation are eligible to collectively bargain under the bill and, as such, 
the impact could be significant. Given the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date, 
negotiations may occur as early as the latter half of fiscal 2025 and any agreed-upon rights, 
benefits, and/or salaries are unlikely to become effective until fiscal 2026 at the earliest. 
 
Specifically excluding managerial or confidential employees of OPD from collective 
bargaining has no fiscal effect as this codifies existing practice. 
 
Department of Budget and Management Staff Costs 
 
Additionally, general fund expenditures for DBM increase by $86,483 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one labor relations representative for DBM to assist with negotiations, potential 
grievances, and correspondence with the representatives of bargaining units. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$79,227 
Operating Expenses 
    7,256 
Total FY 2025 DBM Staff Expenditures 
$86,483 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 260/ Page 6 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
State expenditures (all funds) may increase further to the extent that grievances stemming 
from the bill are referred to the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). Reimbursable 
revenues and expenditures for OAH increase accordingly. Agencies pay OAH on a 
per-case basis to cover the costs associated with adjudication; however, the number of 
cases referred to OAH annually as a result of the bill cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Public Employee Relations Act of 2023 established 
legislative intent that State law with respect to the labor rights of public-sector employees 
follow the rights of employees under the federal National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). 
NLRA excludes supervisors from coverage under the Act, although supervisors that have 
been discriminated against for refusing to violate NLRA may be covered. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 298 and HB 183 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 192 (Senator Kramer) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Transportation Authority; Maryland Department of 
Aging; Maryland Environmental Service; Department of Commerce; Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management; Comptroller’s Office; Office of the Public 
Defender; Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland School for the Deaf; Public Employee Relations Board; Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of 
Human Services; Department of Information Technology; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Military Department; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans Affairs; Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; State Retirement Agency; National 
Labor Relations Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 260/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7