START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 253

Chapter 253

(House Bill 216)

AN ACT concerning

Condominiums – Common Elements – Clean Energy Equipment

FOR the purpose of authorizing ~~certain~~ ~~governing~~ ~~bodies~~ the board of directors of a
condominium to grant certain interests affecting the common elements of the
condominium for the installation and use of leased clean energy equipment; and
generally relating to the common elements of a condominium and leased clean
energy equipment.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11–125
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

11–125.

(a) The existing physical boundaries of any unit or common element constructed
or reconstructed in substantial conformity with the condominium plat shall be conclusively
presumed to be its boundaries, regardless of the shifting, settlement, or lateral movement
of any building and regardless of minor variations between the physical boundaries as
described in the declaration or shown on the condominium plat and the existing physical
boundaries of any such unit or common element. This presumption applies only to
encroachments within the condominium.

(b) If any portion of any common element encroaches on any unit or if any portion
of a unit encroaches on any common element or any other unit, as a result of the duly
authorized construction or repair of a building, a valid easement for the encroachment and
for the maintenance of the encroachment exists so long as the building stands.

(c) An easement for mutual support shall exist in the units and common
elements.

(d) The grant or other disposition of a condominium unit shall include and grant,
and be subject to, any easement arising under the provisions of this section without specific
or particular reference to the easement.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 253 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) (1) The council of unit owners or its authorized designee shall have an
irrevocable right and an easement to enter units to investigate damage or make repairs
when the investigation or repairs reasonably appear necessary for public safety or to
prevent damage to other portions of the condominium.

(2) Except in cases involving manifest danger to public safety or property,
the council of unit owners shall make a reasonable effort to give notice to the owner of any
unit to be entered for the purpose of investigation or repair.

(3) If damage is inflicted on the common elements or any unit through
which access is taken, the council of unit owners is liable for the prompt repair.

(4) An entry by the council of unit owners for the purposes specified in this
subsection may not be considered a trespass.

(f) (1) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE declaration or bylaws may give the council of unit owners authority to
grant easements, rights–of–way, licenses, leases in excess of 1 year, or similar interests
affecting the common elements of the condominium if the grant is approved by the
affirmative vote of unit owners having [66 2/3 percent] TWO–THIRDS or more of the votes,
and with the express written consent of the mortgagees holding an interest in those units
as to which unit owners vote affirmatively. Any easement, right–of–way, license, or similar
interest granted by the council of unit owners under this subsection shall state that the
grant was approved by unit owners having at least [66 2/3 percent] TWO–THIRDS of the
votes, and by the corresponding mortgagees.

(2) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE board of directors may, by majority vote, grant easements,
rights–of–way, licenses, leases in excess of 1 year, or similar interests for the provision of
utility services or communication systems for the exclusive benefit of units within the
condominium regime. These actions by the board of directors are subject to the following
requirements:

(i) The action shall be taken at a meeting of the board held after at
least 30–days’ notice to all unit owners and mortgagees of record with the condominium;

(ii) At the meeting, the board may not act until all unit owners and
mortgagees shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present their views on the
proposed easement, right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest; AND

(iii) The easement, right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest
shall contain the following provisions:

1. The service or system shall be installed or affixed to the
premises at no cost to the individual unit owners or the council of unit owners other than

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 253

charges normally paid for like services by residents of similar or comparable dwelling units
within the same area;

2. The unit owners and council of unit owners shall be
indemnified for any damage arising out of the installation of the service or system; and

3. The board of directors shall be provided the right to
approve of the design for installation of the service or system in order to insure that the
installation conforms to any conditions which are reasonable to protect the safety,
functioning, and appearance of the premises.

(3) By majority vote, the board of directors may grant to the State
perpetual easements, rights–of–way, licenses, leases in excess of 1 year, or similar interests
affecting the common elements of the condominium for bulkhead construction, dune
construction or restoration, beach replenishment, or periodic maintenance and replacement
construction, on Maryland’s ocean beaches, including rights in the State to restrict access
to dune areas. These actions by the board of directors are subject to the following
requirements:

(i) The action shall be taken at a meeting of the board held after at
least 30–days’ notice to all unit owners and mortgagees of record with the condominium;
and

(ii) At the meeting, the board may not act until all unit owners and
mortgagees shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present their views on the
proposed easement, right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest.

(4) By majority vote, the board of directors may settle an eminent domain
proceeding or grant to the State or any county, municipality, or agency or instrumentality
thereof with condemnation authority, perpetual easements, rights–of–way, licenses, leases
in excess of 1 year, or similar interests affecting the common elements of the condominium
for road, highway, sidewalk, bikeway, storm drain, sewer, water, utility, and similar public
purposes. These actions by the board of directors are subject to the following requirements:

(i) The action shall be taken at a meeting of the board held after at
least 60–days’ notice to all unit owners and all first mortgagees listed with the
condominium;

(ii) The notice shall include information provided by the
condemnation authority that describes the purpose and the extent of the property being
acquired for public use; and

(iii) At the meeting, the board may not act until all unit owners and
mortgagees in attendance have been afforded a reasonable opportunity to present their
views on the proposed easement, right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 253 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) (I) IN THIS PARAGRAPH, “CLEAN ENERGY EQUIPMENT” MEANS
ELECTRIC VEHICLE RECHARGING EQUIPMENT, SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT, AND
ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS.

(II) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS, BY A MAJORITY VOTE, OR THE COUNCIL OF UNIT
OWNERS, BY THE AFFIRMATIVE VOTE OF UNIT OWNERS HAVING AT LEAST 51% OF
THE VOTES IN THE COUNCIL, MAY GRANT LEASES IN EXCESS OF 1 YEAR OR SIMILAR
INTERESTS AFFECTING THE COMMON ELEMENTS OF THE CONDOMINIUM FOR THE
INSTALLATION AND USE OF LEASED CLEAN ENERGY EQUIPMENT.

(III) THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS MAY GRANT AN INTEREST
UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH ONLY AT A MEETING OF THE BOARD HELD AFTER AT LEAST
30–DAYS’ NOTICE TO ALL UNIT OWNERS OF RECORD.

(IV) A MORTGAGEE OR GROUP OF MORTGAGEES MAY NOT
OVERRULE A VOTE TO GRANT AN INTEREST UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH.

[(5)] (6) The action of the board of directors granting any easement,
right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest under paragraphs (2), (3), or (4) of this
subsection shall not be final until the following have occurred:

(i) Within 15 days after the vote by the board to grant an easement,
right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest, a petition may be filed with the board of
directors signed by the unit owners having at least [15 percent] 15% of the votes calling
for a special meeting of unit owners to vote on the question of a disapproval of the action of
the board of directors granting such easement, right–of–way, license, lease, or similar
interest. If no such petition is received within 15 days, the decision of the board shall be
final;

(ii) If a qualifying petition is filed, a special meeting shall be held no
less than 15 days or more than 30 days from receipt of the petition. At the special meeting,
if a quorum is not present, the decision of the board of directors shall be final;

(iii) 1. If a special meeting is held and [50 percent] 50% of the
unit owners present and voting disapprove the grant, and the unit owners voting to
disapprove the grant are more than [33 percent] 33% of the total votes in the condominium,
then the grant shall be void; or

2. If the vote of the unit owners is not more than [33 percent]
33% of the total votes in the condominium, the decision of the board or council to make the
grant shall be final;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 253

(iv) Mortgagees shall receive notice of and be entitled to attend and
speak at such special meeting; and

(v) Any easement, right–of–way, license, lease, or similar interest
granted by the board of directors under the provisions of this subsection shall state that
the grant was approved in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.

[(6)] (7) The provisions of this subsection are applicable to all
condominiums, regardless of the date they were established.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5