START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 238 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 238 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Health) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Clean Indoor Air Act - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the ban on smoking in public indoor areas, places of 
employment, and on specified mass transit systems under the Clean Indoor Air Act (CIAA) 
to include “vaping.” Signage that states “No Smoking or Vaping” must be conspicuously 
posted and properly maintained in each indoor area open to the public (including each 
public entrance to an indoor area) where smoking or vaping is prohibited under CIAA. The 
bill adds new defined terms and alters the definitions of existing terms under CIAA, 
conforms existing affirmative defense language, and repeals obsolete language regarding 
waivers. Uncodified language (1) requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to 
convene a workgroup to study the issuance of alcoholic beverages licenses to tobacconists; 
(2) prohibits issuing such licenses to tobacconists from July 1, 2024, through July 1, 2026; 
and (3) requires the workgroup, by July 1, 2025, to report its findings and recommendations 
to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by up to $215,600 
in FY 2025 only for signage. MDH general fund expenditures increase by $48,800 in 
FY 2025 only for contractual staff. Compliance with and enforcement of the bill can be 
handled by State agencies with existing budgeted resources. Potential minimal increase in 
special fund revenues to the Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF) as a result of fines. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
48,800 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
215,600 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($264,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 238/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local health departments can handle enforcement with existing resources; 
any signage that local governments must install to comply with the bill’s requirements can 
likely be paid for with existing budgeted funds. Revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDH has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Vaping” means the use of an electronic smoking device (ESD) or any 
device through which the user inhales aerosol containing tobacco, cannabis, or hemp. 
 
The bill expands the current definition of “environmental smoke” to include the complex 
mixture formed from the escaping aerosol of an ESD or exhaled as ESD aerosol. 
 
The current affirmative defense to a complaint brought against a person for a violation of 
CIAA is expanded to include that a person or an employee of the person (1) posted a “No 
Smoking or Vaping” sign; (2) removed all vaping paraphernalia; and (3) if a violation 
occurred in a bar or restaurant, refused to seat or serve anyone who was vaping in a 
prohibited area and, if the individual continued to vape after an initial warning, asked the 
individual to leave. 
 
The bill also conforms workplace smoking ban language under CIAA to specify that 
regulations must prohibit environmental smoke rather than environmental tobacco smoke 
in indoor places of employment not normally open to the public.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Electronic smoking device” means a device that can be used to deliver aerosolized or 
vaporized nicotine to an individual inhaling from the device. ESD includes an electronic 
cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic 
hookah, a vape pen, and vaping liquid, and, except as otherwise specified, any component, 
part, or accessory of such a device regardless of whether or not it is sold separately. 
 
“Environmental smoke” means the complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a 
burning tobacco, cannabis, or hemp product or smoke exhaled by the smoker. “Smoking” 
means the burning of a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or any other matter or substance that 
contains tobacco. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 238/ Page 3 
“Hemp” means the plant Cannabis sativa L. and any part of that plant, including all 
derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts, and salts of isomers, whether 
growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed 
0.3% on a dry weight basis. “Hemp” does not include any plant or part of a plant intended 
for a use that is regulated under Title 13, Subtitle 33 of the Health-General Article. 
 
Smoking Ban 
 
Under CIAA, a person generally may not smoke in (1) an indoor area open to the public; 
(2) an indoor place in which meetings are open to the public; (3) a government-owned 
or -operated means of mass transportation; (4) an indoor place of employment; (5) a private 
home used by a licensed child care provider; or (6) a private vehicle used for public 
transportation of children or as part of health care or day care transportation. The 
prohibition includes bars, clubs, restaurants, pubs, taverns, retail establishments, theaters, 
concert halls, athletic facilities, financial service institutions, government buildings, 
educational institutions, museums, and libraries. However, the prohibition does not apply 
to (1) private homes or residences; (2) private vehicles; (3) a hotel or motel room as long 
as the total percent of rooms so used does not exceed 25%; (4) specified tobacco facilities 
and retail businesses (including tobacconists); or (5) a laboratory for the purpose of 
conducting scientific research into the health effects of tobacco smoke. 
 
Penalty Provisions 
 
A person who violates a provision of CIAA (or a regulation adopted under CIAA) is subject 
to specified penalties. For a first violation, the Secretary of Health or a designee must issue 
a written reprimand. For a second violation, a violator is subject to a $100 civil penalty and 
for each subsequent violation, a civil penalty of at least $250. A penalty may be waived by 
the Secretary of Health, under specified circumstances. Any civil penalties collected must 
be paid into CRF. 
 
It is an affirmative defense to a complaint brought against a person for a violation of CIAA 
or a regulation adopted thereunder that the person (or an employee of the person) posted a 
“No Smoking” sign as required; removed all ashtrays and smoking paraphernalia from all 
areas where smoking is prohibited; and, if the violation occurred in a bar, tavern, or 
restaurant, refused to seat or serve any individual smoking in a prohibited area and asked 
the individual to leave the establishment if they continued to smoke after an initial warning. 
 
Obsolete Waiver Provisions 
 
Within 90 days from the receipt of an application for a waiver (and the date that all 
conditions for the waiver application were satisfied), the health officer of a county could 
grant a waiver from the application of a specific CIAA provision, if the applicant for a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 238/ Page 4 
waiver established in writing that compliance (1) with a specific CIAA provision would 
cause undue financial hardship or (2) would be unreasonable given the existence of other 
factors. A waiver could not be granted after January 31, 2011, and a waiver granted prior 
to January 31, 2011, terminated on that date. 
 
Background:  MDH advises that a universal ban on indoor smoking has proven a 
successful public health strategy to reduce exposure to secondhand smoke. Part of the 
success of CIAA is the ability of MDH, with its partners at the Maryland Department of 
Labor and local health departments, to establish uniform and consistent standards for 
businesses and other public indoor spaces across the State. Since enactment of CIAA, 
several external factors have changed the tobacco landscape that create previously 
unforeseen enforcement challenges. The bill is intended to reduce secondhand exposure to 
potentially harmful chemicals from vaping while simplifying the enforcement of CIAA for 
covered entities. 
 
As of March 31, 2023, 17 states and the District of Columbia have passed comprehensive 
smokefree indoor air laws that include e-cigarettes. These laws prohibit smoking and the 
use of e-cigarettes in indoor areas of private worksites, restaurants, and bars. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of Transportation  
 
The Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) advises that the bill requires it to 
post “No Smoking or Vaping” signs (1) inside all buses, trains, and mobility/paratransit 
vehicles operated by the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) and (2) at each entrance 
of Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) branches and other MDOT buildings. MDOT 
estimates that signs will cost $100 each, reflecting an assumption that they will be 
high-quality, permanent metallic signs. 
 
According to MDOT, MTA has 811 buses and 515 mobility/paratransit vehicles in service, 
each of which would need one sign installed. For active locomotives, MDOT advises that 
MTA must post signs at each of the two entrances on railcars; it estimates that a total of 
104 signs would need to be installed for the light rail, 354 signs for MARC trains, and 
172 signs for Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority trains. Overall, MDOT 
estimates that it would need to install 1,956 signs, at a cost of $195,600, for all active MTA 
vehicles and locomotive cars. At this time, MDOT cannot provide a precise estimate of 
how many signs must be installed at MVA branches and other MDOT buildings; however, 
MDOT estimates that those costs would not exceed $20,000. 
 
Thus, TTF expenditures increase by as much as $215,600 in fiscal 2025 only for MDOT 
to install required signage on active MTA vehicles and locomotives and in MDOT 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 238/ Page 5 
buildings. In future fiscal years, signage costs are likely minimal and absorbable, as MDOT 
must replace signs only as needed. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
The bill requires MDH to convene a workgroup to study the issuance of alcoholic 
beverages licenses to tobacconists. Although the bill does not specify that MDH must staff 
the workgroup, this analysis assumes that staff from MDH are needed to support the 
workgroup and assist with preparing the workgroup’s report.  
 
Accordingly, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $48,849 in fiscal 2025 only, 
which reflects the cost of hiring one part-time contractual health policy analyst to staff the 
workgroup beginning July 1, 2024. This level of staffing assumes assistance is provided 
by the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission, which is the only other agency 
represented on the workgroup. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and operating expenses.  
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$41,863 
Operating Expenses 
6,986 
Total FY 2025 MDH Expenditures 
$48,849 
 
This analysis assumes that the contractual position terminates at the end of fiscal 2025, 
concurrent with the date by which the workgroup must submit its report.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 244 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 238/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 238/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Public Health - Clean Indoor Air Act - Revisions 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0238 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Prevention and Health Promotion Administration 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Businesses subject to the CIAA will be required to prohibit vaping in indoor areas open to the 
public. This will include updating employee training, updating signage, and taking action in the 
case of potential violations of the CIAA. Enforcement will be greatly simplified for businesses, 
as any aerosol from an ESD or smoke exhaled in indoor public areas will be prohibited. Costs to 
update signage and employee training is expected to be minimal. 
 
Small businesses may be minimally financially impacted by this proposal, but the impact is not 
expected to be different from the impact on other businesses.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 7