START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 291 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 291 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
County Boards of Education - Bid Advertisement Threshold and Electronic 
Posting of Hearing Notices and Bid Advertisements 
 
 
This bill requires county boards of education to electronically post hearing information 
pertaining to the selection of a school site on the local school system website, in addition 
to in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. In addition, the bill repeals a physical 
posting requirement and specifies county boards of education can post notice on local 
school system websites to fulfill the notice requirements for bids on school buildings, 
improvements, supplies, or equipment above a certain value. The bill makes a technical 
change to specify that reporting requirements apply to items valued at more than $100,000. 
The bill also updates public notification requirements by specifying eMaryland 
Marketplace, instead of Maryland Contract Weekly, as an authorized publication. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local procurement procedures. 
  
Local Effect:  County boards of education can comply with the bill’s notice requirements 
using existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law specifies processes that boards of education must follow when 
procuring school buildings, improvements, supplies, or equipment above a certain value. 
The $25,000 threshold specified in § 5-112 of the Education Article differs from the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 291/ Page 2 
$100,000 threshold specified in § 13-109 of the State Finance and Procurement Article. 
Therefore, according to statute, the State Finance and Procurement Article amount 
supersedes the amount in § 5-112 of the Education Article.  
 
The procurement process requires that at least two weeks before filing bids for a school 
building, improvement, supplies, or equipment above a certain value (more than $100,000), 
a board of education must advertise for bids in a medium accessible to the general public, 
including (1) a newspaper of general circulation in the region; (2) the Maryland Contract 
Weekly or comparable State publication; or (3) an electronic posting on a bid board and 
physical posting on the local school system bid board. Statute includes guidelines for the 
specifications included in the bid requests. 
 
Contracts for school buildings, improvements, supplies, or equipment must be awarded to 
the responsible bidder who provides the best value and conforms to the bid specifications, 
with consideration given to: 
 
 
the quantities involved; 
 
the time required for delivery; 
 
the purpose for which required; 
 
the competency and responsibility of the bidder; 
 
the ability of the bidder to perform satisfactory service; 
 
the plan for utilization of minority contractors; and 
 
the price offered by the bidder. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel, Charles, Frederick, Montgomery, Prince George’s 
and St. Mary’s counties public schools advise that the school boards already post on the 
eMaryland Marketplace for procurements. Frederick, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties public schools also advise that existing procurement processes already involve 
posting hearing information to the school system website. Other public school systems can 
post hearing information to school system websites and to eMaryland Marketplace as 
necessary with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 170 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 291/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Charles County Public Schools; 
Frederick County 
Public 
Schools; 
Montgomery 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3