START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 283 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 283 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Affordable Housing - Identifying 
Suitable Property 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement that the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD) identify a property as suitable for use or redevelopment as 
affordable housing if the property meet specified conditions. Instead, the bill prohibits 
DHCD from identifying excess State real property as suitable for use or redevelopment as 
affordable housing if the property (1) is located outside an area designated as a priority 
funding area or (2) belongs in a specified category of property generally encompassing 
parks and conservation land. When determining if a property is suitable for use or 
redevelopment as affordable housing, DHCD must consider whether the property (1) is 
adequately sized for any type of residential use; (2) has access to public utilities; (3) has 
access to feasible ingress and egress points; and (4) meets any other factors determined by 
DHCD that are necessary for the property to be used or redeveloped as affordable housing. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s changes can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material, direct effect on local 
government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 283/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) must notify DHCD and 
specified committees of the General Assembly of any excess real property submitted to 
MDP, which has not been otherwise disposed of in accordance with existing provisions of 
law. No later than 60 days after receiving such notification, DHCD must, in consultation 
with the unit of State government that controls the property, determine if the property is 
suitable for use or redevelopment as affordable housing. DHCD must identify a property 
as suitable for use or redevelopment as affordable housing if the property (1) is located in 
an area designated as a priority funding area; (2) does not belong to a specified category of 
property generally encompassing parks and conservation land; (3) is adequately sized for 
any type of residential use; (4) has access to public utilities; and (5) has access to feasible 
ingress and egress points. In addition to these factors, DHCD is authorized to consider 
other factors when determining the suitability of a property for use or redevelopment as 
affordable housing. 
 
DHCD must compile and regularly update a list of properties it has determined are suitable 
for use or redevelopment as affordable housing. For each property included in the list, 
DHCD must (1) give notice of the determination to the unit of State government that 
controls the property and the State Treasurer and (2) advise the unit of the bill’s 
requirements regarding the disposal of the listed property. The list must be made available 
to the public. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 333 (Senator Hettleman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Board of Public Works; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of General Services; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; State Treasurer’s Office; University System of Maryland; Department 
of Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 283/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3