START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 284 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 284 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Provision of Maryland Youth Crisis Hotline Telephone Number - 
Alteration 
 
 
This bill alters the name of the crisis hotline that must be provided by a local board of 
education to each student in grades 6 through 12 from the Maryland Youth Crisis Hotline 
to the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline. A local board of education is not required to reprint 
or reissue school handbooks or student identification cards in use on the effective date of 
the bill in order to comply with the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations.  
  
Local Effect:  Local school system finances are not materially affected as there is no 
requirement to reprint or reissue school handbooks or student identification cards already 
in use. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 446 of 2010 requires each local board of education to provide each 
student in grades 6 through 12 with the telephone number of the Maryland Youth Crisis 
Hotline by (1) printing the number prominently in the school handbook and (2) printing 
the telephone number on a student’s school identification card, if provided.  
 
Chapter 122 of 1986 established the Youth Suicide Prevention School Program, 
administered by the Maryland State Department of Education in cooperation with local 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 284/ Page 2 
school systems and community suicide prevention agencies. One element of the program 
is the Maryland Youth Crisis Hotline, which began operation in 1990. The Maryland Youth 
Crisis Hotline is a decentralized hotline answered by four different call centers in 
Maryland. Youth aged 14 to 24 are able to call 24 hours a day and speak confidentially 
with a counselor about their problems.  
 
Pursuant to Chapters 145 and 146 of 2022 and the federal National Suicide Hotline 
Designation Act of 2020, the Maryland Department of Health designated 9-8-8 as the 
State’s behavioral health crisis hotline on July 16, 2022. The 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline 
provides free and confidential support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for people in distress, 
prevention and crisis resources, and best practices for professionals. The Acts also 
established a 9-8-8 Trust Fund to provide reimbursement for costs associated with 
designating and maintaining 9-8-8 and developing and implementing a statewide initiative 
for the coordination and delivery of the continuum of behavioral health crisis response 
services. Chapter 260 of 2023 mandates an annual appropriation of $12.0 million to the 
fund beginning in fiscal 2025.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 122 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2