START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 231 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 231 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee, et 
al.) (By Request - Departmental - Veterans Affairs) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Special Registration Plates - Gold Star and Next of Kin Families 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the recipient of a U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) 
Next of Kin lapel button to apply for special registration plates after submitting specified 
documentation to the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), similar to DOD Gold Star 
recipients under current law. The bill also waives the one-time fee for the issuance of such 
special registration plates to recipients of either a Gold Star or Next of Kin lapel button.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations, 
as the number of new fee exemptions (and new plate issuances) is assumed to be minimal. 
Reprogramming and special registration plate design changes can be handled with existing 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) has 
determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment 
does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To be eligible to receive the plate, the vehicle for which the plate is to be 
affixed must be a Class A (passenger), Class E (truck with a rated capacity of one ton or 
less), Class M (multipurpose), or Class D (motorcycle) vehicle. In addition, an applicant 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 231/ Page 2 
who qualifies due to having received a Next of Kin Lapel button must provide satisfactory 
proof to MVA that the applicant is a recipient of the button for surviving spouses, parents, 
and next of kin of members of the Armed Forces who lost their lives while serving on 
active duty (or while assigned to a reserve or National Guard unit in a drill status). This 
requirement is similar to the existing requirement for Gold Star recipients.  
 
Current Law:  The contribution of the U.S. Armed Forces is recognized through several 
provisions within the Maryland Vehicle Law. Specifically, Maryland has exemptions from 
registration fees for veterans with certain disabilities and vehicles owned by national 
veterans’ organizations as well as special registration plates for honorably discharged 
veterans; recipients of individually earned, combat-related U.S. Armed Forces medals; and 
recipients of a DOD Gold Star indicating status as a surviving spouse, parent, or next of 
kin of a member of the U.S. Armed Forces who lost his or her life in combat. 
 
Special registration plates for recipients of an individually earned combat-related, 
Armed Forces medal must pay the annual registration fee required under State law and 
each time new registration plates are issued for the vehicle.  
 
Background:  MDVA advises that Gold Star and Next of Kin families are often 
working-class families, and the bill’s fee waiver for the issuance of such special registration 
plates is intended to signal the State supports those families and recognizes their sacrifices.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 275 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Veterans Affairs) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 231/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Vehicle Laws - Special Registration Plates - Gold Star and Next of Kin 
Families 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 231 
PREPARED BY: 
Robert Finn 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
N/A 
 

END OF PAGE 3