START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 209 
(Delegate Amprey, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Prison Education Delivery Reform Commission 
 
 
This bill establishes the Prison Education Delivery Reform Commission, staffed by the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP). The commission must 
(1) convene an advisory stakeholder group, as specified; (2) work with the advisory 
stakeholder group, including conducting roundtable discussion forums seeking public input 
in all geographic regions of the State; (3) develop an education-focused statewide 
framework of policies to invest in strategies to increase public safety and reduce recidivism 
of adult offenders, using a data-driven approach; (4) research best practices for the primary, 
secondary, postsecondary, and career or vocational education of those who are subject to 
the criminal and juvenile justice systems; (5) identify measures to mitigate risk factors that 
contribute to adult contact with the criminal justice system, with a focus on education;  
(6) evaluate current workforce programs and their effectiveness, as specified; and  
(7) request technical assistance from specified organizations. Members may not receive 
compensation. The commission must submit an interim report of its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly by June 1, 2025; a final report is due by 
January 1, 2026. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures increase by $144,000 in 
FY 2025 and $73,800 in FY 2026 for contractual staff. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
144,000 
73,800 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($144,000) 
($73,800) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 209/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Correctional Education Council 
 
The Correctional Education Council is under the joint jurisdiction of the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MDL) and the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services. The council must develop and recommend an educational and workforce training 
program for adult correctional institutions in the State. These programs must meet the 
special needs and circumstances of the inmates in each correctional institution. 
 
The Correctional Education Council must also adopt regulations for a mandatory education 
program for inmates who fail to attain specified minimum educational standards as well as 
regulations for a mandatory workforce skills training program. Further, the council must 
advocate and promote the interests of educational programs and workforce skills training 
opportunities in correctional institutions and regularly review these programs to ensure that 
educational and training needs of inmates are being met. 
 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning 
 
MDL’s Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) oversees 
Correctional Education throughout Maryland’s State correctional facilities. DWDAL’s 
Office of Correctional Education provides career training opportunities “behind the fence.” 
Offerings vary by institution but include training in automotive skills, barbering, 
construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead to a portable, industry-recognized 
credential that contributes to an inmate’s employability after release. In addition to 
occupational programming, the Office of Correctional Education oversees academic and 
transitional courses throughout Maryland’s prisons. Academic programming includes 
GED preparation ahead of earning a Maryland high school diploma and English as a 
second language courses. Prior to release, inmates may complete transitional courses to 
ease their reentrance to society. These offerings include classes in parenting, employment 
readiness, financial literacy, and life skills. 
 
Chapter 485 of 2022, the Maryland New Start Act of 2022, established the New Start Grant 
Program in MDL to award grants to at least five eligible organizations to create or support 
existing entrepreneurship development programs that assist specified formerly imprisoned 
individuals or specified individuals approved for release by a correctional facility. The Act 
also authorized the Department of Commerce, in collaboration with the Governor’s Office 
of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs, to administer a microloan program to 
award collateral-free loans to these formerly or currently imprisoned individuals. The 
Governor must include an appropriation of at least $300,000 to the Maryland New Start 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 209/ Page 3 
Microloan Fund and at least $200,000 for the Maryland New Start Grant Program in the 
annual budget bill through fiscal 2028. 
 
MDL provides services to returning citizens through the Re-entry Navigator initiative. 
Re-entry Navigators are a team of employment specialists located within the American Job 
Centers across the State of Maryland who connect justice-involved job seekers with 
businesses by planning with pre-release individuals and supporting post-release job 
seekers. The navigators also continually establish a network of employer contacts who are 
interested in hiring their clients. More information on the Re-entry Navigator Program can 
be found on MDL’s website. 
 
State Expenditures:  Despite the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date, it is assumed that State 
finances are not affected in fiscal 2024. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
 
Existing staff within GOCPP cannot handle the additional workload generated by the bill. 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $143,965 in fiscal 2025, which reflects 
a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one contractual program coordinator and one contractual research analyst 
to coordinate with the advisory stakeholder group and technical assistance entities and to 
conduct research necessary to complete the required reports. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, travel costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$127,913 
Operating Expenses and Travel Costs 
16,052 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$143,965 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses, including travel costs. The contractual positions 
are assumed to terminate during fiscal 2026, shortly after the commission’s final report is 
due. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 209/ Page 4 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
The commission created by the bill and the existing Correctional Education Council have 
some duplicative functions; thus, MDL staff may be operationally affected as MDL is 
required to participate in both commissions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 623 (Senator Carter) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4