START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 277 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 277 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Frederick County - Local Gaming and Authorization for Electronic Tip Jar 
Dispensers 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of a “tip jar” for gaming events in Frederick County to 
include an electronic tip jar dispenser that does not connect to the Internet or to a server. 
Thus, the bill authorizes a person authorized to operate a tip jar in Frederick County to 
operate an electronic tip jar dispenser that does not connect to the Internet or to a server. 
The bill also makes technical changes by replacing obsolete references. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill may draw some gaming revenues away from the State lottery 
and casino facilities, the impact is likely small enough that overall gaming revenues are not 
materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County can issue permits with existing resources and county 
finances are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To operate a tip jar or punchboard in Frederick County, an establishment 
or proprietor must be licensed to serve food and alcoholic beverages for consumption on 
the premises. A person may operate a tip jar or punchboard only for the benefit of an 
eligible organization. Eligible organizations include bona fide hospitals and religious, 
fraternal, civic, war veterans’, amateur athletic, patriotic, charitable, and educational 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 277/ Page 2 
organizations as well as volunteer fire, rescue, and ambulance companies and their 
auxiliary organizations in Frederick County. The beneficiary of a tip jar may not hold more 
than three permits to operate tip jars or punchboards outside of the beneficiary’s premises 
and must receive at least 70% of the gross proceeds of the tip jar or punchboard after paying 
winning players and reimbursing the operator for operating expenses. 
 
Commercial Electronic Bingo and Tip Jar Machines 
 
An entity licensed to offer instant bingo under a commercial bingo license on July 1, 2007, 
or a qualified nonprofit organization, may continue to operate a game of instant bingo in 
the same manner using electronic machines, provided that:   
 
 
the machines were in operation for a one-year period ending December 31, 2007, or 
under a commercial bingo license on December 31, 2007; 
 
the entity does not operate more than the number of machines in operation on 
February 28, 2008; and 
 
the conduct of the gaming and operation of the machines are consistent with all 
other provisions of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
A county may not issue a commercial bingo license under Title 13 of the Criminal Law 
Article or under any public local law to an entity that was not licensed to conduct 
commercial bingo on or before June 30, 2008. 
 
A State admissions and amusement (A&A) tax is imposed on the net proceeds derived 
from any charge for the operation of an electronic bingo machine permitted under a 
commercial bingo license or an electronic tip jar machine authorized under Title 13 of the 
Criminal Law Article that is operated for commercial purposes. The combined State and 
local tax rate may not exceed 35%. The tax is currently only imposed in Anne Arundel and 
Calvert counties. 
 
Additional Comments:  The State A&A tax does not apply to electronic tip jar machines 
authorized under the bill because the State A&A tax is only imposed on machines 
authorized under Title 13 of the Criminal Law Article that are operated for commercial 
purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 953 and HB 1277 of 2023 and HB 759 and SB 647 of 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 277/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 415 (Senator Lewis Young) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Lottery 
and Gaming Control Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3