START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 256 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 256 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Waterway Incident Notification System (WINS) - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM), in 
consultation with other interested stakeholders, to study and make recommendations 
regarding the feasibility of establishing a Waterway Incident Notification System (WINS) 
for specified purposes. MDEM must submit an interim report and a final report of its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024, and December 1, 2025, respectively. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures for MDEM increase by 
approximately $50,000 in FY 2025 and $25,000 in FY 2026, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
50,000 
25,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($50,000) 
($25,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 256/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDEM, in consultation with other interested stakeholders, must study 
and make recommendations regarding (1) the feasibility of establishing a WINS to notify 
members of the public, including recreational boaters and commercial watermen, of active 
waterway emergencies involving a person at risk of death or serious bodily harm, 
emergency marine events, or marine hazards and (2) potential partnerships between the 
State, the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Navy, and nearby states to improve notifications to 
members of the public, including recreational boaters and commercial watermen, of 
waterway emergencies involving a person at risk of death or serious bodily harm, 
emergency marine events, or marine hazards. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Radio Equipment in Maritime Vessels 
 
While the Department of Natural Resources is responsible for administering the State Boat 
Act (which is intended to foster the development, use, and enjoyment of all waters in 
Maryland), State law is silent on establishing requirements for maritime vessels 
maintaining radio equipment and monitoring specified radio frequencies in the event of 
emergencies. 
 
Generally, federal law requires specified larger and working maritime vessels to have a 
radiotelephone capable of operation from their navigational bridges or main control 
stations. The radiotelephone must be capable of transmitting and receiving on the 
frequency or frequencies within the 156-162 Mega-Hertz band using specified classes of 
radio emissions. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
Chapters 287 and 288 of 2021 established MDEM as a principal department of the 
Executive Branch of State government and as the successor to the Maryland Emergency 
Management Agency. MDEM is responsible for coordinating the State response in any 
major emergency or disaster. This includes supporting local governments as needed or 
requested and coordinating assistance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
and other federal partners. MDEM manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad 
range of initiatives leading to enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of 
natural and man-made disasters that could threaten the State’s citizens. Chapters 287 and 
288 also transferred the Maryland 9-1-1 Board to MDEM from the Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 256/ Page 3 
Within MDEM, the Maryland Joint Operations Center (MJOC) serves as a communication 
hub for emergency responders statewide and supports local emergency management. 
MJOC also monitors local, State, national, and international events and alerts decision 
makers in the State when appropriate. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $50,000 in 
fiscal 2025 and $25,000 in fiscal 2026 for MDEM to hire a consultant to conduct related 
research, provide subject matter expertise, and develop the required reports. Actual costs 
may be slightly higher than this estimate, and the allocation between fiscal years may vary, 
depending on final contract terms. MDEM advises, and the Department of Legislative 
Services concurs, that MDEM cannot conduct the study with existing staff, as the 
department lacks the relevant expertise. Though the bill takes effect June 1, 2024, it is 
assumed that funds to initially hire the consultant are encumbered in fiscal 2025, so there 
is no effect in fiscal 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. See SB 336 
and HB 478 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 166 (Senator Bailey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3