START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 395

Chapter 395

(House Bill 242)

AN ACT concerning

State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board – Sunset ~~Extension~~ ~~Repeal~~
Extension

FOR the purpose of continuing the State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board in
accordance with the provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law)
by ~~extending~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date~~ ~~repealing~~ extending to a certain date the termination
provisions relating to the statutory and regulatory authority of the Board; requiring
the Maryland Department of Labor to submit a certain report to the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee on or before a certain date; and generally relating to the State
Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 3–303
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments, ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
Article – Business Regulation
Section 3–315
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

3–303.

There is a State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board in the Department.

3–315.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act, §§ 3–301 and 3–303 through 3–311 of this subtitle shall terminate on July
1, [2024] 2027.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, 2025, the
Maryland Department of Labor shall submit a report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 395 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Committee with information regarding the State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board
as determined by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee.

~~3–315.~~

~~Subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~evaluation~~ ~~and~~ ~~reestablishment~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Program~~
~~Evaluation~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~§§~~ ~~3–301~~ ~~and~~ ~~3–303~~ ~~through~~ ~~3–311~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~shall~~ ~~terminate~~ ~~on~~ ~~July~~
1, [2024] 2034.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
June 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2