START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 212 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 212 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems - Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes a regulatory framework for counties to use noise abatement monitoring 
systems on State and local highways to record violations of State law governing maximum 
sound limits of motor vehicles. However, the scope and timeframe of the authorization is 
limited to the use of, at most, three such systems in each of just two counties (Montgomery 
and Prince George’s counties) over a two-year period. Each of the two counties that uses 
the authorization must report – by December 1, 2025 – to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on its implementation of noise abatement monitoring systems, as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the bill is authorizing in nature, the impact on State finances 
generally depends on the extent to which the systems are deployed. Nevertheless, the 
District Court must be prepared should any systems be deployed, with programming costs 
totaling as much as $75,200 in FY 2025 only, as discussed below. The District Court can 
likely adopt procedures as required under the bill with existing resources.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
75,200 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($75,200) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature for the two counties; accordingly, the impact 
on county finances depends on the extent to which the systems are deployed, as discussed 
below. Further, any impact ends at the end of fiscal 2026. The counties can provide the 
required report using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 212/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Agency” means a county law enforcement agency that is authorized to issue a citation for 
a violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law or of local traffic laws or regulations. 
 
“Noise abatement monitoring system” means a mobile or fixed vehicle sensor that works 
in conjunction with a noise measuring device, such as a decibel reader, that automatically 
produces two or more photographs, two or more microphotographs, a videotape, or other 
recorded images of a motor vehicle at the time the motor vehicle is operated during the 
commission of a violation.  
 
“Owner” means the registered owner of a motor vehicle or a lessee of a motor vehicle under 
a lease of six months or more. “Owner” does not include a motor vehicle leasing company 
or a specified holder of a special registration plate.  
 
“Recorded image” means an image recorded by a noise abatement monitoring system 
(1) on a photograph, microphotograph, electronic image, videotape, or any other medium 
and (2) showing the rear of a motor vehicle, the decibel level recorded for the motor vehicle 
at the time of recordation, and (on at least one image or portion of tape) a clear and legible 
identification of the entire registration plate number of the vehicle.  
 
A “violation” refers to a violation of § 22-602 of the Transportation Article, which prohibits 
a person from driving (or permitting to be driven) a motor vehicle on a highway in violation 
of maximum sound limits established under State law by the Motor Vehicle Administration 
(MVA), by at least five decibels. 
 
Issuance of Citations and Collection and Disposition of Fines  
 
The bill expands existing statutory provisions governing the issuance of citations and the 
collection and disposition of fines collected as a result of automated monitoring systems to 
apply to noise abatement monitoring systems. Accordingly, the District Court has exclusive 
original civil jurisdiction in a civil infraction under the bill. In consultation with the 
appropriate county agencies, the Chief Judge of the District Court must adopt procedures 
for the issuance of citations, trials for violations, and the collection of civil penalties 
imposed under the bill.  
 
Further, a citation issued as a result of a noise abatement monitoring system controlled by 
a political subdivision (in this case, a county) must provide that, in an uncontested case, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 212/ Page 3 
the penalty be paid directly to the political subdivision; a citation issued as a result of a 
noise abatement monitoring system in a case contested in District Court must provide that 
the penalty be paid directly to the District Court. Civil penalties resulting from citations 
issued using a noise abatement monitoring system that are collected by the District Court 
must be collected and distributed in accordance with existing statutory provisions.  
 
A political subdivision (in this case, a county) is authorized to recover the costs of 
implementing and administering noise abatement monitoring systems from fines collected 
by the political subdivision as a result of violations enforced by noise abatement monitoring 
systems. Additionally, a political subdivision may spend the remaining balance solely for 
public safety purposes, including pedestrian safety programs, as specified under existing 
statutory provisions.  
 
Admissibility of Recorded Images as Evidence  
 
Consistent with existing evidentiary provisions pertaining to images recorded by 
automated monitoring systems, a recorded image of a motor vehicle and any relevant 
recorded audio produced by a noise abatement monitoring system in conjunction with a 
noise measuring device in accordance with the bill is admissible in a proceeding concerning 
a civil citation issued under the bill for a violation of specified offenses without 
authentication. In any other judicial proceeding, a recorded image produced by a noise 
abatement monitoring system is admissible as otherwise provided by law.  
 
Authorized Use and Operation of Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems  
 
The bill’s authorization for the use of a noise abatement monitoring system only applies in 
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. Up to three such systems may be used in a 
county if their use is authorized by the governing body of the county by local law enacted 
after reasonable notice and a public hearing. A county may deploy a noise abatement 
system at multiple locations at different times; accordingly, a system may be moved. A 
county that establishes a noise abatement monitoring system program must bear the cost 
of implementing the program. The bill establishes the following processes, procedures, and 
requirements related to the use and operation of noise abatement monitoring systems:   
 
 
Before activating a noise abatement monitoring system, a county must inform the 
general public that the systems are in use and where they are located in a specified 
manner.  
 
A county that authorizes a program of noise abatement monitoring systems must 
designate an official or employee to investigate and respond to questions or 
concerns about the program. The bill specifies the other responsibilities and duties 
of this individual. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 212/ Page 4 
 
If a county moves or places a noise abatement monitoring system to or at a location 
where one had not previously existed, a citation for a violation recorded by that 
system may not be issued until signage is installed and for at least the 
first 15 calendar days after the signage is installed.  
 
A noise abatement monitoring system operator must complete training and be 
certified by the manufacturer of the system, as specified, and the certificate of 
training must be admitted as evidence in any court proceeding for a violation. 
 
A noise abatement monitoring system operator must fill out and sign a daily set-up 
log for a noise abatement monitoring system that includes specified information, 
must be kept on file, and must be admitted as evidence in any court proceeding for 
a violation. 
 
A noise abatement monitoring system must undergo an annual calibration check 
performed by an independent calibration laboratory, as specified, and the certificate 
of calibration must be kept on file and admitted as evidence in any court proceeding 
for a violation. 
 
Civil Penalty and Related Penalties  
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
recorded by a noise abatement monitoring system during the commission of a violation. 
For a first offense, a person is subject to a warning notice; for a second or subsequent 
offense, the person is subject to a civil penalty of up to $75. A county may not issue a 
citation applicable to a motor vehicle during the first 30 days after a warning for a 
first offense applicable to the motor vehicle is mailed.  
 
The District Court must prescribe a uniform citation form, as specified, and a civil penalty, 
which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons who choose to prepay the 
civil penalty without appearing in District Court.  
 
A person may not be issued more than one citation per county per day for a violation 
enforced by a noise abatement monitoring system. 
 
If the citation is not paid and the violation is not contested, MVA may refuse to register or 
reregister or may suspend the registration of the motor vehicle. A violation for which a 
civil penalty is imposed is not a moving violation for the purpose of points assessment, 
may not be recorded on the driving record of the owner or driver of the vehicle, and may 
not be considered in the provision of motor vehicle insurance.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 212/ Page 5 
Requirements Related to Agency Issuance and Processing of Citations 
 
Any agency, or an agent or contractor designated by the agency, must administer and 
process civil citations issued under the bill in coordination with the District Court. A 
contractor’s fee may not be contingent on a pre-ticket basis on the number of citations 
issued or paid.  
 
An agency generally must mail to the owner liable for a violation recorded by a noise 
abatement monitoring system a citation that includes specified information in accordance 
with the bill. An agency may mail a warning notice instead of a citation and an agency may 
not mail a citation to a person who is not an owner, as defined by the bill.  
 
Generally, a citation must be issued within two weeks of the alleged violation (or 30 days 
after the alleged violation for vehicles registered in another state). A person who receives 
a citation may pay the civil penalty in accordance with the instructions on the citation or 
elect to stand trial.  
 
Certifications Alleging a Violation 
 
A certification alleging that a violation occurred, sworn to or affirmed by a duly authorized 
law enforcement officer employed by (or under contract with) an agency, based on the 
inspection of recorded images produced by a noise abatement monitoring system, is 
evidence of the facts contained in the certificate and is admissible in any proceeding 
concerning the alleged violation.  
 
A person who receives a citation may request a system operator to be present and testify at 
trial but only if the person notifies the court within 20 days before the trial. Adjudication 
of liability must be based on a preponderance of the evidence.  
 
Defense of Violations 
 
The District Court may consider in defense of a violation (1) that the motor vehicle or 
registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and were 
not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation; (2) that the 
noise abatement monitoring system was malfunctioning at the time of the violation; or 
(3) any other issues and evidence that the District Court considers pertinent.  
 
Required Report 
 
By December 1, 2025, a county that authorizes a program of noise abatement monitoring 
systems must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on:   
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 212/ Page 6 
 
through October 1, 2025, the time period during which noise abatement monitoring 
systems were in use in the county and the number of warnings and citations issued, 
as specified; 
 
the costs associated with implementing and operating the systems and the revenue 
collected on a monthly basis as a result of any violations; 
 
appropriate locations for the deployment of the systems; 
 
the performance and reliability of the systems used by the county; and 
 
the effectiveness of the systems in reducing noise produced by motor vehicles in the 
county and in areas where the systems were implemented and used.  
 
Current Law:  A person is prohibited from driving (or permitting to be driven) a motor 
vehicle on a highway in violation of maximum sound limits established under State law. A 
violation is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The prepayment penalty is $60.  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems.  
 
State Revenues:  To the extent the District Court collects fines for citations issued under 
the bill, general fund revenues increase for approximately a two-year period. Any such 
impact depends on the extent to which the two counties elect to deploy noise abatement 
monitoring systems, the amount of the fine established for a violation, and whether 
citations are contested. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the District Court increase for 
programming changes necessary to collect payments for citations that may be issued under 
the bill. Programming-related costs total as much as $75,244 in fiscal 2025. This estimate 
includes about 578 hours of reprogramming.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The two authorized counties may deploy at most three noise 
abatement monitoring systems each; to the extent they do so, county expenditures increase 
for start-up costs, ongoing implementation costs over, at most, two years, and public safety 
purposes. County revenues also increase to the extent an affected county collects penalties 
from citations issued by its noise abatement monitoring systems. Given the bill’s 
termination date, it is unclear whether each county that implements a noise abatement 
monitoring system will fully offset its implementation costs. 
 
‘ 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 212/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been considered within the last 
three years. See SB 229 and HB 1130 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 155 (Senator A. Washington) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Anne Arundel, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties; cities of Annapolis, College Park, Greenbelt, and Rockville; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7