START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 235 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 235 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural 
Resources) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Department of Natural Resources - Pay-For-Success Contracts - Procurement 
Exemption 
 
 
This departmental bill exempts the negotiation and execution of “pay-for-success” 
contracts by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) from most provisions of State 
procurement law. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.      
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Pay-for-success Contracting 
 
Chapters 237 and 238 of 2022 establish a framework for “pay-for-success contracting,” 
which is defined as a performance-based procurement method through which an agency 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 235/ Page 2 
contracts with an organization to deliver services or commodities in exchange for payment 
based on the achievement of outcomes. It establishes pay-for-success contracting as an 
allowable procurement method in State law and authorizes the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture (MDA), the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), DNR, the 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), the Maryland Environmental Service 
(MES), and the Department of General Services (DGS) to enter into a pay-for-success 
contract for (1) delivery of an environmental outcomes project or (2) already certified 
environmental outcomes. Other State and local entities may participate in a pay-for-success 
contract in accordance with an intergovernmental cooperative purchasing agreement. The 
authorization to enter into pay-for-success contracting does not apply to the purchase of 
nitrogen load reductions with funds from the Clean Water Commerce Account of the Bay 
Restoration Fund.  
 
A pay-for-success contract entered into by an authorized State agency must include: 
 
 
a quantification plan approved by the agency; 
 
a statement of the environmental outcomes to be procured and how defined 
performance measures will demonstrate progress in achieving the outcomes; 
 
requirements regarding the content and frequency of progress reports; 
 
a methodology for calculating the amount and timing of outcome payments when 
the designated evaluator determines that performance measures have been achieved; 
 
a statement that the basis of payment is the determination of achievement of 
environmental outcomes by the evaluator; and 
 
terms addressing the application of specified State laws and related contract 
requirements. 
 
A pay-for-success contract may also include provisions regarding (1) long-term 
maintenance and monitoring of environmental services; (2) a requirement that a State 
agency hold contract funds in a reserve account for payments; (3) for agriculture services, 
payment for achievement of baseline water quality requirements; or (4) termination prior 
to the first payment. 
 
Procurement Exemptions 
 
The University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland, and Baltimore City Community College are exempt from most provisions of 
State procurement law. In addition, the following agencies are exempted in whole or in 
part from most State procurement law: 
 
 
Blind Industries and Services of Maryland; 
 
Maryland State Arts Council; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 235/ Page 3 
 
Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority; 
 
Department of Commerce; 
 
Maryland Food Center Authority; 
 
Maryland Public Broadcasting Commission; 
 
Maryland State Planning Council on Developmental Disabilities; 
 
Maryland Historical Trust; 
 
Rural Maryland Council; 
 
Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
 
Maryland Health Insurance Plan; 
 
Maryland Energy Administration; 
 
Maryland Developmental Disabilities Administration; 
 
DGS, for historic preservation; 
 
DNR, for conservation service opportunities; 
 
Maryland State Archives; 
 
Maryland Stadium Authority; 
 
State Retirement and Pension System, for specified investment-related services; 
 
College Savings Plan of Maryland; 
 
Chesapeake Bay Trust; 
 
Department of Service and Civic Engagement, for the Maryland Corps Program; 
and  
 
Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority. 
 
Background:  DNR advises that provisions of State procurement law unnecessarily delay 
the procurement of pay-for-success contracts, and thereby delay potential benefits to the 
State in the form of positive environmental outcomes. For instance, current procurement 
processes require a fund certification for the fiscal year in which a procurement is 
conducted, but payments under pay-for-success contracts typically begin many years after 
the procurement is conducted (once outcomes have been achieved).        
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not address pay-for-success contracts by MDA, 
MDE, MDOT, MES, and DGS, which are authorized under current law.         
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 235/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 253 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Natural Resources) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Natural 
Resources; Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 12, 2024 
Third Reader - February 9, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 235/ Page 5 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES - PAY-FOR-SUCCESS CONTRACTS - 
PROCUREMENT EXEMPTION 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 0235 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Sarah Lane 
 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill would exempt pay for success contracts from procurement procedures, such as soliciting 
projects through eMaryland Martketplace, thus eliminating a burdensome step for small 
businesses.  Instead of issuing contracts through procurement procedures, pay for success projects 
can be issued under current grant agreement procedures that small businesses are already familiar 
with.   
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5