START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 292 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement - Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals - Attorney's 
Fees 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland State Board of Contract Appeals (MSBCA) to award 
reasonable attorney’s fees to an “interested party” who prevails in appealing a bid protest 
and alters the conditions under which MSBCA may award attorney’s fees for a contract 
claim. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential increase in general and special fund expenditures to the extent that 
interested parties successfully appeal bid protests or contract claims to MSBCA and are 
awarded attorney’s fees. Expenditures may further increase to the extent that the bill causes 
vendors to file more protests and claims. A reliable estimate is not feasible because future 
outcomes cannot be predicted, but any increase is likely minimal, as discussed below. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An “interested party” means an actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or 
contractor that may be aggrieved by the solicitation or award of a contract, or by a protest. 
 
For all contract claims, MSBCA may award the reasonable costs of filing and pursuing a 
claim, including reasonable attorney’s fees, if the board finds that the conduct of the unit 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 292/ Page 2 
in processing the claim is in bad faith, without substantial justification, or in violation of 
the law. 
 
Current Law:  A “contract claim” is a claim that relates to a procurement contract, 
including breach, modification, or termination of a procurement contract. A “protest” 
means a complaint that relates to the formation of a procurement contract, including about 
the qualifications of a bidder or offeror or the determination of a successful bidder or 
offeror. 
 
Contract claims and bid protests must first be filed with the unit of State government 
responsible for the contract or procurement; the unit is then responsible for reviewing the 
claim or protest and issuing a final determination. A prospective bidder or offeror, or a 
bidder or offeror, may appeal an agency’s final decision regarding a bid protest to MSBCA. 
Similarly, a contractor may appeal an agency’s final decision regarding a contract claim to 
MSBCA. 
 
MSBCA may award a prospective bidder, prospective offeror, bidder, or offeror the 
reasonable costs of filing and pursuing a bid protest, but not attorney’s fees, if MSBCA 
sustains the appeal and finds that there has been a violation of law or regulation. 
 
For contract claims related to construction contracts, MSBCA may award the contractor 
the reasonable costs of filing and pursuing a claim, including reasonable attorney’s fees, if 
MSBCA finds that the conduct of agency personnel is in bad faith or without substantial 
justification. State law does not allow for the awarding of reasonable costs for claims 
related to all other contracts. 
 
State Expenditures:  Currently, MSBCA may order the payment of reasonable 
attorney’s fees only for appeals of contract claims related to construction contracts. 
Expanding the authority to include all successful appeals of bid protest and all contract 
claims may increase payments by agencies to prevailing vendors. Federal funds may not 
be used to pay court-ordered penalties, so the bill affects only general and special funds, 
even if federal funds are involved in payment of a contract. 
 
However, recent history indicates that few appeals of bid protests and contract claims 
decided by MSBCA are successful. In the last five years, only 1 of 74 contract claims was 
successful and only 5 of 77 bid protests were successful. Although the 1 successful contract 
claim included a request for attorney’s fees, they were not awarded because the contractor 
was defending against a claim by the State rather than having filed their own claim. 
 
The prospect of possibly being reimbursed for reasonable attorney’s fees if they prevail 
may prompt more vendors to file bid protests or contract claims against the State. A 
substantial increase may require more procurement staff and assistant Attorneys General 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 292/ Page 3 
to handle the appeals, but a reliable estimate is not feasible in the absence of experience 
under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that prevail in appeals of bid protests or contract 
claims before MSBCA may be reimbursed for reasonable attorney’s fees. MSBCA notes, 
however, that claims for attorney’s fees require separate litigation to determine what 
constitutes “reasonable.”  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 667 (Senator Charles) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Board of Contract Appeals; Board of Public Works; 
Department of General Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3