START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 301

Chapter 301

(House Bill 285)

AN ACT concerning

Task Force on Property Appraisal and Valuation Equity – Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the deadlines for the reporting requirement for the Task Force
on Property Appraisal and Valuation Equity; extending the termination date for the
Task Force; and generally relating to the Task Force on Property Appraisal and
Valuation Equity.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 654 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022
Section 1 and 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Chapter 654 of the Acts of 2022

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Task Force on Property Appraisal and Valuation Equity.

(b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

(1) the Secretary of Housing and Community Development, or the
Secretary’s designee;

(2) the Secretary of Labor, or the Secretary’s designee;

(3) the Director of Assessments and Taxation;

(4) one representative of the Consumer Protection Division of the Office of
the Attorney General, appointed by the Attorney General;

(5) one representative from the field of alternative dispute resolution,
appointed by the Chief [Judge of the Maryland Court of Appeals] JUSTICE OF THE
SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND;

(6) two representatives of an association for appraisers, appointed by the
Governor;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 301 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) two representatives of the banking industry:

(i) one appointed by the President of the Senate; and

(ii) one appointed by the Speaker of the House;

(8) the following members appointed by the President of the Senate:

(i) one representative from the Maryland Association of Counties;

(ii) one member of the Maryland Building Industry Association; and

(iii) four representatives of the general public with a primary
residence in the State; and

(9) the following members appointed by the Speaker of the House:

(i) one representative from the Maryland Municipal League;

(ii) one member of the Maryland Association of Realtors; and

(iii) four representatives of the general public with a primary
residence in the State.

(c) The members of the Task Force shall elect from among the members the chair
of the Task Force.

(d) The Department of Housing and Community Development shall provide staff
for the Task Force.

(e) A member of the Task Force:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Task Force shall address the persistent misvaluation and undervaluation
of property owned by minorities by:

(1) studying strategies and actions that will:

(i) help ensure that governmental oversight and industry standards
and practices further valuation equity;

(ii) increase training of appraisers to combat valuation bias;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 301

(iii) remove barriers to entry into the appraisal profession by
minorities;

(iv) assist in the development of a model for a meaningful
reconsideration of value process; and

(v) reduce or eliminate bias related to automated valuation models
and alternative property valuation methods; and

(2) identify legislative or other policy recommendations that will provide a
comprehensive and coordinated approach for reducing bias in valuations, through
enforcement, compliance, or other methods.

(g) On or before October 31, [2023] 2024, the Task Force shall report its findings
and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2022. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and [1 month] 7 MONTHS and, at
the end of [June 30, 2024] DECEMBER 31, 2024, this Act, with no further action required
by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3