START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 109

Chapter 109

(House Bill 237)

AN ACT concerning

Commercial Northern Snakehead License – Gear

FOR the purpose of repealing certain buffer zones within which a commercial northern
snakehead licensee may not fish using bowfishing gear; requiring a licensee who
fishes for northern snakehead to comply with Department of Natural Resources
regulations governing the use of gear; and generally relating to gear used under the
commercial northern snakehead license.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–701.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

4–701.1.

(a) There is a commercial northern snakehead license.

(b) [(1)] The license authorizes the holder to catch for sale northern snakeheads
in the tidal waters of the State using:

[(i)] (1) A bow and arrow attached to a retrieval line; or

[(ii)] (2) Hook and line.

[(2) A licensee may not fish with a bow and arrow under the license within
100 yards of:

(i) Another person or vessel;

(ii) A public or private swimming area;

(iii) A diver down flag; or

(iv) An occupied offshore stationary blind.]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 109 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) An applicant for a license does not need to hold a tidal fish license under §
4–701 of this subtitle to be eligible for the license.

(d) A person who wishes to obtain a license shall complete and submit an
application for the license to the Department or any person designated by the Department.

(e) The term of the license is 1 year from September 1 through August 31 of the
following year.

(f) The annual license fee is $15.

(g) A licensee may not transfer a license issued under this section.

(h) A licensee who fishes for northern snakehead under the license shall possess
the license.

(I) A LICENSEE WHO FISHES FOR NORTHERN SNAKEHEAD UNDER THE
LICENSE SHALL COMPLY WITH ALL DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE
USE OF GEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2