START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 280 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 280 
(Delegate Holmes) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Local Government - Condominium and Homeowners Associations - Repair and 
Rehabilitation Funds 
 
 
 
This bill authorizes counties and municipalities to establish a local trust fund or other 
appropriate fund for the purpose of repairing or rehabilitating infrastructure within 
communities that are subject to the Maryland Condominium Act or the Maryland 
Homeowners Association Act. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect overall county and municipal property tax revenues 
but rather redirects property tax revenues to be used for specified purposes to the extent 
special funds are established. This diversion of property tax revenues may result in less 
funding for other local services, including education and public safety. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A fund created may be used, at the discretion of a county or municipality, 
for the repair of infrastructure that is traditionally maintained by the county or municipality 
for the benefit of the public, including roads and stormwater management facilities and 
may not be used to repair or replace recreational facilities used for the exclusive use or 
benefit of the members of a condominium association or homeowners association or their 
guests. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 280/ Page 2 
A fund established by a county or municipality must consist of (1) property tax revenues 
paid to the county or municipality by unit owners in a condominium or lot owners in a 
homeowners association; (2) other appropriations made by the county or municipality for 
the benefit of the fund; (3) gifts or donations made to the fund; and (4) investment earnings 
of the fund. 
 
A county or municipality must assign property tax revenues paid to the county or 
municipality by the unit owners in a condominium association or the lot owners in a 
homeowners association to a fund that is established as follows:  (1) 25% of the revenues 
per year for any condominium association or homeowners association that has not received 
support from the fund since the date on which the fund was established; and (2) between 
10% and 25% of the revenues per year for any condominium association or homeowners 
association that has received support from the fund since the date on which the fund was 
established. 
 
A county or a municipality may establish eligibility requirements for the award of funds to 
a condominium association or homeowners association. A county or municipality must 
prioritize support for condominiums and homeowners associations that exhibit the greatest 
need for infrastructure repair or rehabilitation. When evaluating the need for funding to 
support infrastructure repair, a county or municipality may consider the availability of other 
funds and resources on which a condominium association or homeowners association may 
rely. 
 
Current Law:  There are an estimated 7,100 community associations with an estimated 
one million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. For a discussion of common 
ownership communities, please see Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not alter the overall amount of property taxes collected 
by local governments. The bill authorizes a local government to establish a fund to pay 
certain infrastructure costs for homeowners associations and condominium associations. 
To the extent these funds are established, local governments must direct up to 25% of 
property tax revenues collected from these various associations to the fund. As a result, 
local government general fund revenues will be diverted from other local services such as 
education and public safety. The amount of property tax revenue that may be diverted 
depends on the amount of property taxes collected from homeowners and condominium 
associations, which cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:   Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 55 of 2023 and HB 1061 of 2022. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 280/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 446 (Senator Muse) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Worcester counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; City of Salisbury; Town of Leonardtown; State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 280/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 280/ Page 5 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5