START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 73

Chapter 73

(House Bill 229)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Motor Vehicle Insurance Companies – Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring motor vehicle insurance companies to participate in a certain
program of insurance verification for motor vehicle insurance policies; requiring
motor vehicle insurance companies to provide certain customer information details;
and generally relating to motor vehicle insurance.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 17–104(a), (b), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 17–104(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

17–104.

(a) The Administration may not issue or transfer the registration of a motor
vehicle unless the owner or prospective owner of the vehicle furnishes evidence satisfactory
to the Administration that the required security is in effect.

(b) The owner of a motor vehicle that is required to be registered in this State
shall maintain the required security for the vehicle during the registration period.

(c) Each insurer or other provider of required security shall:

(1) [Except as provided in item (2) of this subsection, immediately notify
the Administration electronically of new motor vehicle insurance policies issued for insured
vehicles registered in the State; and] PARTICIPATE IN THE ADMINISTRATION’S ONLINE
VERIFICATION PROGRAM FOR VEHICLE INSURANCE POLICIES FOR LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PURPOSES;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 73 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) For each fleet policy, electronically notify the Administration every 30
days of any additions, deletions, or modifications to the fleet policy, including those policy
numbers affected; AND

(3) ELECTRONICALLY PROVIDE THE ADMINISTRATION WITH ALL
ACTIVE INSURANCE POLICIES:

(I) IN A FORMAT REQUIRED BY THE ADMINISTRATION; AND

(II) AT AN INTERVAL DETERMINED BY THE ADMINISTRATION.

(d) The Administration, in consultation with the Maryland Insurance
Administration and representatives of the automobile insurance industry, shall adopt
regulations that establish procedures to be used by an insurer to provide timely notification
to an insured of the penalties that may be imposed in accordance with § 17–106 of this
subtitle if the insured fails to renew or replace a policy of motor vehicle liability insurance
without surrendering the evidences of registration.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ January 1, ~~2024~~ 2025.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2