START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 147

Chapter 147

(House Bill 241)

AN ACT concerning

Housing and Community Development – Just Community Designation

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Governor, on the recommendation of the Secretary of
Housing and Community Development, to designate certain areas as Just
Communities based on certain criteria; providing for the prioritization of State
funding for Just Communities; and generally relating to Just Communities.

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 6–1201 through 6–1203 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 12. Just
Community Designation”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

SUBTITLE 12. JUST COMMUNITY DESIGNATION.

6–1201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “JUST COMMUNITY” MEANS THE PART OF A PRIORITY FUNDING AREA
THAT, AS DETERMINED BY THE GOVERNOR, SATISFIES THE REQUIREMENTS OF §
6–1203 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) “PRIORITY FUNDING AREA” MEANS AN AREA DESIGNATED AS A
PRIORITY FUNDING AREA UNDER § 5–7B–02 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

6–1202.

(A) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS THAT THE STATE MUST HAVE JUST
COMMUNITIES IN ORDER TO:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 147 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) AFFIRMATIVELY ADVANCE EQUITY, CIVIL RIGHTS, RACIAL
JUSTICE, AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN THE STATE;

(2) CREATE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE BEEN HISTORICALLY UNDERSERVED, WITH ANTICIPATED
BENEFITS FOR THE ENTIRE STATE; AND

(3) RIGHT THE WRONGS OF THE PAST, WHEN THE STATE
SYSTEMATICALLY EXCLUDED CERTAIN GROUPS FROM EQUAL PARTICIPATION IN
THE BENEFITS OF PUBLIC RESOURCES.

(B) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT THE JUST
COMMUNITY DESIGNATION BE USED TO PRIORITIZE STATE FUNDING TO INCREASE
RACIAL, ECONOMIC, AND HEALTH EQUITY IN THE STATE.

6–1203.

(A) THE GOVERNOR, ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE SECRETARY, MAY
DESIGNATE AN AREA AS A JUST COMMUNITY IF THE SECRETARY DEMONSTRATES
THAT:

(1) PAST AND CURRENT TRENDS IN HOMEOWNERSHIP, PROPERTY
VALUES, COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL VACANCY, AND BUSINESS OR HOUSING
INVESTMENT SHOW A NEED FOR REINVESTMENT IN THE AREA; AND

(2) THE AREA HAS BEEN NEGATIVELY IMPACTED BY A HISTORY OF:

(I) FORMS OF LEGAL RACIAL SEGREGATION INCLUDING
REDLINING, EXCLUSIONARY ZONING, OR RACIALLY RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS;

(II) THE DEMOLITION OF RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
THROUGH THE USE OF EMINENT DOMAIN OR STATE OR FEDERAL FUNDING;

(III) A STATE IMPRISONMENT RATE HIGHER THAN 750 PER
100,000 PERSONS; OR

(IV) UNEQUAL EXPOSURE TO ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH
HAZARDS, INCLUDING:

1. PROXIMITY TO A FEDERAL SUPERFUND SITE;

2. ESTIMATED EXPOSURE TO LEAD–BASED PAINT; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 147

3. RATES OF ASTHMA AMONG ADULTS THAT ARE HIGHER
THAN THE 90TH PERCENTILE FOR THE STATE.

(B) TO MAINTAIN A JUST COMMUNITY DESIGNATION, EVERY 5 YEARS THE
SECRETARY SHALL MAKE DESIGNATION RECOMMENDATIONS FOR APPROVAL BY
THE GOVERNOR IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) AT THE TIME JUST COMMUNITIES ARE DESIGNATED OR RENEWED, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL IDENTIFY STATE PROGRAMS UNDER WHICH A JUST COMMUNITY
SHALL RECEIVE PRIORITY FOR STATE FUNDING.

(D) THE PRIORITIZATION OF STATE FUNDING FOR JUST COMMUNITIES
UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION SHALL NOT SUPERSEDE OTHER PROGRAM
REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIED IN STATE LAW.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3