START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 204 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 204 
(Delegate Attar, et al.) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education – Coaches – Mental Health Training 
 
 
This bill requires each public school in the State that offers an athletic program and each 
public institution of higher education that offers an athletic program to provide specified 
mental health training to each participating coach. The Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE) must work in collaboration with the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH), each local board of education, and the Maryland Public Secondary Schools 
Athletic Association (MPSSAA) to develop guidelines for public schools to train coaches 
in recognizing the indicators of mental illness and behavioral distress in students (including 
depression, trauma, violence, youth suicide, and substance abuse). Likewise, the Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC) must work with MDH to develop guidelines for 
public institutions of higher education to train coaches in recognizing the indicators of 
mental illness and behavioral distress in students. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHEC, MSDE, MPSSAA, and MDH can collaborate, as specified, to 
develop new guidelines for public schools and public institutions of higher education using 
existing resources. Expenditures for public institutions of higher education and the 
Maryland School for the Deaf (a State-funded educational institution) may increase 
minimally to provide the required mental health trainings for coaches. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Expenditures for local school systems and local community colleges may 
increase minimally to provide the required mental health training for coaches. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 204/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For elementary and secondary schools “athletic program” means an 
intramural, interscholastic, or other school-sponsored athletic program that is developed 
and offered to students in accordance with criteria established by the State Board of 
Education. For institutions of higher education “athletic program” means any 
intercollegiate athletic program at a public institution of higher education in the State. 
 
Current Law:  With the assistance of the local health department (LHD), each local board 
of education must provide adequate school health services, instruction in health education, 
and a healthful school environment. MSDE and MDH must jointly develop public 
standards and guidelines for school health programs and assist local boards of education 
and LHDs in their implementation. 
 
Chapter 36 of 2020, The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future established the Maryland 
Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports within the Maryland Community Health 
Resources Commission. The consortium must complete certain tasks related to the 
development of coordinated community supports partnerships to meet student behavioral 
health needs and other related challenges in a holistic, nonstigmatized, and coordinated 
manner, including developing a statewide framework for the creation of a coordinated 
community supports partnership, implementing a related grant program, evaluating a 
payment reimbursement program for providers, and developing a program for uninsured 
students. In addition, in consultation with MSDE, the consortium must develop best 
practices for the creation of a positive classroom for all students. The Blueprint also 
expanded funding for school-based health centers and for local school systems to train 
school staff to recognize student behavioral health issues and required local boards of 
education to enhance and expand the availability of behavioral health services to students. 
 
Health Training for Public School Coaches 
 
Coaches receive training related to the physical safety of students, including training in 
relation to venue-specific emergency action plans and seizure action plans. Chapter 78 of 
2022 requires that, beginning in the 2023-2024 school year, each public school must 
require that an abridged presentation of the best practices for seizure response based on 
school health services guidelines be given to all school personnel who have direct contact 
with and supervision of students, including coaches. Chapter 212 of 2022 establishes that 
all members of the coaching staff must be trained in the operation and use of automatic 
external defibrillators, and a trained member of the coaching staff must be present at all 
athletic practices and events on school property. 
 
MPSSAA operates in conjunction with MSDE and the 24 local school systems in Maryland 
to provide interscholastic participation opportunities to student athletes. MPSSAA operates 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 204/ Page 3 
a Medical Advisory Committee that meets three times a year to review the latest 
information on health and safety of high school interscholastic students, provide direction, 
and develop policies and implementation strategies of health and safety measures for the 
betterment of student-athletes. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHEC, MSDE, MPSSAA, and MDH can collaborate, as specified, 
to develop new guidelines for public schools and public institutions of higher education 
with existing resources. In response to a prior introduction of the bill, MHEC advised it 
would require one contractual employee to assist its academic affairs staff in developing 
the required guidelines. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that 
MHEC can likely create the guidelines using existing resources, particularly as the scope 
of the guidelines is limited to recognizing the indicators of mental illness and behavioral 
distress in students, existing mental health resources are likely available to MHEC, and 
MDH is required to collaborate. This analysis assumes MDH can meaningfully collaborate 
with MHEC to develop the required guidelines. To the extent MDH cannot meaningfully 
collaborate with MHEC to develop guidelines, MHEC may face minimal additional costs 
to hire contractual support for the research and development of the guidelines. 
 
Depending on services and training already provided, higher education expenditures at 
public institutions of higher education may increase minimally to provide mental health 
training to coaches; however, it is assumed that these costs are generally absorbable within 
existing resources. The University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus advises that, if the 
trainings are conducted internally, the trainings can be performed with existing resources. 
Towson University advises that the cost to run trainings could be as much as $10,000 to 
hire a part-time contractual employee to run the trainings annually. The University of 
Maryland, College Park Campus similarly advises that the cost to train coaches is $3,000 to 
$5,000, although the exact amount depends on the length of training required and the cost 
of the training selected. 
 
Likewise, State-funded primary and secondary schools may incur additional minimal 
expenditures to provide training to coaches. In response to a prior introduction of the bill, 
the Maryland School for the Deaf advised the school would face additional expenditures 
to contract with a new trainer for its coaches; however, any such costs would likely be 
absorbable within existing resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures for local school systems and local community colleges 
may increase minimally to provide the required mental health training for coaches. Local 
school system expenditures may include hiring substitutes or providing stipends to allow 
coaches to attend training. MSDE advises that the National Federation of High Schools 
(NFHS) offers a free course on Student Mental Health and Suicide Prevention. The course, 
designed for both students and coaches, includes a focus on wellness framework, student 
mental health, stress and anxiety, depression, and suicide prevention. MSDE further 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 204/ Page 4 
advises that the NFHS concussion, sudden cardiac arrest, and heat acclimatization courses 
are currently used by local school systems to meet other requirements of coach educational 
training. 
 
Baltimore City Public Schools estimates an annual cost of $25,000 for training costs and 
participant stipends. Anne Arundel County Public Schools advises that expenditures to 
implement the bill may increase depending on the specifics of the training selected, how 
the coursework is delivered to coaches, cost of materials, and certificate tracking. 
Baltimore County Public Schools advises that the school system already retains staff to 
support the mental health of students and can provide the NFHS training to its coaches with 
existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 375 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 165 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland School for the Deaf; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Baltimore 
City 
Community 
College; 
University 
System 
of 
Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; St. Mary’s 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 19, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4