START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 252 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 252 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Maryland Insurance Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Insurance - Holding Companies - Group Capital Calculation and Liquidity 
Stress Test 
 
 
This departmental bill alters Maryland insurance law to reflect revisions made to the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) Model Act #440 “Insurance 
Holding Company System Regulatory Act” and Model Act #450 “Insurance Holding 
Company System Model Regulation with Reporting Forms and Instructions.” The bill 
generally requires insurers to participate in a Group Capital Calculation (GCC) and 
Liquidity Stress Test (LST) and establishes related processes and requirements. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled using existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) has determined 
that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 252/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the bill:  
 
 
establishes relevant definitions, including the scope of data to be used when MIA 
determines whether an insurer is required to perform the LST; 
 
specifies that data, information, and materials collected by MIA for the GCC or LST 
is (1) recognized as being proprietary and to contain trade secrets; (2) confidential 
and private; (3) not subject to the Public Information Act; (4) not subject to 
subpoena; and (5) not subject to discovery or admissible in evidence in any private 
civil action;  
 
enumerates how the data, information, and materials collected by MIA for the GCC 
or LST may and may not be used; 
 
specifies that certain information must be disclosed for the purposes of the GCC and 
LST, even if it is not considered material; 
 
requires the Commissioner to maintain the confidentiality of the GCC, GCC-related 
information, LST results, and LST-related information, as specified; 
 
explicitly authorizes the Commissioner to share GCC and LST documents and 
information to assist in the performance of the Commissioner’s duties, but specifies 
the processes that must be followed and agreements that must be entered into to 
ensure confidentiality of the documents and information; 
 
enumerates various other requirements related to the sharing of GCC and LST 
documents and information, including that the sharing of information by the 
Commissioner may not constitute a delegation of regulatory authority or 
rulemaking; 
 
requires each insurer subject to registration in the State to concurrently file with its 
registration statement an annual GCC and establishes related exemptions, 
requirements, and processes; and 
 
requires each insurer subject to registration in the State and that is required to perform 
an LST to file the results of a specific year’s LST concurrently with its registration 
statement and establishes related exemptions, requirements, and processes. 
 
Current Law/Background:  As the primary regulator of the insurance industry in the 
State, MIA performs actuarial evaluations, financial audits, financial examinations, and 
market conduct examinations to ensure that insurers remain financially solvent and comply 
with State laws. MIA participates in the activities of NAIC, a national standard-setting and 
regulatory support organization. MIA achieved voluntary NAIC accreditation in 
September 1994. NAIC regularly develops and revises model acts concerning new and 
existing insurance issues and encourages its member regulators to adopt the legislation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 252/ Page 3 
The bill implements revisions to NAIC Model Acts #440 and #450, specifically by 
implementing the GCC and LST. The GCC provides regulators with an additional 
analytical tool for conducting group-wide supervision and assists regulators in 
understanding the financial condition of noninsurance entities within the holding company 
system. The LST is a tool intended to help assess the impacts on the broader financial 
market of aggregate asset sales by large life insurers under a liquidity stress event. 
 
MIA advises that adoption of these model acts will become an NAIC accreditation standard 
beginning January 1, 2026. Thus, the bill ensures that MIA has an effective framework to 
supervise insurance groups operating in the State and continue to maintain its NAIC 
accreditation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 252/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Insurance – Holding Companies – Group Capital Calculation and Liquidity 
Stress Test 
BILL NUMBER: HB 252 
PREPARED BY: Jamie Sexton 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
There is no economic impact on small businesses associated with this proposal. 
 

END OF PAGE 4