START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 91

Chapter 91

(House Bill 225)

AN ACT concerning

~~Smart~~ Sustainable Growth Subcabinet ~~–~~ ~~Membership~~ ~~and~~ ~~Duties~~ and Repeal of
the Office of Smart Growth

FOR the purpose of repealing the Office of Smart Growth; repealing the position of Special
Secretary of Smart Growth; renaming the Smart Growth Subcabinet to be the
Sustainable Growth Subcabinet; altering the membership and duties of the ~~Smart~~
~~Growth~~ Subcabinet; and generally relating to the ~~Smart~~ Sustainable Growth
Subcabinet and the repeal of the Office of Smart Growth.

BY repealing and reenacting, ~~without~~ with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–1401, 9–1402, 9–1405, and 9–1406 to be under the amended subtitle
“Subtitle 14. Sustainable Growth Subcabinet”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
Article – State Government
Section ~~9–1406~~ 9–1403 and 9–1404
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

Subtitle 14. [Office of Smart Growth] SUSTAINABLE GROWTH SUBCABINET.

9–1401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) ~~“Office”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Smart~~ ~~Growth.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~“Special~~ ~~Secretary”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Special~~ ~~Secretary~~ ~~of~~ ~~Smart~~ ~~Growth.~~

(d) “Subcabinet” means the Smart SUSTAINABLE Growth Subcabinet.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 91 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) “SUSTAINABLE GROWTH POLICY” MEANS THE STATE ECONOMIC
GROWTH, RESOURCE PROTECTION, AND PLANNING POLICY SET FORTH IN §
5–7A–01 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

9–1402.

(a) The General Assembly finds that the State is committed to addressing the
high financial, social, and environmental costs of sprawl development through effective
[smart] SUSTAINABLE growth policy.

(b) The purpose of this subtitle is to establish a centralized office in the State in
a manner such that the policy of [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth can be better articulated,
coordinated, and implemented in order to better serve the residents of the State.

[9–1403.

There is an Office of Smart Growth, established as part of the Executive
Department.]

[9–1404.

(a) The head of the Office is the Special Secretary of Smart Growth, who shall be
appointed by the Governor.

(b) (1) The Special Secretary serves at the pleasure of the Governor and is
responsible directly to the Governor.

(2) The Special Secretary shall advise the Governor on all matters assigned
to the Office and is responsible for carrying out the Governor’s policies on smart growth.

(c) (1) The Special Secretary is responsible for the operation of the Office and
shall establish guidelines and procedures to promote the orderly and efficient
administration of the Office.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this subtitle, the Special Secretary may
establish, reorganize, or abolish areas of responsibility in the Office as necessary to fulfill
the duties assigned to the Special Secretary.

(3) The Special Secretary may adopt regulations necessary to carry out the
provisions of this subtitle.

(d) The Special Secretary is entitled to the salary provided in the State budget.]

9–1405.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 91

(a) In addition to any other powers and duties imposed by law, the [Office]
SUBCABINET has the powers and duties set forth in this section.

(b) The [Office] SUBCABINET shall:

(1) review State assistance programs related to [smart] SUSTAINABLE
growth to determine their applicability, if any, to projects that are consistent with the
State’s [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth policy;

(2) promote interagency consensus and cooperation on projects that are
consistent with the State’s [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth policy and resolve conflicting
agency positions on projects in an expedited manner;

(3) provide advisory and technical assistance to local jurisdictions and to
the public in preparing, financing, and developing [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth and
neighborhood [conservation] VITALITY projects;

(4) gather and disseminate information to the public, including local
jurisdictions, nonprofit organizations, and developers on how to develop projects that are
consistent with the State’s [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth policy;

(5) provide a single point of access for members of the public, including
local jurisdictions, nonprofit organizations, developers, and community and homeowners’
associations who need assistance or guidance in navigating the processes and regulations
of State agencies on projects that are consistent with the State’s [smart] SUSTAINABLE
growth policy;

(6) work with local governments in expediting review of projects that both
the local government and the State agree are consistent with the State’s [smart]
SUSTAINABLE growth policy;

(7) provide effective public information on [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth
programs and educational activities, including relationships with the National Center for
Smart Growth Education and Research at the University of Maryland, College Park
Campus, and coordination of [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth outreach efforts to local
governments, the general public, and other interest groups;

(8) coordinate the efforts of the Executive Branch to provide input to the
General Assembly on legislation that concerns [smart] SUSTAINABLE growth and
neighborhood [conservation] VITALITY; and

(9) [in coordination with the Subcabinet,] recommend to the Governor
changes to State law and regulations necessary to advance the policy of [smart]
SUSTAINABLE growth.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 91 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9–1406. 9–1403.

(a) There is a Smart SUSTAINABLE Growth Subcabinet.

(b) The Subcabinet consists of:

(1) [the Special Secretary;

(2)] the Secretary of Agriculture;

[(3)] (2) the Secretary of Budget and Management;

[(4)] (3) the Secretary of Commerce;

(4) THE SECRETARY OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT;

(5) the Secretary of the Environment;

(6) the Secretary of General Services;

(7) the Secretary of Higher Education;

(8) the Secretary of Housing and Community Development;

(9) the Assistant Secretary of the Office of Neighborhood Revitalization;

(10) the Secretary of Natural Resources;

(11) the Secretary of Planning;

(12) the Secretary of Transportation;

(13) a representative of the Governor’s office;

(14) the Secretary of Health;

(15) the Secretary of Labor; and

(16) the Director of the Maryland Energy Administration.

(c) The Executive Director of the National Center for Smart Growth Education
and Research at the University of Maryland, College Park Campus shall serve as an ex
officio member of the Subcabinet.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 91

(d) (1) The [Special] Secretary OF PLANNING shall chair the Subcabinet and
shall be responsible for the oversight, direction, and accountability of the work of the
Subcabinet.

(2) The Secretary of [Planning] HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT shall be the vice chair of the Subcabinet.

(e) (1) The Office DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING shall provide the primary
staff support for the Subcabinet AND SERVE AS ITS PRIMARY OFFICE.

(2) The [Special Secretary and the] Secretary of Planning may call upon
any of the Subcabinet members to provide additional staff assistance as needed.

(f) The [Special Secretary and the] Secretary of Planning may establish
subcommittees to carry out the work of the Subcabinet.

(g) The Subcabinet shall meet regularly at such times and places as it determines.

(h) (1) The Subcabinet shall:

(i) provide a forum for discussion of interdepartmental issues
relating to activities that affect growth, development, EQUITY, RESILIENCY, neighborhood
~~conservation~~ VITALITY, and resource management;

(ii) work together using all available resources to promote the
understanding of smart SUSTAINABLE growth;

(iii) work together to create, enhance, support, and revitalize
EQUITABLE AND sustainable communities across the State;

(iv) meet at least biannually with county and municipal elected
leaders and planning officials to discuss local government issues relating to activities that
affect smart EQUITABLE AND RESILIENT growth, development, neighborhood
~~conservation~~ VITALITY, and resource management;

(v) subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, make
recommendations to:

1. the Department of Commerce in accordance with § 5–1304
of the Economic Development Article;

2. the Department of Housing and Community Development
in accordance with § 6–206 of the Housing and Community Development Article;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 91 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. the Department of Planning in accordance with § 5A–303
of the State Finance and Procurement Article; and

4. the Department of Transportation in accordance with §
7–101 of the Transportation Article;

(vi) in coordination with State agencies, evaluate and report
annually to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of this article, to the General
Assembly on the implementation of the State’s smart SUSTAINABLE growth policy; and

(vii) perform other duties assigned by the Governor.

(2) The failure of the Subcabinet to make a recommendation under
paragraph (1)(v) of this subsection may not be construed as prohibiting a department to act
in accordance with the department’s authority under State law.

(i) The annual report required in subsection (h)(1) of this section shall include:

(1) a description of the projects, programs, and costs of activities located in
priority funding areas;

(2) a description of projects, programs, and costs of activities funded under
the exceptions allowed in § 5–7B–06 of the State Finance and Procurement Article;

(3) projects submitted to the Board of Public Works for funding outside
priority funding areas under the extraordinary circumstances exception in accordance with
§ 5–7B–05 of the State Finance and Procurement Article and the impact of these projects
upon the State’s smart SUSTAINABLE growth policy;

(4) a list of programs and policies reviewed and changed to ensure
compliance with the State’s smart SUSTAINABLE growth policy; and

(5) a list of projects or programs approved and funded under Chapter 759,
§ 2 of the Acts of 1997.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
the section affected.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6