START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 274

Chapter 274

(House Bill 291)

AN ACT concerning

County Boards of Education – Bid Advertisement Threshold and Electronic
Posting of Hearing Notices and Bid Advertisements

FOR the purpose of ~~authorizing~~ requiring county boards of education to post certain
hearing notices and bid advertisements on the websites of certain local school
systems; increasing the threshold amount of costs of school buildings, improvements,
supplies, and equipment that require county boards to advertise for bids; updating
the reference to the State’s centralized procurement platform on which county boards
may advertise for certain bids; and generally relating to county boards of education,
the bid advertisement threshold, and electronic posting of notices and
advertisements.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 4–116(b) and 5–112(b)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

4–116.

(b) (1) If a county board gives preliminary approval of a school site, the county
board shall hold a public hearing if:

(i) It considers it desirable;

(ii) 100 or more adult residents of the county petition in writing for
a hearing; or

(iii) The county commissioners or county council asks for a hearing.

(2) The hearing shall be held on at least 10 days’ notice, published at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county OR AND POSTED
ELECTRONICALLY ON THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM WEBSITE, to give all interested
persons an opportunity to present their views.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 274 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Any petition by residents of the county shall be filed at the office of the
county board within 15 days after the board gives preliminary approval of the site.

(4) If a hearing is held, minutes shall be kept and, after deliberation, the
county board shall send the minutes of the hearing and its recommendation to the State
Superintendent for use in making a decision on his approval of the site.

(5) A request for site approval may not be made to the State
Superintendent by a county board until 15 days pass after its action recommending the site
or, if a hearing is held, until after the hearing, whichever occurs last.

5–112.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, IN ADDITION
TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF § 17–502 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE, if the cost of any school building, improvement, supplies, or equipment is more
than [$25,000] $100,000, the county board, at least 2 weeks before bids are to be filed,
shall advertise for bids in a medium accessible to the general public, which includes:

(i) A newspaper of general circulation in the region;

(ii) [The Maryland Contract Weekly or comparable State
publication] EMARYLAND MARKETPLACE; or

(iii) An electronic posting on [a bid board and physical posting on]
the local school system [bid board] WEBSITE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2