START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 237 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 237 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Commercial Northern Snakehead License – Gear 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) repeals certain buffer zones (100 yards from another person or 
vessel, a public or private swimming area, a diver down flag, or an occupied offshore 
stationary blind) within which a commercial northern snakehead licensee may not fish with 
a bow and arrow and (2) instead requires a commercial northern snakehead licensee who 
fishes for northern snakehead to comply with all Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
regulations governing the use of gear. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A commercial northern snakehead license is established in State law that 
authorizes the holder to catch for sale northern snakeheads in the tidal waters of the State 
using (1) a bow and arrow attached to a retrieval line or (2) hook and line. An applicant for 
a license does not need to hold a tidal fish license (DNR’s traditional, limited entry 
commercial fishing license) to be eligible for the license. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 237/ Page 2 
A commercial northern snakehead licensee may not fish with a bow and arrow under the 
license within 100 yards of (1) another person or vessel; (2) a public or private swimming 
area; (3) a diver down flag; or (4) an occupied offshore stationary blind. 
 
The commercial northern snakehead license was first established under Chapters 708 and 
709 of 2016 as the commercial northern snakehead bowfishing license. (The name of the 
license was changed to its current name under Chapter 528 of 2020, when licensees were 
authorized to also use hook and line to catch northern snakeheads under the license.) 
Chapters 708 and 709 also authorize DNR to adopt regulations to define and govern the 
use of bowfishing gear in commercial fishing. 
 
DNR gear regulations adopted in 2018 that govern the commercial use of archery 
equipment (defined as a vertical bow or a crossbow) prohibit a person from shooting 
archery equipment within 100 yards of any (1) human being; (2) private or public 
swimming area; (3) international diving flag; (4) occupied duck blind; or (5) vessel other 
than the vessel occupied by the individual using archery equipment. The distance 
restrictions, however, do not apply if the person using the archery equipment receives 
permission from all affected parties within that area prior to engaging in fishing activities. 
 
Background:  DNR indicates that bowfishing under the commercial northern snakehead 
license has expanded since the license was first established in 2016 and the bill allows the 
department to make changes to bow and arrow gear regulations to address user conflicts. 
DNR indicates that, without the bill, changes it makes to the gear regulations may be 
inconsistent with the buffer zones applicable to commercial northern snakehead licensees 
in statute. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 302 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural Resources) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 237/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 237/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Commercial Northern Snakehead License - Gear 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 237 
 
PREPARED BY:  Sarah Widman 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This legislation requires bowfish licensees to follow the agency’s regulations. This does 
not result in any meaningful economic impacts to small businesses at this time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4