START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 285 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 285 
(Delegate Holmes, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Task Force on Property Appraisal and Valuation Equity - Alterations 
 
   
This bill extends the termination date of Chapter 654 of 2022, which established a 
Task Force on Property Appraisal and Valuation Equity, from June 30, 2024, to 
December 31, 2024. The bill also extends the date by which the required report is to be 
submitted from October 31, 2023, to October 31, 2024. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Extending the reporting due date and termination date of the task force can 
be handled with the existing resources of the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD). Any expense reimbursements for task force members are assumed 
to continue and to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 654 established a Task Force on Property Appraisal and Valuation 
Equity to be staffed by DHCD. The task force was required to report its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and General Assembly by October 31, 2023.  
 
The task force must address the persistent misvaluation and undervaluation of property 
owned by minorities by: 
 
 
studying strategies and actions that will: 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 285/ Page 2 
 
help ensure that governmental oversight and industry standards and practices 
further valuation equity;  
 
increase training of appraisers to combat valuation bias;  
 
remove barriers to entry into the appraisal profession by minorities;  
 
assist in the development of a model for a meaningful reconsideration of 
value process;  
 
reduce or eliminate bias related to automated valuation models and 
alternative property valuation methods; and 
 
identifying legislative or other policy recommendations that will provide a 
comprehensive and coordinated approach for reducing bias in valuations, through 
enforcement, compliance, or other methods. 
 
The first meeting of the task force occurred on October 26, 2023. 
 
Property Appraisal Process in Maryland  
 
The Maryland Commission of Real Estate Appraisers, Appraisal Management Companies 
and Home Inspectors was established in 1990 and licenses and regulates individuals who 
perform real estate appraisal services in connection with federally related transactions. As 
defined in the federal Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 
1989, this includes appraisal management companies. The commission also regulates 
appraisal management companies and individuals who provide appraisal or home 
inspection services pursuant to the Business Occupations and Professions Article.  
 
Real estate appraisers provide estimates of the value of commercial and residential real 
property to their clients. Real estate appraisals are most often associated with the purchase 
of a home and are often shared with the buyer, seller, and broker involved in a real estate 
transaction. Generally, however, an appraiser’s client is a mortgage lender seeking an 
accurate value for the home that serves as collateral in the loan transaction. Appraisal 
services are also used for a variety of other purposes, including estate planning and property 
insurance.       
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 518 (Senator A. Washington) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 285/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland 
Department of Labor; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3