START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 228 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 228 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee and 
Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Natural Resources) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Natural Resources - Maryland State Parks - Funds and Plan Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill grants additional flexibility to the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR) in spending funds allocated to the department under Chapter 39 of 2022 (the Great 
Maryland Outdoors Act) by (1) extending the deadline by which DNR must spend certain 
funds in the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund; (2) authorizing DNR to make certain 
expenditures from the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund without prior approval of 
the Department of General Services (DGS); and (3) expanding the purposes and authorized 
uses of the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund and the Great 
Maryland Outdoors Fund. The bill also clarifies the intent of the use of money expended 
from the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund and requires DNR to 
report on expenditures from the fund. Finally, the bill extends the deadline for DNR to 
develop and publish a Comprehensive Long-Range Strategic Plan for the State park system 
by one year, from December 1, 2023, to December 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect total spending over the five-year period covered by 
this fiscal and policy note; however, as much as $20.0 million in special fund expenditures 
from the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund is delayed from FY 2026 to FY 2027 
through 2029, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 228/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 39 made various changes to State law affecting the 
Maryland Park Service, parks and forests in the State, land conservation, and State lakes, 
relating to (1) funding for parks, land conservation, State lakes, and forest-related purposes; 
(2) parks staff and volunteers; (3) management of parks and park infrastructure; and 
(4) new parks/amenities and other considerations. Among the various changes made to the 
statute governing the State park system, the Act established several new special funds. The 
special funds relevant to this bill, and the bill’s changes to those special funds, are discussed 
below. 
 
Park System Critical Maintenance Fund 
 
Chapter 39 established the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund as a special, nonlapsing 
fund to address critical maintenance concerns on lands managed by DNR for public 
purposes. The Act required the Governor, for fiscal 2024 only, to include in the annual 
budget bill a general fund appropriation of $70.0 million to the fund. Pursuant to 
Chapter 39, DNR must spend those funds by July 1, 2026.  
 
The bill extends the deadline by which DNR must spend the allocated funds by three years 
(from July 1, 2026, to July 1, 2029).  
 
In general, under current law, DGS has oversight over Executive Branch agencies’ 
procurement of supplies, information technology equipment and services, construction, 
services, and more. DGS delegates its authority to most Executive Branch agencies for 
construction contracts valued at $200,000 or less. In addition, pursuant to § 13-109 of the 
State Finance and Procurement Article, DNR is authorized to make a procurement contract 
for capital projects or maintenance with a value of $200,000 or less without prior approval 
of DGS.  
 
The bill authorizes DNR, notwithstanding § 13-109 of the State Finance and Procurement 
Article, to expend up to $400,000 for a project that addresses critical maintenance concerns 
from the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund without prior approval of DGS. 
 
Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund 
 
Chapter 39 established the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund as a 
special, nonlapsing fund to provide funding for (1) completing State park projects related 
to capital improvements on lands managed by DNR for public purposes and (2) acquiring 
land to be managed by DNR for public purposes as a State park. The fund may be used 
only for those purposes. Money expended from the fund for capital improvements in the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 228/ Page 3 
State’s parks is supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that 
otherwise would be appropriated for capital improvements in the State’s parks. 
 
The bill repeals references to “parks” in the above provisions and includes references to 
State projects on lands managed by DNR for public purposes. As a result, the bill expands 
the purpose and authorized uses of the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition 
Fund to include authorized projects in, and land acquisition for, any DNR-managed lands, 
rather than just State parks. The bill also clarifies that money expended from the fund for 
capital improvements is intended to expand public access on lands managed by DNR and 
alleviate overcapacity within the State park system. 
 
Additionally, Chapter 39 required the first $70.0 million in the special fund to be used in a 
specified manner. The bill modifies this required spending as follows:  
 
 
Chapter 39 required exactly $5.0 million to be used for infrastructure projects that 
mitigate the effects of climate change. The bill requires at least $5.0 million to be 
used for this purpose. 
 
Chapter 39 required exactly $5.0 million to be used for historic preservation, as 
specified. The bill requires at least $5.0 million to be used for this purpose. 
 
Chapter 39 required exactly $20.0 million to be used for transportation 
improvements, as specified. The bill requires at least $20.0 million to be used for 
this purpose.  
 
Chapter 39 required exactly $10.0 million to be used for increasing water access, as 
specified. The bill requires at least $10.0 million to be used for this purpose. 
 
Chapter 39 required exactly $30.0 million to be used for land acquisition, as 
specified. The bill requires up to $30.0 million to be used for land acquisition. 
 
Chapter 39 also established a Parks and Recreation Commission in DNR to provide 
oversight of the Maryland Park Service and its implementation of Chapter 39. Under 
current law, DNR must annually provide the commission with a briefing on the status of 
the Maryland Park Service and the State park system. The commission must (1) meet 
quarterly to review the status of the Maryland Park Service and (2) submit an annual report 
of its findings and recommendations to specified legislative committees. The bill expands 
the provisions relating to the commission by requiring DNR to report to the 
commission – at each of its meetings – on expenditures from the Park System Capital 
Improvements and Acquisition Fund. 
 
Great Maryland Outdoors Fund 
 
Chapter 39 established the Great Maryland Outdoors Fund in DNR and authorized an 
annual appropriation of up to $3.0 million to the fund beginning in fiscal 2024. Under 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 228/ Page 4 
current law, funding may only be used for (1) implementing the recommendations of the 
Maryland Outdoor Recreation Economic Commission, including establishing and 
supporting an Office of Outdoor Recreation in DNR; (2) DNR projects and programs that 
provide, promote, and enhance outdoor recreation opportunities in the State; and 
(3) awarding grants to destination marketing organizations for the purpose of promoting 
and marketing State parks. 
 
The bill expands the stated purpose and authorized uses of the fund to include the 
promotion, growth, and provision of resources to support outdoor environmental education 
opportunities in the State. 
 
Background:  DNR advises that the bill is intended to provide the department with 
additional flexibility in implementing Chapter 39 and spending the funds allocated to the 
department pursuant to that Act. Specifically:   
 
 
changes to the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund are necessary because DNR 
is uncertain whether it can spend the entire $70.0 million appropriated in fiscal 2024 
and required to be spent by July 1, 2026; while DNR is making efforts to spend the 
funds in a timely manner, it would like additional time for these projects; 
 
changes to the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund allow DNR 
to align funding to projects that are required to improve public access to DNR lands 
and are ready-to-go. DNR advises that there are significant capital development 
needs on lands managed by various DNR units, not just the Maryland Park Service, 
and that under the bill, DNR plans to allocate funding to the highest priority projects 
to meet public needs for open space and recreation space and amenities; 
 
with respect to the bill’s changes to the Great Maryland Outdoor Fund, DNR advises 
that while it still intends to use the fund to support the mission of the Office of 
Outdoor Recreation, there is no special fund available within DNR to support 
outdoor environmental education in the State; and 
 
extending the deadline for developing and publishing the Comprehensive 
Long-Range Strategic Plan is necessary to ensure that the planning process for the 
strategic plan is aligned with the planning process for the Land Preservation and 
Recreation Plan, which DNR updates every five years to meet requirements and 
maintain eligibility for funding from the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund 
within the U.S. Department of the Interior. 
 
State Expenditures:  Most of the bill’s changes do not affect overall spending, as they 
generally afford additional flexibility to DNR as it implements Chapter 39 or result in 
administrative efficiencies for DNR. However, the extension of the deadline by which 
DNR must spend certain funds in the Park System Critical Maintenance Fund affects the 
timing of DNR’s special fund expenditures over the next several years. While total 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 228/ Page 5 
spending over the five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note is not affected, 
some spending is delayed (from fiscal 2026 to fiscal 2027 through 2029). 
 
DNR advises that it has yet to spend any of the $70.0 million from the Park System Critical 
Maintenance Fund that was appropriated in fiscal 2024 and is required to be spent by 
July 1, 2026. DNR further advises that it plans to spend between $10.0 million and 
$15.0 million in fiscal 2025, regardless of the bill. That leaves $55.0 million to 
$60.0 million that must be spent in fiscal 2026 under current law. 
 
DNR advises that under the bill, it plans to delay some of the spending. Specifically, under 
the bill, DNR plans to spend between $40.0 million and $50.0 million in fiscal 2026 and 
the remainder (between $5.0 million and $20.0 million) in fiscal 2027 through 2029. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures decrease by as much as $20.0 million in fiscal 2026 
and increase correspondingly over the three-year period from fiscal 2027 through 2029. 
The bill is not anticipated to affect total spending in fiscal 2025. 
 
Additional Comments:  DLS advises that, because the Park System Critical Maintenance 
Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund, and there is no provision in law requiring reversion of 
any funds to the general fund, it appears that, even in the absence of the bill, any portion 
of the $70.0 million that is not spent by July 1, 2026 remains in the special fund and could 
be available for spending in a future year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 259 (Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Natural Resources) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of General 
Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 11, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 11, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 228/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
NATURAL RESOURCES - MARYLAND STATE PARKS - 
FUNDS AND PLAN ALTERATIONS 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 228 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Hilary Bell 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Both land acquisition and capital development projects positively impact small 
businesses since they can be contracted for some/all of the work associated with the 
project.  This legislation doesn’t change the total spent on land acquisition and capital 
development projects so it is not anticipated that there will be a significant impact on 
small businesses.  The bill could change the total funding spent on each category, but the 
funding will still be spent on projects.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 6