START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 34

Chapter 34

(House Bill 215)

AN ACT concerning

Human Services – Attendant Care Program – Ongoing Additional Supports

FOR the purpose of altering the purpose of the Attendant Care Program to include the
provision of financial assistance for ongoing additional supports; and generally
relating to the Attendant Care Program and ongoing additional supports.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 7–401, 7–402, and 7–404
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

7–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Attendant care services” means any of the following services for an eligible
individual, which are certified as necessary by an attending physician or by a registered
nurse:

(1) dressing;

(2) preparing food and assisting with eating;

(3) bathing and personal hygiene;

(4) assisting with routine bodily functions, including bowel and urinary
care;

(5) moving into, out of, or turning in bed;

(6) laundering and other clothing care; and

(7) cleaning house and performing other services of daily care, including
shopping and transportation, that the Department and the eligible individual request.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 34 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) “Department” means the Department of Disabilities.

(d) “Eligible individual” means an individual who:

(1) is at least 18 years old and under the age of 65 years at the time of the
initial eligibility determination; and

(2) has a severe chronic or permanent physical disability that precludes or
significantly impairs the individual’s independent performance of essential activities of
daily living, self–care, or mobility.

(e) “Financial assistance” means a payment the Department makes to an eligible
individual for attendant care services OR ONGOING ADDITIONAL SUPPORTS.

(F) “ONGOING ADDITIONAL SUPPORTS” MEANS A CONTINUAL SUPPORT
THAT:

(1) INCREASES AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL’S INDEPENDENT
PERFORMANCE OF AN ESSENTIAL ACTIVITY OF DAILY LIVING, SELF–CARE, OR
MOBILITY; AND

(2) IS REQUESTED BY AN ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL AND APPROVED BY
THE DEPARTMENT.

[(f)] (G) “Program” means the Attendant Care Program.

[(g)] (H) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Disabilities.

7–402.

(a) (1) There is an Attendant Care Program in the Department.

(2) The purpose of the Program is to provide financial assistance to eligible
individuals for attendant care services AND ONGOING ADDITIONAL SUPPORTS.

(b) The Department shall provide financial assistance in accordance with a
sliding payment scale that the Department establishes by regulation for each category of
eligible individuals described in § 7–404(a) of this subtitle.

7–404.

(a) (1) The Department shall ensure that at any given time at least 50% of the
eligible individuals receiving financial assistance under the Program are:

(i) gainfully employed;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 34

(ii) actively seeking employment; or

(iii) attending an institution of postsecondary or higher education, as
defined in § 10–101 of the Education Article.

(2) The remainder of the eligible individuals receiving financial assistance
under the Program shall be individuals who:

(i) reside in a nursing facility or similar institution licensed to
provide chronic or intermediate care and who will be deinstitutionalized as a result of the
Program; or

(ii) are certified by an attending physician or certified nurse
practitioner as being at risk of placement in a nursing facility or similar institution licensed
to provide chronic or intermediate care if attendant care services are not received in the
community.

(b) (1) Subject to the availability of funds, the Secretary may waive the
proportional requirement of subsection (a)(1) of this section in the event there is a waiting
list of eligible individuals described in subsection (a)(2) of this section.

(2) The Secretary may adopt regulations to establish priorities and
procedures for a waiting list of eligible individuals.

(3) An eligible individual receiving financial assistance may not be
removed from the Program to achieve the proportional requirement under subsection (a)(1)
of this section.

(c) Financial assistance provided under the Program may not duplicate any other
State or federal assistance for attendant care services OR ONGOING ADDITIONAL
SUPPORTS that an eligible individual receives.

(d) The Department shall limit participation in the Program to the number of
eligible individuals who can be served with the funds appropriated for the Program in the
State budget.

(e) Each year, the Department shall review the eligibility of each individual
receiving financial assistance.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3