START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 250 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 250 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Financial Institutions - Third-Party Service Providers - Examinations 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) to examine a 
“third-party service provider” as to services and activities performed on behalf of an entity 
licensed or chartered by OFR within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  OFR can handle any additional examination and enforcement activities with 
existing resources. Revenues are likely not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions and Applicability 
 
A “third-party service provider” is a person who performs activities relating to financial 
services on behalf of a “regulated entity” (i.e., a person who is licensed or chartered by 
OFR) for that regulated entity’s customers. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 250/ Page 2 
The bill delineates several types of third-party service providers that meet those criteria, 
including (1) data processing services; (2) activities that support specified financial 
services; (3) Internet-related services; or (4) any other similar activity OFR designates by 
regulation as related to financial services. 
 
However, a third-party service provider does not include (1) a provider of an interactive 
computer service or a general audience Internet or communications platform (except to the 
extent that the service or platform is specially designed or adapted for financial services 
and related activities) or (2) any person that controls, or is under common control with, an 
entity licensed by OFR unless the person performs any of the activities noted in the criteria 
above for the licensed entity. 
 
Office of Financial Regulation Examination Authority 
 
To the extent authorized by law, regulation, or any other agreement to which OFR is a 
party, OFR must notify a licensed person of any examination initiated by OFR of any 
third-party service provider who performs activities relating to financial services on behalf 
of the licensed person. 
 
The power of OFR to examine a third-party service provider pursuant to the bill’s authority 
is not limited to services and activities conducted on the premises of a regulated entity. 
 
After commencement of an examination of a person licensed by OFR or any third-party 
service provider who performs activities relating to financial services on behalf of a person 
licensed by OFR: 
 
 
OFR may request information from the third-party service provider; and 
 
if the licensed person has access to the information, the licensed person may provide 
the information to OFR (1) with the consent of OFR or (2) if the third-party service 
provider fails to provide the information. 
 
The bill authorizes OFR to collect a fee in connection with each examination to cover the 
cost of the examination from (1) the examined third-party provider or (2) the regulated 
entity that contracts with the third-party service provider (only if the examined third-party 
provider fails to cover the cost of the examination within 60 days after OFR sends an 
invoice). 
 
OFR may accept the results of an examination of a federal supervisory agency or 
responsible supervisory agency of another state as the results of an examination by OFR. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 250/ Page 3 
OFR is expressly authorized to examine the following:   
 
 
all books, accounts, and records of a regulated entity or a third-party service 
provider (as necessary) to conduct a complete examination; and 
 
any officer, director, or employee of the regulated entity or, as appropriate, the 
third-party service provider, under oath, who may provide information on behalf of 
the regulated entity (or the third-party service provider). 
 
The examination powers of OFR authorized by the bill are in addition to any examination 
powers of OFR authorized under any other provision of law. 
 
Enforcement Actions 
 
The bill authorizes OFR to take enforcement actions against any third-party service 
provider who (1) refuses to submit to an examination; (2) refuses to pay any assessed fee 
for the cost of the examination; or (3) engages in activities that OFR deems unsafe or 
unsound. 
 
OFR may advise any regulated entity that uses the services of a third-party service provider 
who refuses to submit to examination (or engages in unsafe or unsound activities) that the 
continued use of the third-party service by the regulated entity may constitute unsafe or 
unsound activity. 
 
Pursuant to State law, OFR and any employees must hold as confidential any information 
obtained or generated by an examination. 
 
Current Law/Background:  OFR notes that the bill is intended to grant the office the 
authority to examine third parties that provide services to entities formally licensed or 
chartered by OFR. OFR further notes that it is seeking this authority because many entities 
licensed or chartered by OFR contract with third-party service providers for critical 
functions. Additionally, OFR states that regulators in 38 states have the authority to 
examine third-party service providers for banks and credit unions. According to OFR, a 
reaccreditation examination of the office in 2022 noted its lack of authority to examine 
third-party service providers and recommended that it seek that authority. 
 
OFR further advises that Maryland depository institutions and licensed financial service 
providers all rely on third-party service providers for a range of services (e.g., processing 
their lending and deposit taking activities, providing physical and technological security 
monitoring services, building and operating mobile applications, and more). 
 
While the use of such third-party service providers confers many benefits to financial 
institutions, it also multiplies the risks that financial service providers and their products 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 250/ Page 4 
pose to consumers and the financial system. OFR currently lacks the authority to examine 
such third-party service providers and the bill is intended to enhance OFR’s ability to 
effectively participate in federal and multi-state networked supervisory activities. 
 
Office of Financial Regulation – Duties and General Investigative and Enforcement 
Powers 
 
OFR regulates State-chartered and State-licensed financial institutions operating in 
Maryland. These include depository institutions such as Maryland-chartered banks, trust 
companies, bank holding companies, and credit unions, as well as nondepository entities 
such as money transmitters, check cashers, consumer lenders, sales finance companies, 
installment lenders, mortgage lenders, mortgage loan originators, credit services 
businesses, debt management services providers, debt settlement services providers, 
consumer reporting agencies, and collection agencies. 
 
OFR has the power to vigorously investigate financial transactions to determine whether a 
person has violated a law, regulation, rule, or order over which the commissioner has 
jurisdiction. For the purposes of an investigation or proceeding, the commissioner may 
administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel the attendance of 
witnesses, and require the production of documents and other evidence. If a person refuses 
to obey a subpoena from the commissioner, the commissioner may apply to the appropriate 
circuit court to issue an order requiring the person to appear before the commissioner and 
produce any requested evidence. If the court issues such an order, failure to obey it subjects 
the person to contempt of court. 
 
When the commissioner determines, after notice and a hearing, as specified, that a person 
has engaged in a violation of a law, regulation, rule, or order, the commissioner may issue 
a cease and desist order, suspend or revoke the license of the violator, and/or issue a penalty 
order against the person for up to $10,000 for a first violation and up to $25,000 for each 
subsequent violation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 250/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 250/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Financial Institutions - Third-Party Service 
Providers - Examinations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0250 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Amy Hennen 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 

END OF PAGE 6