START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 216 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 216 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Condominiums - Common Elements - Clean Energy Equipment 
 
 
This bill establishes a specific procedure by which the board of directors of a condominium 
may grant a lease in excess of one year, or a similar interest affecting the common elements 
of the condominium, for the installation and use of leased “clean energy equipment.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Clean energy equipment” is electric vehicle recharging equipment, solar 
energy equipment, and energy storage systems. 
 
The board of directors, by a majority vote, may grant leases in excess of one year (or similar 
interests affecting the common elements of the condominium) for the installation and use 
of leased clean energy equipment. The board of directors may grant such an interest only 
at a meeting of the board held after at least 30 days’ notice to all unit owners of record. A 
mortgagee or group of mortgagees is prohibited from overruling a vote to grant an interest. 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions establish the process by which a governing body of a 
condominium may generally grant easements, rights-of-way, licenses, leases in excess of 
one year, or similar interests. For example, the declaration or bylaws may give the council 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 216/ Page 2 
of unit owners authority to grant such interests affecting the common elements of the 
condominium if the grant is approved by affirmative vote of two‐thirds of the unit owners 
and with the express written consent of the mortgagees, as specified. The board of directors 
may grant interests for the provision of utility services or communication systems for the 
exclusive benefit of units within the condominium regime by majority vote but only after 
specific requirements are satisfied. This includes at least 30 days’ notice to all unit owners 
and mortgagees of record and the opportunity for these individuals to provide comment. 
 
Within 15 days after a board of directors grants an interest under certain statutory 
provisions, a petition meeting specified requirements may be filed with the board calling 
for a special meeting of the unit owners to vote on the question of disapproving the action. 
If no petition is received, the decision of the board is final. If a qualifying petition is 
received, a special meeting must be held, as specified, the results of which determine 
whether the board’s decision granting the interest is final or void. (These provisions are not 
applicable to the specific process established by the bill.)  
 
Section 11‐111.4 of the Real Property Article establishes the process necessary for the 
installation and use of electric vehicle recharging equipment within a condominium 
community in a unit owner’s deeded parking space or a parking space that is specifically 
designated for use by a particular owner. Generally, if approval is required, the governing 
body of the condominium must process and review an application for approval of the 
installation/use of electric vehicle recharging equipment in the same manner as an 
application for approval of an architectural modification to the condominium. Subject to 
limited exception, if an application is not denied in writing within 60 days, it is deemed 
approved. The governing body must approve the installation if it does not unreasonably 
impede the normal use of an area outside the unit owner’s parking space and is reasonably 
possible.  
 
For more information on condominiums, a common ownership community, see the 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 101 and SB 593 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 206 (Senator Smith) - Judicial Proceedings. 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 216/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - February 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 216/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 216/ Page 5 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5