START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 287 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 287 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Property Tax - Renters' Property Tax Relief Program - Assets Calculation 
 
   
This bill alters the definition of assets for purposes of the Renters’ Property Tax Relief 
Program to exclude the cash value of any qualified retirement savings plan or individual 
retirement accounts. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years 
beginning after June 30, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase beginning in FY 2025 to the extent that 
additional renters qualify for the tax credit. Based on current application data, general fund 
expenditures are not expected to increase by a significant amount. Revenues are not 
affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Renters’ Property Tax Relief Program provides financial assistance 
for elderly, disabled, and certain low-income renters from the cost attributable to State and 
local real property taxes. The concept behind the program is that renters indirectly pay 
property taxes as part of their rent and, thus, should have some protection, as do 
homeowners. The program makes payments directly to eligible renters to provide relief for 
the “assumed property tax” that renters indirectly pay as part of their rent. The fiscal 2025 
State budget includes $4.4 million for the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 287/ Page 2 
The program is based on an “assumed property tax bill” equal to 15% of rent paid. As 
under the Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit Program, qualification is based on a sliding 
scale of assumed property tax liability and income. If the portion of rent attributable to the 
assumed property taxes exceeds a fixed amount in relation to income, the renter can, under 
specified conditions, receive a maximum credit of $1,000. A renter’s combined net worth 
cannot exceed $200,000. 
 
The amount of the property tax credit is the difference between the assumed 15% of 
occupancy rent and a calculated tax limit. The tax limit is calculated by applying specified 
percentages to the homeowners’ gross income. The percentages applied to the combined 
income that are used to calculate the property tax limit are (1) 0% of the first $4,000 of 
combined income; (2) 2.5% of the next $4,000 of combined income; and (3) 5.5% of the 
combined income over $8,000.     
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2025 to the 
extent that additional renters qualify for the tax credit. The State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation advises that for 2021 and 2022, no renters were denied the tax 
credit for exceeding the net worth limit and of applications processed, to date, for 2023, 
only three renters have been denied the tax credit for exceeding the net worth limit. As a 
result, the department estimates that the change proposed by the bill will have a minimal 
impact on general fund expenditures.   
 
The average renters’ property tax credit is $450. In fiscal 2022, 5,769 renters received the 
tax credit. As a point of reference, if 100 additional renters become eligible for the program, 
general fund expenditures increase by approximately $45,000.         
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 342 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Comptroller’s 
Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2