START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

Chapter 624

(House Bill 212)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Noise Abatement Monitoring Systems – ~~Authorization~~ Pilot
Program

FOR the purpose of ~~authorizing~~ establishing a pilot program to authorize the use of noise
abatement monitoring systems in ~~Anne~~ ~~Arundel~~ ~~County,~~ Montgomery County, and
Prince George’s County to enforce certain motor vehicle noise requirements; and
generally relating to the use of noise abatement monitoring systems.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 4–401(13), 7–302(e)(1) through (3) and (4)(i), and 10–311
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 22–602
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 22–612
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

4–401.

Except as provided in § 4–402 of this subtitle, and subject to the venue provisions of
Title 6 of this article, the District Court has exclusive original civil jurisdiction in:

(13) A proceeding for a civil infraction under § 21–202.1, § 21–704.1, §
21–706.1, § 21–809, § 21–810, § 21–1134, § 22–612, or § 24–111.3 of the Transportation
Article or § 10–112 of the Criminal Law Article;

7–302.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) (1) (i) A citation issued pursuant to § 21–202.1, § 21–706.1, § 21–809, §
21–810, § 21–1134, § 22–612, or § 24–111.3 of the Transportation Article shall provide that
the person receiving the citation may elect to stand trial by notifying the issuing agency of
the person’s intention to stand trial at least 5 days prior to the date of payment as set forth
in the citation.

(ii) On receipt of the notice to stand trial, the agency shall forward
to the District Court having venue a copy of the citation and a copy of the notice from the
person who received the citation indicating the person’s intention to stand trial.

(iii) On receipt thereof, the District Court shall schedule the case for
trial and notify the defendant of the trial date under procedures adopted by the Chief Judge
of the District Court.

(2) (i) A citation issued as the result of a vehicle height monitoring
system, a traffic control signal monitoring system, or a speed monitoring system, including
a work zone speed control system, controlled by a political subdivision, a school bus
monitoring camera, [or] a bus lane monitoring system, OR A NOISE ABATEMENT
MONITORING SYSTEM shall provide that, in an uncontested case, the penalty shall be paid
directly to that political subdivision.

(ii) A citation issued as the result of a traffic control signal
monitoring system or a work zone speed control system controlled by a State agency, or as
a result of a vehicle height monitoring system, a traffic control signal monitoring system, a
speed monitoring system, a school bus monitoring camera, [or] a bus lane monitoring
system, OR A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM in a case contested in District
Court, shall provide that the penalty shall be paid directly to the District Court.

(3) Civil penalties resulting from citations issued using a vehicle height
monitoring system, traffic control signal monitoring system, speed monitoring system,
work zone speed control system, school bus monitoring camera, [or] bus lane monitoring
system, OR A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM that are collected by the District
Court shall be collected in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and distributed in
accordance with § 12–118 of the Transportation Article.

(4) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (5) of this subsection, from the
fines collected by a political subdivision as a result of violations enforced by speed
monitoring systems, school bus monitoring cameras, [or] bus lane monitoring systems, OR
NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEMS, a political subdivision:

1. May recover the costs of implementing and administering
the speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring cameras, [or] bus lane monitoring
systems, OR NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEMS; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

2. Subject to subparagraphs (ii), (iii), and (iv) of this
paragraph, may spend any remaining balance solely for public safety purposes, including
pedestrian safety programs.

10–311.

(a) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a traffic control signal
monitoring system in accordance with § 21–202.1 of the Transportation Article is
admissible in a proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a
violation of § 21–202(h) of the Transportation Article without authentication.

(b) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a speed monitoring system
in accordance with § 21–809 or § 21–810 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a
proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of Title 21,
Subtitle 8 of the Transportation Article without authentication.

(c) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a school bus monitoring
camera in accordance with § 21–706.1 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a
proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of § 21–706
of the Transportation Article without authentication.

(d) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a vehicle height monitoring
system in accordance with § 24–111.3 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a
proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of a State or
local law restricting the presence of certain vehicles during certain times without
authentication.

(e) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a bus lane monitoring system
in accordance with § 21–1134 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a proceeding
concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of § 21–1133 of the
Transportation Article without authentication.

(f) A RECORDED IMAGE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE AND ANY RELEVANT
RECORDED AUDIO PRODUCED BY A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM IN
CONJUNCTION WITH A NOISE MEASURING DEVICE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 22–612
OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE IS ADMISSIBLE IN A PROCEEDING CONCERNING
A CIVIL CITATION ISSUED UNDER THAT SECTION FOR A VIOLATION OF § 22–602 OF
THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE WITHOUT AUTHENTICATION.

(G) In any other judicial proceeding, a recorded image produced by a vehicle
height monitoring system, traffic control signal monitoring system, speed monitoring
system, work zone speed control system, school bus monitoring camera, or bus lane
monitoring system OR A RECORDED IMAGE AND ANY RELEVANT RECORDED AUDIO
PRODUCED BY A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM IN CONJUNCTION WITH A
NOISE MEASURING DEVICE is admissible as otherwise provided by law.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Transportation

22–602.

(a) A person may not drive on a highway in this State any motor vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a type required to be registered under Title 13 of this article, in
a manner that, at any time, at any speed, or under any condition of grade, load,
acceleration, or deceleration, exceeds the maximum sound level limits established under §
22–601 of this subtitle for the operation of that type of motor vehicle or combination of
vehicles.

(b) An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle may not permit to be driven on a highway
in this State any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles of a type required to be registered
under Title 13 of this article, in a manner that, at any time, at any speed, or under any
condition of grade, load, acceleration, or deceleration, exceeds the maximum sound level
limits established under § 22–601 of this subtitle for the operation of that type of motor
vehicle or combination of vehicles.

22–612.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY,
MONTGOMERY COUNTY, AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(B) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “AGENCY” MEANS:

(I) A A COUNTY LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OF A LOCAL
~~POLITICAL~~ ~~SUBDIVISION~~ THAT IS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE A CITATION FOR A
VIOLATION OF THE MARYLAND VEHICLE LAW OR OF LOCAL TRAFFIC LAWS OR
REGULATIONS; OR

(II) FOR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION THAT DOES NOT
MAINTAIN A POLICE FORCE, AN AGENCY ESTABLISHED OR DESIGNATED BY THE
~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~IMPLEMENT~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~OF~~ ~~NOISE~~ ~~ABATEMENT~~
MONITORING SYSTEMS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(3) “NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM” MEANS A MOBILE OR
FIXED VEHICLE SENSOR THAT WORKS IN CONJUNCTION WITH A NOISE MEASURING
DEVICE, SUCH AS A DECIBEL READER, THAT AUTOMATICALLY PRODUCES TWO OR
MORE PHOTOGRAPHS, TWO OR MORE MICROPHOTOGRAPHS, A VIDEOTAPE, OR
OTHER RECORDED IMAGES OF A MOTOR VEHICLE AT THE TIME THE MOTOR VEHICLE
IS OPERATED DURING THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLATION.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

(4) “NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM OPERATOR” MEANS A
REPRESENTATIVE OF AN AGENCY OR A CONTRACTOR THAT OPERATES A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM.

(5) “NOISE MEASURING DEVICE” MEANS AN ELECTRONIC DEVICE
THAT:

(I) USES AUTOMATED EQUIPMENT THAT ACTIVATES WHEN THE
SOUND LEVEL EXCEEDS THE MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL LIMITS ESTABLISHED UNDER
§ 22–601 OF THIS SUBTITLE BY AT LEAST 5 DECIBELS;

(II) RECORDS AUDIO WHEN ACTIVATED;

(III) RECORDS DECIBEL LEVELS WHEN ACTIVATED; AND

(IV) ALLOWS A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM
OPERATOR TO MANUALLY REVIEW RECORDED AUDIO TO ENSURE A VIOLATION HAS
OCCURRED.

(6) (I) “OWNER” MEANS THE REGISTERED OWNER OF A MOTOR
VEHICLE OR A LESSEE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE UNDER A LEASE OF 6 MONTHS OR
MORE.

(II) “OWNER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

1. A MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL OR LEASING COMPANY;
OR

2. A HOLDER OF A SPECIAL REGISTRATION PLATE
ISSUED UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 9, PART III OF THIS ARTICLE.

(7) “RECORDED IMAGE” MEANS AN IMAGE RECORDED BY A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM:

(I) ON:

1. A PHOTOGRAPH;

2. A MICROPHOTOGRAPH;

3. AN ELECTRONIC IMAGE;

4. VIDEOTAPE; OR

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

5. ANY OTHER MEDIUM; AND

(II) SHOWING:

1. THE REAR OF A MOTOR VEHICLE;

2. THE DECIBEL LEVEL RECORDED FOR THE MOTOR
VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF RECORDATION; AND

3. ON AT LEAST ONE IMAGE OR PORTION OF TAPE, A
CLEAR AND LEGIBLE IDENTIFICATION OF THE ENTIRE REGISTRATION PLATE
NUMBER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE.

(8) “VIOLATION” MEANS A VIOLATION OF § 22–602 OF THIS SUBTITLE
BY AT LEAST 5 DECIBELS.

(C) (1) (I) A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM MAY BE USED IN
~~A~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ COUNTY MAY USE NOT MORE THAN THREE NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEMS UNDER THIS SECTION IF ~~ITS~~ THE USE IS
AUTHORIZED BY THE COUNTY GOVERNING BODY ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ BY
LOCAL LAW ENACTED AFTER REASONABLE NOTICE AND A PUBLIC HEARING.

(II) BEFORE A COUNTY MAY USE A NOISE ABATEMENT
MONITORING SYSTEM ON A STATE HIGHWAY AT A LOCATION WITHIN A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION, THE COUNTY SHALL:

1. OBTAIN THE APPROVAL OF THE STATE HIGHWAY
~~ADMINISTRATION;~~

2. NOTIFY THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE
STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION’S APPROVAL OF THE USE OF A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM AT THAT LOCATION; AND

3. GRANT THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION 60 DAYS
FROM THE DATE OF THE COUNTY’S NOTICE TO THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION TO
~~ENACT~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ORDINANCE~~ ~~AUTHORIZING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~INSTEAD~~ ~~OF~~
~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~USE~~ ~~A~~ ~~NOISE~~ ~~ABATEMENT~~ ~~MONITORING~~ ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~AT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~LOCATION~~
A COUNTY MAY DEPLOY A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM AT MULTIPLE
LOCATIONS AT DIFFERENT TIMES.

(III) BEFORE ACTIVATING A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEM, THE LOCAL JURISDICTION COUNTY SHALL:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

1. PUBLISH NOTICE OF THE LOCATION OF THE NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM ON ITS WEBSITE; AND

2. ENSURE THAT EACH NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEM IS PROXIMATE TO A SIGN THAT:

A. INDICATES THAT NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEMS ARE IN USE IN THE AREA; AND

B. IS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MANUAL AND THE
SPECIFICATIONS FOR A UNIFORM SYSTEM OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES ADOPTED
BY THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION UNDER § 25–104 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(IV) 1. A LOCAL JURISDICTION COUNTY THAT AUTHORIZES A
PROGRAM OF NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEMS SHALL DESIGNATE AN
OFFICIAL OR EMPLOYEE TO INVESTIGATE AND RESPOND TO QUESTIONS OR
CONCERNS ABOUT THE LOCAL JURISDICTION’S COUNTY’S NOISE ABATEMENT
MONITORING SYSTEM PROGRAM.

2. A. THE LOCAL DESIGNEE SHALL REVIEW A
WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION GENERATED BY A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEM IF THE PERSON WHO RECEIVED THE WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION
REQUESTS REVIEW BEFORE THE DEADLINE FOR CONTESTING LIABILITY UNDER
THIS SECTION.

B. IF THE LOCAL DESIGNEE DETERMINES THAT THE
WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION IS AN ERRONEOUS VIOLATION, THE LOCAL
DESIGNEE SHALL VOID THE WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION.

C. IF THE LOCAL DESIGNEE DETERMINES THAT A
PERSON DID NOT RECEIVE NOTICE OF A WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION ISSUED
UNDER THIS SECTION DUE TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE ERROR, THE LOCAL DESIGNEE
MAY RESEND THE WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION OR VOID THE WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION.

D. A LOCAL DESIGNEE THAT TAKES ANY ACTION
DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSUBSUBPARAGRAPH C OF THIS SUBSUBPARAGRAPH SHALL
NOTIFY THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF RESCINDING
ANY ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES IMPOSED UNDER SUBSECTION (H) OF THIS
SECTION.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

E. A LOCAL DESIGNEE MAY NOT DETERMINE THAT A
WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION IS AN ERRONEOUS VIOLATION BASED SOLELY ON
THE DISMISSAL OF THE WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION BY A COURT.

F. A LOCAL DESIGNEE MAY WAIVE A WARNING NOTICE
OR CITATION IF THE PERSON ALLEGED TO BE LIABLE UNDER THIS SECTION
PROVIDES SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE THAT THE PERSON HAS MADE ANY ALTERATIONS
TO THE MOTOR VEHICLE NECESSARY TO AVOID FUTURE VIOLATIONS.

3. A LOCAL DESIGNEE MAY NOT BE EMPLOYED BY A
NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM CONTRACTOR OR HAVE BEEN INVOLVED
IN ANY REVIEW OF A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM WARNING NOTICE OR
CITATION, OTHER THAN REVIEW OF A WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION UNDER THIS
SUBPARAGRAPH.

4. ON RECEIPT OF A WRITTEN QUESTION OR CONCERN
FROM A PERSON, THE LOCAL DESIGNEE SHALL PROVIDE A WRITTEN ANSWER OR
RESPONSE TO THE PERSON WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME.

5. A LOCAL JURISDICTION SHALL MAKE ANY WRITTEN
QUESTIONS OR CONCERNS RECEIVED UNDER THIS SUBPARAGRAPH AND ANY
SUBSEQUENT WRITTEN ANSWERS OR RESPONSES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC
INSPECTION.

(V) IF A LOCAL JURISDICTION COUNTY MOVES OR PLACES A
NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM TO OR AT A LOCATION WHERE A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM HAD NOT PREVIOUSLY BEEN MOVED OR PLACED,
THE ~~LOCAL~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ COUNTY MAY NOT ISSUE A CITATION FOR A VIOLATION
RECORDED BY THAT NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM:

1. UNTIL SIGNAGE IS INSTALLED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (III)2 OF THIS PARAGRAPH; AND

2. FOR AT LEAST THE FIRST 15 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER
THE SIGNAGE IS INSTALLED.

(2) (I) A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM OPERATOR
SHALL COMPLETE TRAINING BY THE MANUFACTURER OF THE NOISE ABATEMENT
MONITORING SYSTEM IN THE PROCEDURES FOR SETTING UP AND OPERATING THE
NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

(II) THE MANUFACTURER SHALL ISSUE A SIGNED CERTIFICATE
TO THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM OPERATOR ON COMPLETION OF
THE TRAINING.

(III) THE CERTIFICATE OF TRAINING SHALL BE ADMITTED AS
EVIDENCE IN ANY COURT PROCEEDING FOR A VIOLATION.

(3) A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM OPERATOR SHALL
FILL OUT AND SIGN A DAILY SET–UP LOG FOR A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEM THAT:

(I) STATES THAT THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM
OPERATOR SUCCESSFULLY PERFORMED OR REVIEWED AND EVALUATED THE
MANUFACTURER–SPECIFIED DAILY SELF–TEST OF THE NOISE ABATEMENT
MONITORING SYSTEM BEFORE PRODUCING A RECORDED IMAGE;

(II) STATES THE DATE AND TIME WHEN, AND THE LOCATION
WHERE, THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM WAS SET UP EACH DAY;

(III) SHALL BE KEPT ON FILE; AND

(IV) SHALL BE ADMITTED AS EVIDENCE IN ANY COURT
PROCEEDING FOR A VIOLATION.

(4) (I) A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM SHALL
UNDERGO AN ANNUAL CALIBRATION CHECK PERFORMED BY AN INDEPENDENT
CALIBRATION LABORATORY THAT IS:

1. SELECTED BY THE LOCAL JURISDICTION COUNTY;
AND

2. UNAFFILIATED WITH THE MANUFACTURER OF THE
NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM.

(II) THE INDEPENDENT CALIBRATION LABORATORY SHALL
ISSUE A SIGNED CERTIFICATE OF CALIBRATION AFTER THE ANNUAL CALIBRATION
CHECK THAT SHALL BE:

1. KEPT ON FILE; AND

2. ADMITTED AS EVIDENCE IN ANY COURT PROCEEDING
FOR A VIOLATION.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) A LOCAL JURISDICTION COUNTY THAT ESTABLISHES A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM PROGRAM SHALL BEAR THE COST OF
IMPLEMENTING THE PROGRAM.

(D) (1) UNLESS THE DRIVER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE RECEIVED A
CITATION FROM A POLICE OFFICER AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION, THE OWNER OF
A MOTOR VEHICLE IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY IF THE MOTOR VEHICLE IS
RECORDED BY A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM WHILE BEING OPERATED
DURING THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLATION.

(2) (I) A PERSON LIABLE FOR A VIOLATION ENFORCED BY A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM IS SUBJECT TO:

(I) 1. FOR A FIRST OFFENSE, A WARNING NOTICE; AND

(II) 2. FOR A SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, A CIVIL
PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING $70 $75.

(II) A COUNTY MAY NOT ISSUE A CITATION APPLICABLE TO A
MOTOR VEHICLE DURING THE FIRST 30 DAYS AFTER A WARNING FOR A FIRST
OFFENSE APPLICABLE TO THE MOTOR VEHICLE IS MAILED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH
(I)1 OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(3) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE DISTRICT COURT SHALL
PRESCRIBE:

(I) A UNIFORM CITATION FORM CONSISTENT WITH
SUBSECTION (E)(1) OF THIS SECTION AND § 7–302 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE; AND

(II) A CIVIL PENALTY, WHICH SHALL BE INDICATED ON THE
CITATION, TO BE PAID BY PERSONS WHO CHOOSE TO PREPAY THE CIVIL PENALTY
WITHOUT APPEARING IN DISTRICT COURT.

(4) A PERSON MAY NOT BE ISSUED MORE THAN ONE CITATION PER
~~LOCAL~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ BY A COUNTY PER DAY FOR A VIOLATION ENFORCED BY A
NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM.

(E) (1) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF PARAGRAPHS (2) THROUGH (4)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN AGENCY SHALL MAIL TO AN OWNER LIABLE UNDER
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION A WARNING NOTICE OR CITATION THAT SHALL
INCLUDE:

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

(I) THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE REGISTERED OWNER OF
THE MOTOR VEHICLE;

(II) THE REGISTRATION NUMBER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE
INVOLVED IN THE VIOLATION;

(III) THE VIOLATION CHARGED;

(IV) THE LOCATION WHERE THE VIOLATION OCCURRED;

(V) THE LOCATION OF THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEM;

(VI) THE DATE AND TIME OF THE VIOLATION;

(VII) THE RECORDED DECIBEL LEVEL;

(VIII) A COPY OF THE RECORDED IMAGE;

(IX) THE AMOUNT OF THE CIVIL PENALTY IMPOSED AND THE
DATE BY WHICH THE CIVIL PENALTY SHOULD BE PAID, IF APPLICABLE;

(X) A SIGNED STATEMENT BY A DULY AUTHORIZED LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER EMPLOYED BY OR UNDER CONTRACT WITH AN AGENCY
THAT, BASED ON INSPECTION OF RECORDED IMAGES, THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS
BEING OPERATED DURING THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLATION;

(XI) A STATEMENT THAT RECORDED IMAGES ARE EVIDENCE OF
A VIOLATION;

(XII) INFORMATION ADVISING THE PERSON ALLEGED TO BE
LIABLE UNDER THIS SECTION TO MAKE ANY NECESSARY ALTERATIONS TO THE
MOTOR VEHICLE TO AVOID FUTURE VIOLATIONS;

(XIII) INFORMATION ADVISING THE PERSON ALLEGED TO BE
LIABLE UNDER THIS SECTION OF THE MANNER AND TIME IN WHICH LIABILITY AS
ALLEGED IN THE CITATION MAY BE CONTESTED IN THE DISTRICT COURT; AND

(XIV) INFORMATION ADVISING THE PERSON ALLEGED TO BE
LIABLE UNDER THIS SECTION THAT FAILURE TO PAY THE CIVIL PENALTY OR TO
CONTEST LIABILITY IN A TIMELY MANNER, IF APPLICABLE:

1. IS AN ADMISSION OF LIABILITY;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. MAY RESULT IN THE REFUSAL BY THE
ADMINISTRATION TO REGISTER THE MOTOR VEHICLE; AND

3. MAY RESULT IN THE SUSPENSION OF THE MOTOR
VEHICLE REGISTRATION.

(2) AN AGENCY MAY MAIL A WARNING NOTICE INSTEAD OF A
CITATION TO THE OWNER LIABLE UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) AN AGENCY MAY NOT MAIL A CITATION TO A PERSON WHO IS NOT
AN OWNER.

(4) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C)(1)(IV)2C OF THIS
SECTION, A CITATION ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE MAILED NOT LATER
THAN 2 WEEKS AFTER THE ALLEGED VIOLATION IF THE VEHICLE IS REGISTERED IN
THIS STATE, AND 30 DAYS AFTER THE ALLEGED VIOLATION IF THE VEHICLE IS
REGISTERED IN ANOTHER STATE.

(5) A PERSON WHO RECEIVES A CITATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION MAY:

(I) PAY THE CIVIL PENALTY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
INSTRUCTIONS ON THE CITATION, DIRECTLY TO THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
COUNTY; OR

(II) ELECT TO STAND TRIAL IN THE DISTRICT COURT FOR THE
ALLEGED VIOLATION.

(F) (1) A CERTIFICATE ALLEGING THAT THE VIOLATION OCCURRED AND
THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION HAVE BEEN
SATISFIED, SWORN TO, OR AFFIRMED BY A DULY AUTHORIZED LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER EMPLOYED BY OR UNDER CONTRACT WITH AN AGENCY, BASED ON
INSPECTION OF RECORDED IMAGES PRODUCED BY A NOISE ABATEMENT
MONITORING SYSTEM, SHALL BE EVIDENCE OF THE FACTS CONTAINED IN THE
CERTIFICATE AND SHALL BE ADMISSIBLE IN A PROCEEDING ALLEGING A VIOLATION
WITHOUT THE PRESENCE OR TESTIMONY OF THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING
SYSTEM OPERATOR WHO PERFORMED THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBSECTION (C)
OF THIS SECTION.

(2) IF A PERSON WHO RECEIVED A CITATION UNDER SUBSECTION (E)
OF THIS SECTION DESIRES THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM OPERATOR
TO BE PRESENT AND TESTIFY AT TRIAL, THE PERSON SHALL NOTIFY THE COURT AND
THE AGENCY IN WRITING NOT LATER THAN 20 DAYS BEFORE TRIAL.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

(3) ADJUDICATION OF LIABILITY SHALL BE BASED ON A
PREPONDERANCE OF EVIDENCE.

(G) (1) THE DISTRICT COURT MAY CONSIDER IN DEFENSE OF A
VIOLATION:

(I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THAT
THE MOTOR VEHICLE OR THE REGISTRATION PLATES OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE WERE
STOLEN BEFORE THE VIOLATION OCCURRED AND WERE NOT UNDER THE CONTROL
OR POSSESSION OF THE OWNER AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION;

(II) THAT THE NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM WAS
MALFUNCTIONING AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION; OR

(III) ANY OTHER ISSUES AND EVIDENCE THAT THE DISTRICT
COURT DEEMS PERTINENT.

(2) TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE OR THE
REGISTRATION PLATES WERE STOLEN BEFORE THE VIOLATION OCCURRED AND
WERE NOT UNDER THE CONTROL OR POSSESSION OF THE OWNER AT THE TIME OF
THE VIOLATION, THE OWNER SHALL SUBMIT PROOF THAT A POLICE REPORT
REGARDING THE STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE OR REGISTRATION PLATES WAS FILED IN
A TIMELY MANNER.

(H) IF A PERSON LIABLE UNDER THIS SECTION DOES NOT PAY THE CIVIL
PENALTY OR CONTEST THE VIOLATION, THE ADMINISTRATION MAY REFUSE TO
REGISTER OR REREGISTER THE MOTOR VEHICLE CITED FOR THE VIOLATION.

(I) A VIOLATION FOR WHICH A CIVIL PENALTY IS IMPOSED UNDER THIS
SECTION:

(1) IS NOT A MOVING VIOLATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF ASSESSING
POINTS UNDER § 16–402 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(2) MAY NOT BE RECORDED BY THE ADMINISTRATION ON THE
DRIVING RECORD OF THE OWNER OF THE VEHICLE;

(3) MAY BE TREATED AS A PARKING VIOLATION FOR THE PURPOSES
OF § 26–305 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(4) MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED IN THE PROVISION OF MOTOR VEHICLE
INSURANCE COVERAGE.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 624 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(J) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE APPROPRIATE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
COUNTY AGENCIES, THE CHIEF JUDGE OF THE DISTRICT COURT SHALL ADOPT
PROCEDURES FOR THE ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS, THE TRIAL OF CIVIL VIOLATIONS,
AND THE COLLECTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES UNDER THIS SECTION.

(K) (1) AN AGENCY OR AN AGENT OR CONTRACTOR DESIGNATED BY THE
AGENCY SHALL ADMINISTER AND PROCESS CIVIL CITATIONS ISSUED UNDER THIS
SECTION IN COORDINATION WITH THE DISTRICT COURT.

(2) IF A CONTRACTOR IN ANY MANNER OPERATES A NOISE
ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM OR ADMINISTERS OR PROCESSES WARNING
NOTICES OR CITATIONS GENERATED BY A NOISE ABATEMENT MONITORING SYSTEM
ON BEHALF OF A LOCAL JURISDICTION COUNTY, THE CONTRACTOR’S FEE MAY NOT
BE CONTINGENT ON A PER–TICKET BASIS ON THE NUMBER OF WARNING NOTICES OR
CITATIONS ISSUED OR PAID.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before ~~September~~ ~~30,~~
~~2027,~~ ~~a~~ ~~local~~ ~~jurisdiction~~ December 1, 2025, a county that authorizes a program of noise
abatement monitoring systems under this Act shall report to the Governor and, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly, ~~in~~
~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~implementation~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~Act~~ on:

(1) through October 1, 2025:

(i) the time period during which noise abatement monitoring
systems were in use in the county; and

(ii) the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of
violations recorded by noise abatement monitoring systems in the county over the reported
time period, by location and date;

(2) (i) the costs associated with implementing and operating noise
abatement monitoring systems; and

(ii) the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations
recorded by noise abatement monitoring systems;

(3) appropriate locations for the deployment of noise abatement monitoring
systems;

(4) the performance and reliability of noise abatement monitoring systems
used by the county; and

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 624

(5) the effectiveness of noise abatement monitoring systems in reducing
noise produced by motor vehicles in the county and in areas where the systems were
implemented and used.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of ~~4~~ 2 years and, at the end of
~~September~~ June 30, ~~2028~~ 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15