START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 215 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 215 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Disabilities) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Human Services - Attendant Care Program - Ongoing Additional Supports 
 
 
This departmental bill expands the purpose of the Attendant Care Program (ACP) in the 
Maryland Department of Disabilities (MDOD) to include providing financial assistance to 
an eligible individual for “ongoing additional supports.” The bill specifies that financial 
assistance provided under ACP must not duplicate any other State or federal assistance for 
attendant care services or ongoing additional supports that an eligible individual receives. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing funds may be used. 
To the extent it requires administrative changes, MDOD can handle them with existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDOD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Ongoing additional supports” means a continual support that 
(1) increases an eligible individual’s independent performance of an essential activity of 
daily living (ADL), self-care, or mobility and (2) is requested by an eligible individual and 
approved by MDOD.    
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 215/ Page 2 
Current Law:  “Attendant care services” means any of the following services for an 
eligible individual, certified as necessary by an attending physician or by a registered nurse:  
dressing; preparing food and assisting with eating; bathing and personal hygiene; assisting 
with routine bodily functions; moving into, out of, or turning in bed; laundering and other 
clothing care; and cleaning house and performing other services of daily care, as specified.  
 
An “eligible individual” is an individual who is between 18 and 65 years of age at the time 
of the initial eligibility determination and has a severe chronic or permanent disability that 
precludes or significantly impairs the individual’s independent performance of essential 
ADLs, self-care, or mobility.  
 
Under ACP, MDOD must provide financial assistance in accordance with a sliding 
payment scale established by the department in regulation. MDOD must annually review 
the eligibility of each individual receiving financial assistance. MDOD must ensure that, 
at any given time, at least 50% of eligible individuals receiving financial assistance under 
the program are gainfully employed, actively seeking employment, or attending an 
institution of postsecondary or higher education. The remainder of eligible individuals 
receiving financial assistance must be individuals who (1) reside in a nursing facility or 
similar institution and will be deinstitutionalized as a result of the program or (2) are 
certified by an attending physician or certified nurse practitioner as being at risk of 
placement in a nursing facility or similar institution if attendant care services are not 
received in the community. 
 
MDOD must limit program participation to the number of eligible individuals who can be 
served with the funds appropriated for the program in the State budget.  
 
Background:  The goal of ACP is to supplement the cost of personal attendant care 
services so individuals with disabilities may maintain employment, attend an institution of 
postsecondary education, or avoid placement in a nursing facility or similar institution. 
 
MDOD advises that, since ACP’s inception in 1982, there have been advancements in 
technology and support available to individuals with disabilities and that expanding the 
program to include providing ongoing additional supports will help better meet the needs 
of individuals who receive financial assistance under the program. 
 
To date, 141 participants have benefited from the program in fiscal 2024, with an average 
reimbursement of $335.93 per pay period. The fiscal 2025 budget includes $1,312,455 for 
ACP to provide financial assistance to eligible individuals.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 215/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 226 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Disabilities) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 215/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Human Services - Attendant Care Program - Ongoing Additional Supports 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 215 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Lisa Belcastro 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Will have minimal or no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 4