START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 272 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 272 
(Delegate Grammer) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Cannabis Licensing and Registration - Use of Straw Ownership - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from applying for or holding a cannabis license or registration 
if the ownership interest in the license or registration is (1) nominal or without the benefits 
and risks of “genuine ownership” or control and (2) for the limited purpose of satisfying 
the requirements for cannabis licensees or registrants, including requirements for social 
equity licensees or registrants. A person who violates this prohibition is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction subject to a maximum penalty of one year imprisonment 
and/or a $2,500 fine. Subject to specified hearing provisions, the Maryland Cannabis 
Administration (MCA) must deny an application for a cannabis license or registration or 
revoke a cannabis license or registration if the applicant, licensee, or registrant is convicted 
of violating – or determined by MCA to be in violation of – the bill’s prohibition. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. The bill’s criminal penalty provision does not have a 
material impact on State revenues, and the bill does not materially affect special fund 
revenues collected by MCA from license and registration fees. 
  
Local Effect:  The criminal penalty provision of the bill does not have a material impact 
on local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 272/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Genuine ownership” means an ownership interest in an applicant, a 
cannabis licensee, or a registrant that is evidenced by record ownership in which the owner 
(regardless of the amount of capital or assets that the owner contributes to the applicant, 
licensee, or registrant) enjoys the customary incidents of ownership and shares in the 
profits and losses of the cannabis license or registration proportionate to the percentage of 
the owner’s interest in the cannabis license or registration.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Cannabis Reform 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State 
following the enactment of Chapter 26 of 2022 and the passage of the associated 
constitutional amendment by (1) creating MCA as an independent unit of State government 
that is responsible for the regulation of medical and adult-use cannabis; (2) attributing 
cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission and renaming it the 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC); (3) developing a licensing 
framework for the regulated sale of cannabis; (4) requiring all existing medical cannabis 
licensees to convert to adult-use cannabis businesses; (5) establishing a 9% sales and use 
tax on the sale of adult-use cannabis; and (6) creating the Office of Social Equity (OSE) in 
MCA and the Social Equity Partnership Grant Program in OSE. The sale of adult-use 
cannabis began on July 1, 2023. 
 
Review of Applications for Cannabis License 
 
Under current regulations, the burden of proving an applicant’s qualifications rests on the 
applicant. MCA may deny an application that (1) is not complete in every material detail; 
(2) contains a material misstatement, omission, misrepresentation, or untruth; (3) does not 
meet the minimum qualifications for the lottery; or (4) is not submitted by the established 
deadline. MCA may request additional information from any applicant if it deems the 
information necessary to review or process the application; if the applicant does not provide 
the additional requested information within 10 calendar days, MCA may deny the 
application. 
 
To determine whether a submitted application meets the minimum qualifications for the 
lottery on a pass-fail basis, MCA must review a detailed operational plan, a business plan, 
a detailed diversity plan, and documentation that the applicant meets the requirements of a 
social equity applicant (if required). Subsequent to the lottery, MCA must notify all 
applicants whether their application was selected in the lottery. MCA may request any 
additional information or supporting documentation from an applicant selected in the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 272/ Page 3 
lottery necessary to verify aspects of the application, including, but not limited to, 
additional information and supporting documentation related to the ownership and control 
of the applicant. MCA may deny issuing a conditional license to an applicant selected in 
the lottery if (1) the applicant fails to provide any additional information or supporting 
documentation requested within 10 calendar days; (2) any additional information or 
supporting documentation submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the applicant is not 
eligible for a license; or (3) MCA determines that the applicant has violated a regulatory 
provision that specifies that an applicant, including any individual that holds an ownership 
interest in or control of the applicant, may only be listed on (1) one application per license 
type per application round and (2) two applications for any license type per application 
round. 
 
Violations and Hearing Authority 
 
After determining that a violation of Title 36 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis 
Article (Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis) or a regulation adopted under the title has 
occurred, MCA must suspend, fine, restrict, or revoke cannabis licenses and cannabis 
registrations, whether active, expired, or surrendered, or impose any authorized penalty. 
For any violation, MCA must give notice and hold a hearing in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act. 
 
MCA may issue a subpoena for a witness or evidence in connection with any disciplinary 
action or any investigation or proceeding initiated for an alleged violation of Title 36. MCA 
is authorized to delegate its hearing authority to an employee within the administration and 
hold a hearing in absentia when the person against whom action is contemplated fails to 
appear after due notice. 
 
Current regulations regarding hearing procedures apply to all hearings that MCA must 
conduct pursuant to statute or regulation (unless specific procedural regulations have 
otherwise been promulgated) and are intended to supplement the procedures required by 
law. A licensed business, registrant, agent, owner, or selected applicant that is subject to 
an MCA action has the right to a hearing. MCA must provide notice of any agency action 
and a statement of the right to a hearing. A party must file a request for a hearing within 
30 days of the notice of an agency action. If a party does not request a hearing within that 
timeframe, the agency action becomes final and is not subject to appeal. However, if a 
party requests a timely hearing, MCA acquires jurisdiction over the matter and may 
delegate a contested case regarding MCA determination to the Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH). 
 
The standard of proof in a hearing must be by a preponderance of the evidence. In the 
hearing of a contested case involving allegations that the party violated a law or regulation, 
MCA has the burden of proof. In the hearing of a contested case resulting from the denial 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 272/ Page 4 
or proposed denial of a license, registration, or permit, the applicant has the burden of 
establishing that the applicant is entitled to the license, registration, or permit. The hearing 
officer must issue a written final determination summarizing (1) any adjustments to the 
determination of fines or penalties and the reason for MCA’s action; (2) the deadline for 
payment of a fine or penalty; and (3) in the case of a license suspension or revocation, the 
reason for MCA’s action. The final determination exhausts all administrative remedies. A 
party may appeal the final determination of MCA to a circuit court if it does so within 
30 days of receipt of the final determination. 
 
For additional information on the State’s cannabis industry, see the Appendix – Medical 
and Adult-use Cannabis Reform. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission 
 
The Field Enforcement Division within ATCC is charged with enforcing the Alcoholic 
Beverages and Cannabis Article. ATCC advises that it is not currently performing the type 
of investigation that the bill requires, and that to do so it would need increased access to 
materials within the control of MCA, including application materials, financial records, 
and organizational documents. While the bill’s changes may increase the investigatory 
work for ATCC, it is assumed that ATCC can handle any increase in workload with 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
MCA currently delegates hearings to OAH. While MCA has yet to refer any contested 
hearings to OAH since its creation, OAH did receive contested hearing referrals from the 
Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission (MMCC) (for which MCA is the 
successor). 
Historically, 
the contested 
hearings delegated 
by 
MMCC were 
multi-day proceedings with written decisions issued at the conclusion of the hearing. 
 
OAH advises that the bill likely increases the number of hearings delegated to OAH, which 
may result in a fiscal impact, but that the number of additional hearings cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time. 
 
MCA advises, however, that all applications for licenses are reviewed to ensure that each 
application meets the minimum requirements for licensure before being entered into the 
lottery. If selected during the lottery, an additional review of the application materials 
commences (including a review of the ownership structures of selected applicants) to 
ensure that all statutory and regulatory licensure requirements are met before a conditional 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 272/ Page 5 
license is awarded. Moreover, MCA reviews any transfer of control or ownership equal to 
5% or more. 
 
Due to the extensive internal review of applications by MCA, this analysis assumes that 
any increase in the number of hearings resulting from the bill is likely minimal. In addition, 
MCA advises that it plans to eventually conduct hearings internally, so the extent to which 
OAH will continue to be solely responsible for MCA hearings in the future is unclear. 
Thus, OAH can likely absorb any increase in hearings with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Penalty Provision 
 
The criminal penalty provision of the bill does not have a material effect on State 
expenditures. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland 
Cannabis Administration; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 272/ Page 6 
Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Reform 
 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State by, 
among other things, (1) attributing cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission and renaming it the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC); 
(2) establishing the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) as an independent unit of 
State government that is responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis; 
(3) creating a licensing framework for the regulated sale of cannabis; (4) requiring all 
existing medical cannabis licensees to either convert to adult-use cannabis businesses or 
cease operating by July 1, 2023; (5) establishing a 9% sales and use tax on the sale of 
adult-use cannabis; (6) creating the Office of Social Equity (OSE) in MCA and the Social 
Equity Partnership Grant Program within OSE; (7) establishing an advisory board on 
medical and adult-use cannabis; and (8) creating the Maryland Incubator Program. 
Additionally, ATCC and MCA must enter a memorandum of understanding providing that 
both parties agree to collaborate on enforcing provisions regarding unlicensed cannabis 
operations in the State. Multiple special funds (discussed below) were also established to 
hold specified revenues and cover specified expenses related to the cannabis industry. 
 
Maryland Cannabis Administration 
 
MCA is an independent unit of State government established to administer and enforce the 
Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages Article (including being 
the successor to the Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission (MMCC) in 
matters concerning medical cannabis). MCA’s responsibilities generally include 
promulgating cannabis industry regulations, licensing and registering cannabis businesses 
in the State, and enforcing the statutes and regulations related to the cannabis industry. 
 
Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The sale of adult-use cannabis began on July 1, 2023. Pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022 and 
the passage of the associated constitutional amendment, a person at least age 21 may use 
and possess the personal use amount of cannabis, while the possession of the personal use 
amount of cannabis by a person younger than age 21, as well as the possession of the civil 
use amount of cannabis, are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use 
amount of cannabis by anyone is subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
“Personal use amount” means (1) up to 1.5 ounces of usable cannabis; (2) up to 12 grams 
of concentrated cannabis; (3) cannabis products containing up to 750 milligrams of 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC); or (4) up to two cannabis plants. “Civil use amount” 
means (1) more than 1.5 ounces but not more than 2.5 ounces of usable cannabis; (2) more 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 272/ Page 7 
than 12 grams but not more than 20 grams of concentrated cannabis; or (3) cannabis 
products containing more than 750 milligrams but not more than 1,250 milligrams of 
delta-9-THC. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, MCA – rather than MMCC – is responsible for the 
State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make medical cannabis available 
to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. There is a framework to certify health 
care providers (including physicians, physician assistants, dentists, podiatrists, nurse 
practitioners, and nurse midwives), qualifying patients, and their caregivers to provide 
qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via written certification. 
Qualifying patients may possess (1) up to 120 grams of usable cannabis; 
(2) cannabis-infused products containing up to 36 grams of delta-9-THC; or (3) for a 
qualifying patient who is at least age 21, no more than four cannabis plants. 
 
Cannabis Industry Regulations 
 
MCA proposed emergency regulations that took effect July 1, 2023; the emergency 
regulations are supplemental to the existing medical cannabis regulations. The emergency 
regulations (1) carry out the requirements for licensure of cannabis businesses, including 
implementing procedures related to applications, licenses, and registrations; (2) assist the 
Comptroller in the collection of taxes imposed on the sale of adult-use cannabis; 
(3) implement inventory management and tracking; (4) establish operating requirements 
for cannabis licensees or cannabis registrants; (5) establish limits on the maximum potency 
of cannabis products sold in the State; and (6) establish child protections, including 
child-resistant packaging and prohibitions on advertising to children. 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 require that the July 1, 2023 emergency regulations be followed by 
nonemergency regulations adopted by MCA by July 1, 2024. These regulations must 
govern Internet sales of cannabis; implement and supplement packaging and labeling 
requirements for cannabis products; establish procedures for the use of point-of-sale 
technologies by dispensaries for all transactions that verify a consumer’s age using a 
driver’s license or other valid identification; and establish health, safety, security, and 
tracking requirements for the packaging and repackaging of cannabis by a dispensary. 
Additionally, MCA must adopt minimum standards for licensed growers to protect the 
rights of growers and employees. 
 
Social Equity in the Cannabis Industry 
 
MCA must (1) conduct extensive outreach to small, minority, and women business owners 
and entrepreneurs who may have an interest in applying for a cannabis license before 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 272/ Page 8 
accepting and processing cannabis license applications and (2) connect potential social 
equity applicants with OSE. MCA began to implement this requirement in 2023 by 
attending fairs and festivals, visiting Maryland colleges and universities, and conducting 
technical assistance seminars. 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 established OSE as an independent office functioning within MCA, 
with the general purpose of promoting and encouraging full participation in the regulated 
cannabis industry by people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted 
by the war on drugs in order to positively impact those communities. OSE has several 
responsibilities in furtherance of its purpose, including consulting with other agencies, 
providing recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting businesses to obtain 
financing through the Capital Access Program, and managing the Social Equity Partnership 
Grant Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships between operational 
licensees and social equity licensees). 
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
MCA. A license is valid for five years on initial licensure and five years upon renewal. 
MCA must issue licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, incubator spaces, and 
on-site consumption. Additional licenses include micro licenses for growers, processors, 
and dispensaries. Licensing and renewal fees are established by MCA and range from 
$5,000 for social equity applicants for certain licenses to $50,000 for standard grower 
licenses. Existing medical licensees (growers, processors, and dispensaries) were required 
to pay a conversion fee based on the licensee’s gross revenues for calendar 2022 to convert 
to medical and adult-use cannabis business licensees of the same type. Essentially all 
medical licensees (18 grower, 23 processor, and 96 dispensary licensees) entered payment 
installment agreements to convert into cannabis business licensees. 
 
First Round Social Equity Licenses:  Social equity applicants are those with at least 65% 
ownership and control held by one or more individuals who meet certain criteria, such as 
living in or attending a public school in a disproportionately impacted area (i.e., determined 
to have had above 150% of the State’s 10-year average for cannabis possession charges). 
As announced by MCA, the available standard licenses for social equity applicants in 
round one total 16 grower licenses, 32 processor licenses, and 75 dispensary licenses. The 
available micro licenses for such applicants total 24 grower licenses, 24 processor licenses, 
and 8 dispensary licenses. MCA accepted 1,708 on-time applications for first round social 
equity licenses from November 13 through December 12, 2023. 
 
While first round licenses were expected to be awarded through a public lottery prior to  
January 1, 2024, MCA was forced to delay the lottery. Before the lottery can take place, 
MCA must review each of the 1,708 applications (1,400 of which were received within 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 272/ Page 9 
72 hours of the application deadline) to ensure that it meets the minimum requirements for 
licensure before being entered into the lottery. If selected during the lottery, an additional 
review of the application materials will commence before a conditional license is awarded. 
During the conditional period (18 to 24 months), a licensee must complete a supplemental 
license application to undergo a criminal and financial history background check and take 
additional actions, including demonstrating legal control and local zoning and planning 
approval of the proposed site for the cannabis business. An unconditional license is issued 
to applicants who satisfy the supplemental application requirements and pay a license fee. 
 
Additional Grower License Awards for Specified Class Members:  Chapters 254 and 255 
also required MCA to establish a process for issuing up to five additional grower licenses 
to recognized class members of Pigford v. Glickman, 185 F.R.D. 82 (D.D.C. 1999) or In 
re Black Farmers Litig., 856 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2011) that also meet other specified 
criteria. As of January 1, 2024, MCA reports awarding four conditional grower licenses to 
qualifying class members in the State. 
 
Second Round Licenses:  Beginning May 1, 2024, MCA must begin issuing a second round 
of licenses. The licenses may be limited to social equity applicants or opened to applicants 
from the general public, dependent on the outcome of a disparity study. 
 
Subsequent Licenses:  MCA may issue additional cannabis licenses up to the maximum 
limit authorized per statute based on the results of a market demand study. Future 
applications for licenses may be limited to social equity applicants and employ remedial 
measures based on the results of the disparity study. 
 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 also established the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-use 
Cannabis. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by ATCC, the 
Governor, MCA, or the General Assembly; (2) on its own initiative, provide 
recommendations to ATCC and MCA regarding guidelines, rules, and regulations that the 
advisory board considers important or necessary for review and consideration; and 
(3) establish at least two subcommittees to focus on medical and adult-use cannabis. As of 
January 1, 2024, the advisory board has not yet convened. 
 
Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
The fiscal and policy note for Chapters 254 and 255 estimated adult-use sales revenues of  
$400.0 million in the first fiscal year, and MCA estimated sales of $600.0 million in the 
first fiscal year. However, adult-use cannabis sales from July through December 2023 
totaled $331.8 million. With six months remaining to be counted during the first fiscal year 
of adult-use cannabis sales, revenues will likely exceed the fiscal and policy note estimate 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 272/ Page 10 
and possibly MCA’s estimate. At the established tax rate of 9%, approximately 
$29.9 million in tax revenues have already been generated during the first six months of 
adult-use cannabis sales. 
 
Local Authority to Regulate Cannabis 
 
A “political subdivision” – defined as a county or municipality – may (1) establish 
reasonable zoning requirements for cannabis businesses that do not “unduly burden” 
licensees; (2) decide how to distribute its allocation of tax revenues; and (3) adopt an 
ordinance to reduce the statutory requirements for how far a dispensary may be located 
from specified locations (e.g., schools, child care centers, playgrounds, libraries, etc.). 
 
A political subdivision may not (1) prohibit transportation through or deliveries within the 
political subdivision of cannabis; (2) prevent the conversion of an existing medical 
cannabis licensee to a cannabis business license; (3) impose fees or requirements on 
cannabis businesses that are disproportionally greater than or more burdensome than other 
businesses; and (4) impose a tax on cannabis. 
 
Additionally, an on-site consumption establishment may not operate in a location unless 
the political subdivision affirmatively authorizes the operation by issuing a permit or 
license. The political subdivision may also place restrictions on or prohibit the operation 
of on-site consumption establishments. 
 
Public Health Actions Related to Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Chapter 26 (and the subsequent passage of the associated constitutional amendment) 
established the Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council to study and report its findings 
and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public health impacts of 
cannabis legalization. The council convened its first meeting in August 2023, forming data 
collection and youth mitigation workgroups. The Cannabis Public Health Fund was also 
established to (1) support the advisory council; (2) support data collection and research on 
the effects of cannabis legalization in the State; (3) provide funding for education and 
public awareness campaigns related to cannabis use, including funding for educational 
programs to be used in schools; (4) support substance use disorder counseling and 
treatment for individuals; (5) provide training and equipment for law enforcement to 
recognize impairments due to cannabis; and (6) purchase technology proven to be effective 
at measuring cannabis levels in drivers. The Maryland Department of Health must 
administer the fund, which consists of revenues distributed to the fund based on tax 
revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis (5% of those revenues), money appropriated 
in the State budget to the fund, and any other money from any other source accepted for 
the benefit of the fund. The fiscal 2023 budget included $5.0 million for initial 
capitalization of the fund. 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 272/ Page 11 
Cannabis-related Special Funds 
 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Funds:  Chapters 254 and 255 established the 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund, administered by the Comptroller at the 
direction of MCA, to cover the costs of (1) operating MCA and (2) administering and 
enforcing the Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages Article. 
The fund generally consists of fees the administration may impose (including application 
and registration fees) and tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis sufficient to 
defray the entire cost of operating the administration. In addition, the balance of the Natalie 
M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Fund, approximately $12.3 million, was credited to the fund 
to cover the costs of implementing the Acts and regulating the cannabis industry in 
Maryland. 
 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund:  Chapter 26 also established the Community 
Reinvestment and Repair Fund, to be administered by the Comptroller, with the stated 
purpose of providing funds to community-based organizations that serve communities 
determined by OSE (in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General) to have been 
the most impacted by disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before 
July 1, 2022. The fund consists of conversion fees paid by medical licensees totaling 
approximately $60.9 million. The fund also receives 35% of the tax revenues from the sale 
of adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund:  Chapter 26 (and the subsequent passage of the 
associated constitutional amendment) established the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
to assist small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses entering the adult-use 
cannabis industry. The Department of Commerce (in consultation with OSE) must 
administer the fund and must prioritize awarding grants and loans to (1) populations that 
have been historically disproportionately impacted by the enforcement of cannabis laws 
and (2) individuals who have been convicted of cannabis offenses. Commerce may not 
award grants or loans to small, minority, and women business owners and entrepreneurs 
with a personal net worth exceeding $1.7 million. The fiscal 2023 budget included 
$40.0 million for initial capitalization of the fund, and the fiscal 2024 budget includes 
$40.0 million for the fund. The fund also receives 5% of the tax revenues from the sale of 
adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 

END OF PAGE 11