START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 261 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 261 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Economic Matters and Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Unemployment Insurance - Benefits - Election Judges 
 
 
This bill prohibits any payment to an individual as compensation for serving as an election 
judge for a local board of elections in the State from reducing the individual’s 
unemployment insurance (UI) weekly benefit amount. Under current law, only the first $50 
of most income sources in any week does not reduce the weekly benefit amount. The bill 
also prohibits the denial of UI benefits for failure to meet the general requirement that an 
individual be able to work, available to work, and actively seeking employment if the 
failure results from service as an election judge for a local board of elections in the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) can handle the bill’s 
requirements with existing budgeted resources. Nonbudgeted expenditures for the 
Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) increase minimally beginning in FY 2025. 
Nonbudgeted UITF revenues increase minimally beginning in FY 2025. State expenditures 
to reimburse UITF increase minimally beginning in FY 2025. Other State revenues are not 
materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures to reimburse UITF increase minimally beginning in 
FY 2025. Local revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A payment to an individual as compensation for serving as an election 
judge for a local board of elections in the State may not be included when computing the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 261/ Page 2 
weekly wages in excess of $50 that must be subtracted from an eligible claimant’s weekly 
benefit amount.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Unemployment Insurance 
 
Generally, an eligible claimant must be paid a weekly benefit amount that is computed by:   
 
 
determining the claimant’s weekly benefit amount based on qualifying income; 
 
adding any allowance for a dependent to which the claimant is entitled; and 
 
subtracting any wages exceeding $50 payable to the claimant for the week. 
 
“Wages” means all compensation for personal services except as specifically exempted by 
statute. “Wages” includes a bonus, a commission, a tip, and the cash value of all 
compensation in any medium other than cash. There are multiple exemptions, such as 
certain payments made under a workers’ compensation law, reimbursement of travel 
expenses, and any payment to an individual as compensation for serving or being called to 
serve on a jury. 
 
Generally, an individual must be able to work, available to work, and actively seeking work 
in order to be eligible to receive UI benefits. However, there are multiple exemptions. For 
example, an individual may not be denied benefits for any week of unemployment for 
failure to meet the general requirements if the failure results from a summons to appear for 
jury duty. 
 
For additional general information, see the Appendix – Unemployment Insurance. 
 
Election Judge Compensation 
 
Generally, the compensation for each election judge who has not previously served as an 
election judge must be at least $250 per day for each Election Day and each early voting 
day actually served. For each election judge who has previously served as an election 
judge, the compensation for each Election Day and each early voting day actually served 
must be at least $100 more per day than the compensation provided to an election judge 
who has not previously served as an election judge. An election judge must also be 
compensated at least $50 for each course of instruction the election judge completes. 
“Compensation” includes stipends for transportation, training, and bonus payments. 
 
Within the limits authorized by the county governing body, a local board of elections may 
fix the compensation of election judges above these minimum compensation levels. The 
county governing body must provide sufficient funding to meet the minimum 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 261/ Page 3 
compensation levels. The State Board of Elections must reimburse each local board of 
elections for $50 of the extra compensation that is paid to each returning election judge 
(who has previously served as an election judge). 
 
State/Local/Small Business Effect:  MDL can handle the bill’s administrative 
requirements, including any information technology costs, and provide additional guidance 
to claimants about compensation for serving as an election judge with existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
The minimum compensation for election judges is $250 per day, or $350 per day for 
returning judges. Training days have a minimum of $50 in compensation. Under the bill, 
compensation as an election judge for a local board of elections in the State cannot reduce 
an individual’s weekly benefit amount, whereas under current law, such compensation in 
excess of $50 per week reduces the weekly benefit amount. Likewise, an individual cannot 
be disqualified from benefit eligibility due to serving as an election judge. Therefore, the 
bill increases UI benefit payments for a few weeks each election cycle. 
 
These additional payments are chargeable benefits for purposes of determining employer 
taxes (or reimbursements for governments and certain nonprofit organizations). MDL 
advises that the increase in UI benefit payments is likely minimal, based on the limited 
number of claimants who are likely affected. For illustrative purposes only, the 
Department of Legislative Services estimates that total payments to election judges may 
be about $12 million each fiscal year; however, the majority of such payments can be 
assumed to be made to individuals who are not actively eligible for and collecting 
UI benefits, as many election judges are government employees and retirees. 
 
Accordingly, nonbudgeted expenditures for UITF increase minimally to pay additional 
benefits to individuals who volunteer to serve as election judges beginning in fiscal 2025. 
Based on the timing of the additional benefit payments, nonbudgeted UITF revenues 
increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2025 from reimbursements and beginning in 
fiscal 2026 from employer taxes. 
 
The State and local governments, as employers, reimburse UITF dollar for dollar and are 
affected as described above:  minimal additional expenditures beginning in fiscal 2025. 
UI taxes for small businesses increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 due to additional 
chargeable benefits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 261/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 460 (Senator Kagan) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; State Board of Elections; 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, and Frederick counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 261/ Page 5 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. State 
UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly; however, Chapter 39 of 2021 
allowed employers with fewer than 50 employees to defer 2021 State UI tax payments or 
reimbursements until January 31, 2022, and authorized the Secretary of Labor to offer a 
similar deferment in 2022. The Act, in conjunction with a 2020 executive order, also 
prevented UI claims made during the COVID-19 pandemic from increasing an employer’s 
taxes, although employers still paid broadly higher rates under Table F in 2021 and Table C 
in 2022 and 2023. With the UITF balance restored, the State is in Table A again in 2024.  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 261/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from… 
Annual Tax Per Employee  
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
N/A 
$1,074.6 
N/A 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
967.2 
$1,074.6 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
859.7 
967.2 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
752.2 
859.7 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
644.8 
752.2 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
644.8 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2022 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with 
nonzero (.0001 to .0027) benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; 
compensation less than that amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C was in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. A preexisting State law requiring a federal solvency goal to be met prior 
to moving to a tax table with lower rates again applies beginning in 2024. The federal solvency goal, which is designed 
to ensure the State’s ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately $1.7 billion and 
varies with the total wages paid in the State and benefits paid during recessions. 
 
As of January 1, 2024, the trust fund balance was $1.9 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the first four 
of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit 
year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most recently 
completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 
 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 261/ Page 7 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MDL-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 
Broadly, the new laws (1) required Table C to apply in 2022 and 2023; (2) made 
administrative changes to assist employers in paying their taxes, specifically allowing them 
to defer payments under certain circumstances; (3) exempted certain UI benefit payments 
from being subject to the State income tax; (4) temporarily modified benefit calculations 
to assist claimants working on a part-time basis; (5) made system administrative changes 
that must be implemented by MDL; and (6) enhanced the State’s work sharing program, 
which allows an employee to continue working at reduced hours and obtain UI benefits 
under certain circumstances. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7