START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 200 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 200 
(Delegate Wilkins) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Community Schools - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires the State Director of Community Schools to, in consultation with local 
school systems and members of the community schools’ leadership team, create a common 
needs assessment tool that each community school coordinator must use to complete the 
community school needs assessment. The State Director must also develop an evaluation 
form that each community school coordinator must use. The definitions of “community 
school” and of “wraparound services” are altered. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. State Concentration of Poverty Grant (CPG) expenditures are not 
affected. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Accountability 
and Implementation Board (AIB) can handle the bill’s provisions using existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill expands community school service options but does not require a 
net change in community school expenditures. However, local school systems with 
large numbers of community schools may realize increased costs associated with 
annual community school coordinator evaluations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The definition of “community school” is altered to, among other changes, 
include a public school that establishes partnerships that leverage shared accountability, 
collaborative leadership, capacity building, and authentic family and community 
engagement, using a student-centered framework to promote inclusive student 
achievement. The definition of “wraparound services” is expanded to include 
transportation to off-site learning opportunities (in addition to apprenticeship programs 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 200/ Page 2 
under current law), hearing services (in addition to vision and dental care services), and to 
include additional therapists. 
 
MSDE may provide comments to the community school coordinator on the 
implementation plan. A community school coordinator must review the implementation 
plan at least once every three years to determine whether the community school is meeting 
students’ needs. A community school coordinator must alter the implementation plan, 
using the common needs assessment tool, and the provision of wraparound services to 
address changes in students’ needs and submit the updated plan to the local school system 
for approval. Following school system approval, the updated plan must be submitted to 
MSDE for review. MSDE may provide comments to the community school coordinator on 
the plan. A needs assessment must be published online. Local governments are expected 
to demonstrate support for a community school through adoption of supportive policy. 
 
Commencing in 2025, by August 15 of each year, each community school coordinator of 
a CPG-eligible school must, using the evaluation form developed by the State Director of 
Community Schools, submit to MSDE and AIB an evaluation that provides specified 
information for the immediately preceding school year for the community school 
coordinator’s school. MSDE and AIB must make publicly available each submitted 
evaluation. By December 1, 2024, MSDE and AIB must jointly submit a report to the 
General Assembly on possible methods for ensuring that CPG funds are used appropriately 
and effectively. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Community Schools, Needs Assessment, and Implementation Plans 
 
“Community school” means a public school that establishes a set of strategic partnerships 
between the school and other community resources that promote student achievement, 
positive learning conditions, and the well-being of students, families, and the community 
by providing wraparound services. The Director of Community Schools in MSDE must 
coordinate professional development for community school coordinators at each 
community school. 
 
A community school coordinator is responsible for completing an assessment of the needs 
of the students in the school for appropriate wraparound services to enhance the success of 
all students in the school, and developing an implementation plan based on the assessment, 
in cooperation with other interested stakeholders. The needs assessment must (1) include 
an assessment of the physical, behavioral, mental health needs and wraparound service 
needs of students, their families, and their communities and (2) be submitted to MSDE and 
the local school system within one year of receiving a CPG personnel grant or within 
one year of becoming a community school. Local governments are expected to demonstrate 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 200/ Page 3 
support for a community school through meaningful partnerships and support that is 
supplemental to and does not supplant existing efforts. “Wraparound services” provided 
by a community school, according to its implementation plan, may involve extended 
learning time and an extended school year as well as any of a wide range of specified 
services, supports and practices. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grants 
 
CPGs have two components. First, for each eligible school a personnel grant is received to 
employ a community school coordinator with specified qualifications and provide full-time 
coverage by at least one health care practitioner. A county that provides health coverage or 
community school services with funds other than the personnel grant must continue to 
provide those services through fiscal 2030. Second, per pupil grants are provided for each 
qualifying school following the completion of a community school needs assessment. 
CPG funds must generally be distributed by the local school board to each eligible school. 
However, if the local school system has at least 40 eligible schools, the local board may 
expend up to 50% of CPG personnel and per pupil grants on behalf of eligible schools in 
accordance with a plan developed in consultation with eligible schools that ensures that 
each eligible school receives the required positions/coverage and services. 
 
The personnel grant is a State-funded categorical amount that increases with inflation. 
Per pupil grants are only wealth equalized for districts that receive the minimum State 
funding (40%) under the compensatory education formula; for all other districts, the State 
pays the full amount. The local funding percentage is based on the compensatory education 
wealth equalization formula. The following table lays out the phase-in of the 
two components of the funding. 
 
Concentration of Poverty Grants Phase-in 
 
School Poverty 
Percentage 
Year Personnel 
Phased-in 
Year Per Pupil 
Phased-in 
> = 80% 
FY 2020 
FY 2022 
75%-80% 
FY 2021 
FY 2023 
70%-75% 
FY 2022 
FY 2024 
65%-70% 
FY 2023 
FY 2025 
60%-65% 
FY 2024 
FY 2026 
55%-60% 
FY 2025 
FY 2027 
 
School concentration percentages are based on a three-year average of compensatory 
education enrollment in each public school. Under Chapter 55 of 2021, the 
three-year enrollment count excludes the 2020-2021 school year. A percentage increment 
of per pupil funding for each of six years of eligibility, beginning with 16% in the first year 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 200/ Page 4 
of eligibility and culminating in 100% funding by the seventh year, is specified in statute. 
County governments (including Baltimore City) must appropriate the greater of the 
combined local share of several aid programs, including the CPG program, after certain 
local relief provisions are applied, or the per pupil maintenance of effort result. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  State CPG funding is not altered. MSDE and AIB revenues and 
expenditures are not affected. MSDE advises that it has created a needs assessment tool 
that aligns with the bill’s requirement for development of such a tool and that it offers 
technical assistance in this domain. This analysis assumes that AIB and MSDE are not 
required to review the reports submitted by each of the community school coordinators in 
the State. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The county government local share of CPG funding of public schools 
is not altered. It is assumed that community school coordinators can handle annual 
evaluation and reporting requirements under the bill using existing resources, though local 
school systems with large numbers of community schools may realize increased costs 
associated with annual community school coordinator reports. Local school system 
revenues are not materially affected. The bill expands community school service options 
(for example hearing services and additional therapists) but does not require a net change 
in community school expenditures.  
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 161 (Senator A. Washington) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 200/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5