START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 222 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 222 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Correctional Services - Division of Pretrial Detention and Services - Facilities 
 
 
This departmental bill updates obsolete references to facilities and positions within the 
Division of Pretrial Detention and Services (DPDS). Specifically, the bill repeals 
references to the Baltimore City Detention Center (BCDC) and its warden and adds 
references to (1) the Youth Detention Center (YDC) and its facility administrators; (2) the 
centralized booking facility; (3) the Maryland Transition Center; and (4) the 
Chesapeake Detention Center. The bill further specifies that YDC is a pretrial detention 
facility for juvenile incarcerated individuals younger than age 18 who have been charged 
with a crime as an adult in Baltimore City. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill’s changes are technical in nature and reflect current practice. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In statute, DPDS consists of a Pretrial Release Services Program, BCDC, 
and a centralized booking facility for Baltimore City. DPDS has the same authority with 
regard to the custody of its inmates and the operation of BCDC as the Division of 
Correction (DOC) has under statute with regard to the custody of its incarcerated 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 222/ Page 2 
individuals and the operation of DOC and the sheriffs have under statute with regard to the 
detention of incarcerated individuals committed to their custody and the operation of local 
correctional facilities. 
 
The Commission of Pretrial Detention and Services may enter agreements with the 
Commissioner of Correction and governmental units for the housing of any incarcerated 
individual held in BCDC and may enter agreements for the housing of any incarcerated 
individual committed to federal or local governmental units in BCDC. 
 
BCDC is a pretrial detention facility for incarcerated individuals committed or transferred 
to the custody of the commissioner. The Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services may authorize the housing in BCDC of any incarcerated individual held in custody 
under any unit in DPSCS. With the approval of the Secretary, the commissioner must 
appoint a warden of BCDC. The warden serves at the pleasure of the commissioner. 
Subject to the authority of the commissioner and the Secretary, the warden is in charge of 
BCDC. The commissioner may also appoint assistant wardens, who serve at the pleasure 
of the commissioner, for BCDC, as provided in the State budget. Subject to the authority 
of the commissioner and the Secretary, in the absence of the warden, an assistant warden 
designated by the warden is in charge of BCDC. 
 
The centralized booking facility or BCDC must be equipped for video bail review. 
 
With specified exceptions, an incarcerated individual in BCDC who is sick, injured, or 
disabled must reimburse the State, as appropriate, for the payment of medical expenses and 
provide the warden with specified information relating to benefits. On the recommendation 
of a healthcare provider, the warden of BCDC and the warden’s designees may authorize 
medical treatment of a juvenile incarcerated individual when in the judgment of the warden 
or a designee the treatment is required and a parent, guardian, or person in loco parentis of 
the juvenile is not available on a timely basis to give the authorization. The warden or the 
warden’s designees may not be held liable for authorizing medical treatment under these 
provisions in good faith. 
 
Background:  DPDS is located in Baltimore City and the facilities within DPDS primarily 
house individuals awaiting trial. BCDC was closed in 2015 and in 2019, DPSCS began the 
demolition of it and 39 other structures at the complex in Baltimore City. Demolition was 
completed in 2021. 
 
In 2017, YDC opened and houses male and female youth younger than age 18 who have 
been charged in Baltimore City as adults and are either awaiting trial or are beginning to 
serve sentences. YDC is not reflected in statute. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 222/ Page 3 
Currently, DPDS consists of the Baltimore Central Booking and Intake Center, the 
Chesapeake Detention Facility, the Metropolitan Transition Center, and YDC. According 
to DPSCS, the bill alters statute to reflect the current facilities within DPDS. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 251 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Safety and Correctional Services) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 222/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Correctional Services - Division of Pretrial Detention and Services - 
Facilities 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0222 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jennifer Beskid 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4