START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 233 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 233 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Critical Area Commission) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Protection Program – 
Climate, Equity, and Administrative Provisions 
 
 
This departmental bill modifies the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area 
Protection Program to incorporate climate resilience, environmental justice, and equity 
measures. The bill also extends the requirement that Critical Area maps be updated on a 
regular interval and makes various technical, conforming, and administrative changes. 
Provisions related to Critical Area maps take effect upon notification of completion 
of a statewide base map project required by Chapter 119 of 2008. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Critical Area Commission (CAC) to 
provide funding to local governments may increase by more than $100,000 annually 
beginning as early as FY 2025. The bill is not anticipated to materially affect overall State 
spending on capital projects, as discussed below. State agencies can generally handle the 
bill’s administrative requirements with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local administrative and capital expenditures may increase beginning as 
early as FY 2025. Local revenues may increase from CAC grants beginning as early as 
FY 2025. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  CAC has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with 
this assessment, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments 
to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 233/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Incorporated, Newly Defined, and Modified Terms 
 
Existing definitions for environmental justice, overburdened community, underrepresented 
community, and underserved community are incorporated into the Critical Area law and 
the following new terms are defined:  climate resiliency; equity; natural features; and 
nature-based features. The term “dwelling unit” is modified by repealing a requirement 
that dwelling unit include permanent provisions for sanitation, cooking, eating, sleeping, 
and other activities routinely associated with daily life. Under the modified definition, such 
provisions must exist but do not need to be permanent.   
 
Commission Regulations Must Address Climate Change, Resilience, Environmental 
Justice, and Equity 
 
In addition to other modifications, regulations adopted by CAC must establish 
comprehensive standards and procedures for:   
 
 
assessing and adapting the Critical Area for climate resiliency; 
 
enhancing the resilience of the Critical Area by protecting, creating, and restoring 
natural and nature-based features; and 
 
environmental justice and equity initiatives that address disparate impacts of 
development and ensure the benefits of development, restoration, mitigation, and 
conservation are shared equitably. 
 
Annual State Funding for Local Critical Area Programs 
 
Provisions requiring the Governor to include money in the budget to reimburse local 
governments for reasonable costs of developing local critical area programs are repealed. 
The ongoing requirement that the Governor include funds in the budget each year to 
provide grants to assist local governments with reasonable costs of implementing local 
programs is expanded to also include updating local programs; local jurisdictions must still 
submit detailed funding requests to CAC by May 1 of each year.  
 
A new annual funding requirement is added specifically to provide grants to assist local 
jurisdictions to incorporate the climate and equity provisions required under the bill into 
updated local programs; local jurisdictions must submit detailed funding requests to CAC 
by May 1 of each year; however, on request of a local jurisdiction, the chair may extend 
the May 1 deadline. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 233/ Page 3 
Local Program Changes 
 
 
Core Elements 
 
In addition to requirements for local critical area programs under current law, each program 
must consist of those elements, which are necessary or appropriate to: 
 
 
reduce vulnerability to the impacts of climate change and incorporate measures to 
improve the climate resiliency of the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays and its 
tributaries; and 
 
ensure an equitable distribution of the burdens and benefits of development, 
mitigation, restoration, conservation, and adaptation to climate change within the 
Critical Area. 
 
Minimum Requirements 
 
In addition to technical and administrative changes, minimum requirements for local 
government programs are updated to require: 
 
 
consideration to be given to underserved communities in the assessment and 
mapping of shoreline areas suitable for specified public uses and water-related 
activities;  
 
provisions for (1) identifying areas vulnerable to climate change; (2) mitigation and 
adaptation measures that address sea level rise, storm surge, precipitation-induced 
flooding, other extreme weather events, migrating wetlands, and coastal forests; 
and (3) enhancing the climate resiliency of the Critical Area by identifying, 
restoring, and creating and conserving existing and projected future natural and 
nature-based features; 
 
provisions for (1) identifying underserved and overburdened communities within 
the Critical Area; (2) measures to ensure the equitable distribution of the benefits 
and burdens of development, restoration, and mitigation within the Critical Area; 
and (3) ensuring equity in the public participation process; 
 
provisions to ensure public access to the water, shoreline, and other natural areas 
for underserved or overburdened communities; and 
 
methods to ensure effective allocation, accounting, and reporting of fee in lieu 
funds. 
 
 
Local Development Standards, Density Calculations, and Lot Coverage 
 
The bill also adds an additional standard pertaining to climate change that a local 
government must use when locating new intensely developed areas (IDAs) or limited 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 233/ Page 4 
development areas (LDAs). More specifically, a local government must locate IDAs and 
LDAs outside of areas vulnerable to climate change, unless the local jurisdiction proposes 
and CAC approves (1) areas identified by the local jurisdiction as vulnerable to climate 
change (as described above) and (2) measures that assess climate resiliency and 
vulnerability and incorporate siting, design, construction, and other natural features to 
significantly enhance climate resiliency and reduce vulnerability. 
 
The bill also modifies requirements related to development in Resource Conservation 
Areas (RCAs) as they pertain to density calculations and additional dwelling units and 
makes changes related to lot coverage. For development that uses pervious materials that 
have been approved by CAC as part of a local program, specified coverage limits on lots 
or parcels of less than one acre in size may be exceeded by up to 500 square feet. 
 
 
Program Updates and Amendments 
 
The frequency with which each local jurisdiction must review its entire critical area 
program and propose any necessary amendments is increased from 6 years to 10 years. On 
request of a local jurisdiction, CAC must extend the deadline by 1 year. Beginning 
January 1, 2028, a local jurisdiction that does not meet the program review requirement is 
prohibited from proposing local amendments or refinements. 
 
If a local jurisdiction fails to update an adopted program after the 10-year deadline or after 
the expiration of a 1-year extension granted under the bill, CAC must make a good faith 
effort to notify the local jurisdiction that an update is necessary by at least four documented 
notification attempts over a 3-year period. The local jurisdiction must adopt a program 
update within 2 years of the last notice from CAC; if at that point the local jurisdiction fails 
to do so, the commission may update the local program.  
 
Provisions governing zoning map amendments are updated to include additional specificity 
for when an amendment may be made due to a mistake. Additionally, a zoning map 
amendment may be granted if it proposes to change the land classification from a more 
developed to a less developed classification. Other existing allowable reasons for 
amendments are not substantively changed. 
 
Mapping Project Extended 
 
The bill specifies a process for updating the statewide base map for the Critical Area as 
required under Chapter 119. The process requires CAC, with the assistance of the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE), to prepare an update to the map at appropriate intervals, but not less 
than every eight years, that includes a State-determined shoreline and landward boundary 
of tidal wetlands and a digitally generated, georeferenced 1,000-foot Critical Area 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 233/ Page 5 
boundary, as appropriate for integration into a Geographic Information System, under 
specified standards. 
 
Subject to specified requirements, a local jurisdiction must formally adopt its updated 
Critical Area map based on the statewide base map within six months of its receipt from 
DNR and CAC and may request an extension of time for an additional six months if 
evidence of reasonable progress has been made and is satisfactory to the commission. Once 
adopted, each local jurisdiction must ensure that, where applicable, each project submittal 
uses the updated digitally generated, georeferenced Critical Area boundary. 
 
These provisions take effect seven days after DNR notifies DLS in writing on the date of 
official completion of the statewide base map project required by Chapter 119. 
 
Other Changes 
 
The bill makes extensive administrative, technical, conforming, and other changes, 
including: 
 
 
The findings of the General Assembly related to the Critical Area are modified to 
expressly include climate change and equity, including three new findings. 
 
The requirement to establish an advisory committee to make recommendations with 
respect to the Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area programs is repealed. 
 
CAC regulations must also establish comprehensive standards and procedures for 
development in the Critical Area with respect to the transfer of development rights. 
 
In reviewing map amendments or refinements involving the use of growth allocation 
under the Critical Area Program, CAC must also consider environmental impacts 
on underserved or overburdened communities. 
 
CAC is authorized to direct, rather than request, that a local jurisdiction submit a 
proposed program amendment or program refinement to correct what CAC 
determines is a clear mistake, omission, or conflict with CAC program criteria or 
law. 
 
A provision requiring CAC approval for certain State or local agency projects not 
subject to project approval by a local jurisdiction is updated to include the Atlantic 
Coastal Bays Critical Area, instead of just the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area. 
 
A provision requiring CAC, by January 1, 1994, to adopt criteria for the production 
or exploration of oil or natural gas in certain areas that assure the protection of land 
and water resources in the Critical Area is repealed. 
 
Current Law:  See the Background section below for a general overview of the Critical 
Area Program. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 233/ Page 6 
Existing Definitions Incorporated into Critical Area Law 
 
“Environmental justice” means equal protection from environmental and public health 
hazards for all people regardless of race, income, culture, and social status. 
 
“Overburdened community” means any census tract for which three or more specified 
environmental health indicators are above the seventy-fifth percentile statewide. Indicators 
include particulate matter, lead paint, cancer risk, and proximity to traffic and various toxic 
or pollution source points. 
 
“Underrepresented community” means a community whose members self-identify as 
Black, African American, Hispanic, Latino, Asian, Pacific Islander, Native American, 
Native Hawaiian, or Alaska Native or with one or more of those groups. 
 
“Underserved community” means any census tract in which, according to the most recent 
U.S. Census Bureau Survey (1) at least 25% of the residents qualify as low-income; (2) at 
least 50% of the residents identify as nonwhite; or (3) at least 15% of the residents have 
limited English proficiency. 
 
Core Critical Area Program Elements 
 
A local critical area program must consist of those elements, which are necessary or 
appropriate: 
 
 
to minimize adverse impacts on water quality that result from pollutants that are 
discharged from structures or conveyances or that have run off from surrounding 
lands; 
 
to conserve fish, wildlife, and plant habitat; and 
 
to establish land use policies for development in the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area 
or the Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area, which accommodate growth and also 
address the fact that, even if pollution is controlled, the number, movement, and 
activities of persons in that area can create adverse environmental impacts. 
 
Minimum Critical Area Program Requirements 
 
At a minimum, a local program sufficient to meet the goals of the Critical Area law must 
include: 
 
 
a map designating the Critical Area in a local jurisdiction; 
 
a comprehensive zoning map for the Critical Area; 
 
as necessary, new or amended provisions of specified regulations, plans, 
enforcement provisions, and, as appropriate, grandfathering provisions; 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 233/ Page 7 
 
provisions requiring project approvals to be based on findings that meet specified 
standards; 
 
provisions to limit lot coverage and to require or encourage cluster development, 
where necessary or appropriate; 
 
establishment of buffer areas along shorelines; 
 
requirements for minimum setbacks for structures and septic fields along shorelines; 
 
designation of shoreline areas, if any, that are suitable public uses and water-related 
recreation; 
 
designation of shoreline areas, if any, that are suitable for ports, marinas, and 
industries that use water for transportation or derive economic benefits from shore 
access; 
 
provisions requiring that all harvesting of timber in the Chesapeake Bay Critical 
Area or the Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area be in accordance with plans 
approved by the district forestry board; 
 
provisions for reasonable accommodations in policies or procedures when the 
accommodations are necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of physical 
disability; 
 
procedures, including consolidation or reconfiguration of lots, approved by CAC, 
that assure that certain lots and lands are brought into conformance with the 
Critical Area law to the extent possible; 
 
provisions for granting a variance to a local program; and 
 
penalty provisions and administrative enforcement procedures. 
 
Program Review 
 
Each local jurisdiction must review its entire program and propose any necessary 
amendments to its entire program, including local zoning maps, at least every six years. 
Each local jurisdiction must send in writing to CAC, within 60 days after the completion 
of its review, the following information: 
 
 
a statement certifying that the required review has been accomplished; 
 
any necessary requests for program amendments, program refinements, or other 
matters that the local jurisdiction wishes CAC to consider; 
 
an updated resource inventory; and 
 
a statement quantifying acreages within each land classification, the growth 
allocation used, and the growth allocation remaining. 
 
A program may not be amended or refined except with approval of CAC, subject to 
specified administrative requirements.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 233/ Page 8 
Land Classifications and Growth Allocations 
 
Land within the Critical Area is mapped and classified based on land uses that existed at 
the time the local program was adopted. The Critical Area law uses three land use 
designations:  
 
 
IDAs, areas of concentrated development where little natural habitat occurs;  
 
LDAs, areas in which development is of a low or moderate intensity; and  
 
RCAs, areas characterized by natural environments or by resource-utilization 
activities. 
 
Certain provisions of critical area criteria apply throughout the Critical Area, while other 
provisions are specific to the land classifications of IDA, LDA, and RCA; these result in 
particular development criteria and performance standards. 
 
In order to accommodate future population growth, the total acreage of IDAs and LDAs 
may be increased by a “growth allocation.” This allowable development increase is 
calculated by a formula. Each county has a finite amount of growth allocation acreage that 
can be used, and this acreage was determined at the time of original Critical Area mapping. 
Local governments consider the use of growth allocation on a project-by-project basis 
through a local review and approval process. Following local review and approval, CAC 
must also review and approve all growth allocation proposals as a map amendment to a 
local program. 
 
When locating new IDAs or LDAs, local jurisdictions must follow specified guidelines, 
such as locating a new IDA in an existing LDA or adjacent to an existing IDA. Growth 
allocation projects must also comply with all of the purposes, policies, and goals of the law 
and criteria. 
 
Background:  
 
Critical Area Program Overview 
 
The General Assembly established CAC in 1984 through the Chesapeake Bay Critical Area 
Protection Act. In 2002, the law was extended to the Atlantic Coastal Bays in 
Worcester County and Ocean City. CAC operates as an administrative unit within DNR. 
The law creates a partnership between the State and local governments. 
Sixty-four Maryland jurisdictions, including 16 counties, Baltimore City, and 
47 municipalities, have lands that border a portion of the Chesapeake or Atlantic Coastal 
bays, their tidal tributaries, or tidal wetlands. The purpose of this partnership is to address 
development in a comprehensive fashion in order to improve water quality, conserve 
wildlife habitats, and manage land uses in a 1,000-foot-wide zone, known as the 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 233/ Page 9 
“Critical Area,” adjacent to these tidal shorelines. The 642,000 acres in the Critical Area 
comprise approximately 10% of the State’s land area. 
 
Each jurisdiction is responsible for managing land use development in the Critical Area 
through a local program. The participating counties and municipalities base their programs 
on the requirements of the State law, the commission’s original program criteria, and 
regulations that the General Assembly authorized the commission to adopt under 
comprehensive statutory amendments enacted in 2008. Standard provisions in each 
program include limits on forest clearing and the amount of certain semi-impervious 
surfaces that contribute to stormwater runoff. All local critical area programs, and 
subsequent amendments, must be approved by the commission. The commission also 
reviews and comments on land development projects that are subject to local approval. 
State agencies must obtain commission approval for development projects in the 
Critical Area. 
 
Climate Resilience, Environmental Justice, and Equity 
 
Maryland’s shorelines are on the front lines of climate change. The State’s coastal 
communities are experiencing rising seas, heightened flooding and erosion from 
intensifying storms, and losses in natural habitat. Many of these communities are 
historically underserved or overburdened, working to overcome decades of disparity in 
green infrastructure investment and environmental protection as climate threats mount. 
New development in these sensitive areas can compound these problems – or help 
overcome them. 
 
CAC advises that the Critical Area Program lacks key tools to help communities become 
more resilient in the face of climate change. It also does not fully reflect current values and 
practices that increase equity and advance environmental justice. For example, CAC cannot 
ensure that the location and design of new development accounts for climate impacts 
expected over the full lifespan of the project. This puts existing neighborhoods and new 
residents at increased risk. It is also challenging for CAC to compel mitigation that corrects 
disparities in environmental quality or more equitably builds resilience to climate change. 
 
State Expenditures:  CAC advises that the administrative requirements in the bill can be 
handled with existing budgeted resources, including updating Critical Area maps. DNR 
and MDE likewise indicate that existing resources are sufficient for implementation. The 
Maryland Department of Planning, an ex-officio member of CAC, advises that any 
assistance it may provide to CAC does not require additional staff, but that other tasks may 
need to be reprioritized due to broadly reduced staffing levels at the department. The 
Department of General Services did not indicate the need for any additional staff or related 
administrative costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 233/ Page 10 
State Assistance to Local Governments 
 
CAC currently provides a small amount of local assistance funds for program 
implementation in its operating budget. The fiscal 2025 budget includes $159,400 in 
general funds for such purposes. Under current practice, local governments will submit 
requests to CAC for an allocation of the fiscal 2025 funds by May 1, 2024. 
 
The bill modifies the provisions under which this funding must be provided to also apply 
to updating local programs and to specifically include funding for local jurisdictions for 
climate resiliency and equitable planning. However, no specific funding level is required, 
and the requirement is to assist, not fully fund, the costs. 
 
The bill’s language does not meet the requirements necessary to establish a mandated 
appropriation. Generally, any legislation mandating funding of a program must include 
either an exact dollar figure or a funding formula that makes it possible to compute the 
level of funding required. Therefore, the extent to which affected local governments will 
request, and receive, discretionary funding for climate resiliency and equitable planning 
under the bill is unknown. Based on the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date and current 
practice, the first local requests made by May 1, 2025, will be for a portion of the funding 
available in the fiscal 2026 budget, although that does not preclude discretionary funding 
being made available in fiscal 2025.   
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures to provide funding to local governments under the 
bill may increase beginning as early as fiscal 2025. Although the amount is unknown, a 
few local jurisdictions indicated costs associated with the bill. Fully meeting local requests 
may require additional general fund expenditures of more than $100,000 annually, 
particularly in the first few fiscal years of implementation. See the Local Fiscal Effect 
Section below for additional information. 
 
State Projects 
 
State agencies must incorporate the bill’s climate resilience, environmental justice, and 
equity measures into Critical Area development projects, which may change the location, 
design, and/or mitigation efforts of such projects. CAC advises that climate resilience 
measures result in long-term savings to State agencies as expenditures related to 
maintenance, repair, and disaster recovery due to climate change impacts are reduced. DLS 
notes that current law requires State and local capital projects that cost $500,000 or more 
and are funded with at least 50% State funds to be constructed in compliance with 
Coast Smart design criteria to address sea level rise inundation and coastal flood impacts. 
Further, existing State regulations require State projects located on State-owned land in the 
Critical Area to incorporate climate resiliency measures. While additional costs for State 
entities are possible due to the bill’s climate resilience requirements beginning as early as 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 233/ Page 11 
fiscal 2025, a reliable estimate of such costs cannot be made at this time. Nevertheless, any 
such costs are not anticipated to materially affect overall State spending on capital projects. 
 
The environmental justice and equity measures likely involve using additional screening 
tools and analysis to determine impacts; CAC advises that additional expenditures to 
complete these tasks are negligible. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill incorporates climate resilience, environmental justice, and 
equity measures into the Critical Area law, which must be incorporated into local critical 
area programs. CAC advises that its staff plans to provide technical assistance and that the 
measures can be incorporated during the currently required comprehensive review of local 
critical area programs. Most local governments that responded to requests for information 
for this fiscal and policy note did not indicate significant expenditures or revenues 
associated with the bill. However, Worcester County advises that it requires a full-time 
staff ($90,000 in total compensation annually) and $10,000 annually in contractual support 
services.  
 
As described above, the extent to which affected local governments will request, and 
receive, State funding for climate resiliency and equitable planning under the bill is 
unknown. The bill requires funding be provided to assist local governments with 
reasonable costs to update local programs and incorporate climate resiliency and equitable 
planning – not to fully cover such costs. Given that at least one local government anticipates 
costs, and the recent minimal levels of State funding provided to local programs in the 
absence of specific funding minimums in statute, it is possible that some local governments 
incur costs in excess of State funding. Fully funding local requests may require more than 
$100,000 annually, particularly in the first few years of implementation. Such discretionary 
funding may be provided as early as fiscal 2025. 
 
Local Projects 
 
Local governments must also incorporate the bill’s climate resilience, environmental 
justice, and equity measures into Critical Area development projects in much the same way 
as the State government. Those measures may result in long-term savings as expenditures 
related to maintenance, repair, and disaster recovery due to climate change impacts are 
reduced. While additional costs for local governments are possible due to these 
requirements beginning as early as fiscal 2025, a reliable estimate of such costs cannot be 
made at this time.  
 
Small Business Effect:  CAC advises that the bill has no immediate adverse direct or 
indirect impacts to small businesses. DLS disagrees with this assessment due to the scope 
of the bill and the potential for some small businesses to be negatively affected – 
particularly in the short term – by new siting and design requirements in the Critical Area. 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 233/ Page 12 
New locations, designs, and mitigation measures may be required of some development 
projects, for example. Conversely, the bill likely has positive meaningful effects on other 
small businesses, including those engaged directly in climate or resiliency projects. 
Long-term, small businesses (along with all other businesses) likely benefit from increased 
climate resiliency in the Critical Area. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 306 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Critical Area Commission) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Critical Area Commission; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Department of General Services; Department of Housing and 
Community 
Development; 
Anne 
Arundel, 
Calvert, 
Charles, 
Harford, 
Kent,  
Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, and Worcester counties; cities of Annapolis 
and Havre de Grace; Town of Leonardtown; Department of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 233/ Page 13 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
CHESAPEAKE AND ATLANTIC COASTAL BAYS CRITICAL AREA  
PROTECTION PROGRAM – CLIMATE, EQUITY, AND 
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
BILL NUMBER:  
HB0233 
 
PREPARED BY: Nick Kelly, Critical Area Commission 
 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposed statutory changes are intended to revise and update the Critical Area law to address 
climate resiliency, environmental justice, and equity. The purpose is to ensure the long-term 
sustainability of communities that may be impacted by sea level rise and to ensure that 
environmental justice and equity are considered. There are no immediate adverse direct or indirect 
impacts to small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 13