START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

Chapter 99

(House Bill 222)

AN ACT concerning

Correctional Services – Division of Pretrial Detention and Services – Facilities

FOR the purpose of altering the composition and authority of the Division of Pretrial
Detention and Services within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services; altering the authority of the Commissioner of the Division; establishing the
Youth Detention Center in the Division; establishing the facility administrator and
authorizing assistant facility administrators for the Youth Detention Center;
repealing authorization for the Baltimore City Detention Center; and generally
relating to the Division of Pretrial Detention and Services.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Correctional Services
Section 5–201 and 5–202; and 5–401 through 5–406 to be under the amended subtitle
“Subtitle 4. Baltimore City – Facilities”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

5–201.

(a) There is a Division of Pretrial Detention and Services in the Department.

(b) The Division consists of:

(1) a Pretrial Release Services Program;

(2) [a Baltimore City Detention Center; and

(3)] a centralized booking facility for Baltimore City;

(3) THE MARYLAND TRANSITION CENTER;

(4) THE CHESAPEAKE DETENTION CENTER; AND

(5) THE YOUTH DETENTION CENTER.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 99 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The Division has the same authority with regard to the custody of its inmates
and the operation of the [Baltimore City Detention Center] FACILITIES WITHIN THE
DIVISION as:

(1) the Division of Correction has under this Code with regard to the
custody of its inmates and the operation of the Division of Correction; and

(2) the sheriffs have under this Code with regard to the detention of
inmates committed to their custody and the operation of local correctional facilities.

(d) This title does not limit or supersede the authority of a court to determine the
conditions of pretrial release.

5–202.

(a) With the approval of the Governor, the Secretary shall appoint a
Commissioner of Pretrial Detention and Services.

(b) The Commissioner serves at the pleasure of the Secretary.

(c) The Commissioner:

(1) has the same authority over the Division as this Code vests in the
Commissioner of Correction over the Division of Correction;

(2) shall keep safely any inmate committed or transferred to the custody of
the Commissioner until the inmate is discharged in accordance with law;

(3) is in charge of the Division, subject to the authority of the Secretary;

(4) is the appointing authority for all employees of the Division;

(5) shall establish a home detention program under terms and conditions
that the Secretary provides;

(6) may enter agreements with the Commissioner of Correction and
governmental units for the housing of any inmate held in the [Baltimore City Detention
Center] CUSTODY OF THE DIVISION;

(7) may enter agreements for the housing of any inmate committed to
federal or local governmental units in [the Baltimore City Detention Center] A FACILITY
WITHIN THE DIVISION; and

(8) may enter other agreements necessary to carry out the purposes of this
title.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(d) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection and notwithstanding any
other provision of law, the Commissioner shall establish by regulation the terms and
conditions of the home detention program required under subsection (c)(5) of this section.

(2) The authority of a court to determine the conditions of pretrial release
or to find that a defendant awaiting trial may not be placed on a home detention program
may not be limited or superseded by:

(i) a regulation of the Division or Department; or

(ii) the Division or the Commissioner.

Subtitle 4. Baltimore City [Detention Center] – FACILITIES.

5–401.

(a) There is a [Baltimore City Detention Center] YOUTH DETENTION CENTER
in the Division.

(b) The [Baltimore City Detention Center is a pretrial detention facility for
inmates committed or transferred to the custody of the Commissioner] YOUTH
DETENTION CENTER IS A PRETRIAL DETENTION FACILITY FOR JUVENILE
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS WHO HAVE BEEN
CHARGED WITH A CRIME AS AN ADULT IN BALTIMORE CITY.

[(c) The Secretary may authorize the housing in the Baltimore City Detention
Center of any inmate held in custody under any unit in the Department.]

5–402.

(a) With the approval of the Secretary, the Commissioner shall appoint a [warden
of the Baltimore City Detention Center] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR OF THE YOUTH
DETENTION CENTER.

(b) The [warden] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR serves at the pleasure of the
Commissioner.

(c) Subject to the authority of the Commissioner and the Secretary, the [warden]
FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR is in charge of the [Baltimore City Detention Center] YOUTH
DETENTION CENTER.

5–403.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 99 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) The Commissioner may appoint assistant [wardens] FACILITY
ADMINISTRATORS for the [Baltimore City Detention Center] YOUTH DETENTION
CENTER as provided in the State budget.

(b) An assistant [warden] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR serves at the pleasure of
the Commissioner.

(c) Subject to the authority of the Commissioner and the Secretary, in the absence
of the [warden] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR, an assistant [warden] FACILITY
ADMINISTRATOR designated by the [warden] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR is in charge of
the [Baltimore City Detention Center] YOUTH DETENTION CENTER.

5–404.

(a) The Division shall operate a centralized booking facility for Baltimore City.

(b) The centralized booking facility shall include:

(1) pretrial release services;

(2) District Court Commissioners;

(3) an Office of the State’s Attorney for Baltimore City; and

(4) Baltimore City Police Services.

(c) The centralized booking facility [or the Baltimore City Detention Center]
shall be equipped for video bail review.

5–405.

(a) An inmate in the [Baltimore City Detention Center] CENTRALIZED
BOOKING FACILITY who is sick, injured, or disabled shall:

(1) reimburse the State, as appropriate, for the payment of medical
expenses; and

(2) provide the warden with any information relating to:

(i) the existence of any health insurance, group health plan, or
prepaid medical care coverage under which the inmate is insured or covered;

(ii) the inmate’s eligibility for benefits under the Maryland Medical
Assistance Program;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 99

(iii) the name and address of the third party payor; and

(iv) any policy or other identifying number relating to items (i)
through (iii) of this item.

(b) (1) In addition to obtaining any reimbursement authorized under
subsection (a) of this section and subject to paragraph (4) of this subsection, the Department
shall establish a reasonable fee, not to exceed $4, for each visit by an inmate to an
institutional medical unit or noninstitutional physician, dentist, or optometrist.

(2) The per visit fee shall be deducted from an inmate’s spending financial
account, reserve financial account, or similar account held by the warden on behalf of the
inmate.

(3) The fees collected under this subsection shall be deposited in the
General Fund of the State.

(4) This subsection does not apply to a visit by an inmate to a medical unit
or a physician, dentist, or optometrist if the visit is:

(i) required as a part of the intake process;

(ii) required for an initial physical examination;

(iii) due to a referral by a nurse or physician’s assistant;

(iv) provided during a follow–up visit that is initiated by a medical
professional from the [Baltimore City Detention Center] CENTRALIZED BOOKING
FACILITY;

(v) initiated by a medical or mental health staff member of the
[Baltimore City Detention Center] CENTRALIZED BOOKING FACILITY; or

(vi) required for necessary treatment.

(c) Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not impose liability for
reimbursement or payment of medical expenses on any person other than an inmate
personally or through a person that provides insurance, coverage, or other benefits
described under subsection (a) of this section.

5–406.

(a) On the recommendation of a healthcare provider, the [warden] FACILITY
ADMINISTRATOR of the [Baltimore City Detention Center] YOUTH DETENTION CENTER
and the [warden’s] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR’S designees may authorize medical
treatment of a juvenile inmate when in the judgment of the [warden] FACILITY
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 99 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ADMINISTRATOR or a designee the treatment is required and a parent, guardian, or person
in loco parentis of the juvenile is not available on a timely basis to give the authorization.

(b) The [warden] FACILITY ADMINISTRATOR or the [warden’s] FACILITY
ADMINISTRATOR’S designees may not be held liable for authorizing medical treatment
under this section in good faith.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6