START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 244 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 244 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Act - Civil Penalties - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the maximum civil penalty for a violation of the Maryland 
Occupational Safety and Health (MOSH) program from $7,000 to $16,131 for each 
violation. If an employer does not correct a violation within the period allowed for 
correction, the bill increases the maximum civil penalty that may be applied for each day 
that the violation continues from $7,000 to $16,131. A civil penalty of up to $161,323 
(instead of $70,000 under current law) may be assessed for willful or repeated violations, 
and for willful violations, the penalty must be at least $11,162 (instead of $5,000 under 
current law). These penalties are indexed to inflation beginning July 15, 2025, as set by the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry beginning January 1, 2025, and annually thereafter. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Increasing civil penalty provisions of MOSH and indexing them to inflation 
do not have a material impact on State finances or operations. State agencies are not subject 
to the penalty provisions of the MOSH Act. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Local governments are not subject to the penalty provisions of the 
MOSH Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 244/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Division of Labor and Industry within MDL administers the 
MOSH program. The requirements of the MOSH program are codified by the MOSH Act. 
In general, these requirements parallel the safety standards established by the federal 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) within the U.S. Department of 
Labor. OSHA specifies that states may elect to assume the responsibility for development 
and management of a state occupational safety and health program as long as the standards 
under the state program are “at least as effective as” OSHA standards. 
 
Employers must provide each employee with employment and a place of employment that 
is safe and healthful and free from each recognized hazard that is causing or likely to cause 
death or serious physical harm to the employee. 
 
A civil penalty must be assessed against an employer when the Commissioner of Labor 
and Industry determines that the employer has committed a serious violation. Under most 
circumstances, a violation is considered a serious violation when there is a substantial 
probability that death or serious physical harm could result from a condition that exists at 
a site. A civil penalty must also be assessed against an employer who fails to post notices 
as required by the commissioner. However, the penalty provisions of MOSH do not apply 
to a public body. 
 
The commissioner may assess a civil penalty for employers who (1) willfully or repeatedly 
violate MOSH; (2) receive a citation for a nonserious violation of MOSH; or (3) fail to 
correct a violation within the timeframe specified by the citation. 
 
In general, civil penalties may not exceed $7,000 per violation. However, if an employer 
does not correct a violation within the period allowed for correction, a civil penalty of up 
to $7,000 may be applied for each day that the violation continues. A civil penalty of up to 
$70,000 may be assessed for willful or repeated violations, and for willful violations, the 
penalty must be at least $5,000. 
 
Before the Commissioner of Labor and Industry assesses a civil penalty, the commissioner 
must consider the appropriateness of the penalty in relation to:   
 
 
the size of the business of the employer against whom the penalty is to be assessed; 
 
the gravity of the violation for which the penalty is to be assessed; 
 
the good faith of the employer; 
 
the history of violations by the employer; 
 
the injury and illness experience of the employer; 
 
the existence and quality of a safety and training program; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 244/ Page 3 
 
the actual harm to human health including injury or illness; 
 
the extent to which the current violation is part of a recurrent pattern of the same or 
similar type of violation; and 
 
the extent to which the existence of the violation was known to the employer but 
remained not corrected. 
 
Civil penalties assessed under MOSH must be deposited into the general fund. 
 
Background:  On November 2, 2015, the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act 
Improvements Act of 2015 was enacted to advance the effectiveness of civil money 
penalties and to strengthen their deterrent effect. The federal law requires agencies across 
the federal government to adjust their penalties for inflation no later than January 15 of 
every year. Thus, OSHA increased their maximum civil penalty amounts to be $16,131 
after January 15, 2024, except the penalties for willful or repeated violations are $161,323 
after January 15, 2024. 
 
MDL notes that currently fewer than 1% of all MOSH violations are classified as “willful”. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; U.S. Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 244/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Occupational Safety and Health Act - Civil 
Penalties - Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0244 
 
PREPARED BY:  Devki Virk, Commissioner Labor & Industry 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposed legislation will have an impact on small businesses in Maryland insofar 
that the penalties for small business may increase if the regulations on calculating 
penalties are changed by the Division of Labor and Industry. 
 

END OF PAGE 4