START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 242 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 242 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Amusement Ride Safety 
Advisory Board within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by three years, to 
July 1, 2027, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland 
Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). MDL must submit a report by July 1, 2025, to the Joint 
Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) with information regarding the State Amusement 
Ride Safety Advisory Board as determined by JAEC. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through  
FY 2027. Otherwise, the bill’s reporting requirement can be handled with existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  An “amusement ride” is defined as a device intended to give 
amusement, excitement, pleasure, or thrills to passengers whom the device carries along or 
around a fixed or restricted course or within a defined area. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 242/ Page 2 
The State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board is responsible for advising and 
consulting with the Commissioner of Labor and Industry on amusement ride safety 
regulations. The board holds hearings to receive public comment and information on which 
to base recommendations to the commissioner. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 242/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Amusement Ride Safety Advisory Board - Sunset 
Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0242 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Devki Virk, Commissioner Labor & Industry 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
N/A 
 

END OF PAGE 3