START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 211 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 211 
(Delegate Taveras) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation - Contractors, Subcontractors, and Brokers - Prohibited 
Conduct 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from serving as a contractor, subcontractor, or broker between 
a contractor and subcontractor in the State within five years of being convicted of an 
offense constituting criminal malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance under federal or 
State law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under State procurement law, a person must be debarred from entering 
into a contract with any public body in the State if the person has been convicted for bribery 
or other related crimes committed in the process of seeking a contract with a public body. 
Statute specifies numerous other grounds for which a person may be debarred from 
contracting with any public body or, in some cases, only with the State, generally related 
to criminal convictions for specified crimes. Debarment proceedings are held before the 
Board of Public Works following procedures outlined in statute. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill is drafted in Title 19 of the Business Regulation Article, 
for which there are no applicable definitions of the terms “broker,” “contractor,” or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 211/ Page 2 
“subcontractor.” However, “contractor” and “subcontractor” are defined under Title 8 of 
the same article, which establishes the Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC) 
and the licensure and regulation of home improvement contractors (who may then act as 
subcontractors). Qualifications for licensure as a contractor under Title 8 do not specifically 
include lack of a criminal conviction. Nevertheless, under separate provisions, an applicant 
for a contractor license may have the license denied and a licensed contractor may have the 
license suspended or revoked (or may be reprimanded) if, under federal or any state laws, 
the applicant or licensee is convicted of a felony or of any misdemeanor directly related to 
the fitness and qualification of the applicant or licensee to engage in home improvement 
services. Therefore, even if the bill is interpreted to apply to the licensure of home 
improvement contractors by MHIC, it may only establish a timeframe during which such 
an individual would not be able to secure or maintain a contractor license from MHIC.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 648 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2