START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 733

Chapter 733

(House Bill 204)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Coaches – Mental Health Training

FOR the purpose of requiring the State Department of Education, in collaboration with the
Maryland Department of Health, each county board of education, and the Maryland
Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association, to develop guidelines for public
schools to train coaches to recognize indicators of mental illness and behavioral
distress in students; requiring each public school in the State that offers ~~a~~
~~mainstream~~ an athletic program to provide a certain mental health training to
coaches; requiring the Maryland Higher Education Commission, in collaboration
with the Maryland Department of Health, to develop guidelines for public
institutions of higher education to train coaches to recognize indicators of mental
illness and behavioral distress in students; requiring a public institution of higher
education that offers an athletic program to provide a certain mental health training
to coaches; and generally relating to coaches and mental health training.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–452 and 15–130.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–452.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “MAINSTREAM ATHLETIC PROGRAM” MEANS AN
INTRAMURAL OR, INTERSCHOLASTIC, OR OTHER SCHOOL SPONSORED ATHLETIC
~~ACTIVITY~~ PROGRAM THAT IS DEVELOPED AND OFFERED TO STUDENTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH CRITERIA ESTABLISHED BY THE STATE BOARD.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EACH COUNTY BOARD, AND THE MARYLAND PUBLIC
SECONDARY SCHOOLS ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION, SHALL DEVELOP GUIDELINES FOR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS TO TRAIN COACHES TO RECOGNIZE INDICATORS OF MENTAL
ILLNESS AND BEHAVIORAL DISTRESS IN STUDENTS, INCLUDING:

(1) DEPRESSION;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 733 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) TRAUMA;

(3) VIOLENCE;

(4) YOUTH SUICIDE; AND

(5) SUBSTANCE ABUSE.

(C) EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE STATE THAT OFFERS A MAINSTREAM AN
ATHLETIC PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
GUIDELINES DEVELOPED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION TO EACH COACH
PARTICIPATING IN THE MAINSTREAM ATHLETIC PROGRAM.

15–130.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ATHLETIC PROGRAM” MEANS ANY
INTERCOLLEGIATE ATHLETIC PROGRAM AT A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER
EDUCATION IN THE STATE.

(B) THE COMMISSION, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, SHALL DEVELOP GUIDELINES FOR PUBLIC
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION TO TRAIN COACHES TO RECOGNIZE
INDICATORS OF MENTAL ILLNESS AND BEHAVIORAL DISTRESS IN STUDENTS,
INCLUDING:

(1) DEPRESSION;

(2) TRAUMA;

(3) VIOLENCE;

(4) YOUTH SUICIDE; AND

(5) SUBSTANCE ABUSE.

(C) A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION THAT OFFERS AN
ATHLETIC PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
GUIDELINES DEVELOPED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION TO EACH COACH
PARTICIPATING IN THE ATHLETIC PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 733

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3