START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 241 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 241 
(Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - Housing and Community 
Development) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Just Community Designation 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Governor, on the recommendation of the Secretary of 
Housing and Community Development, to designate an area as a “Just Community” if the 
secretary determines that the area meets specified criteria. The bill also (1) establishes 
related findings and the intent of the General Assembly that the Just Community 
designation be used to prioritize State funding to increase racial, economic, and health 
equity in the State and (2) requires the Governor to identify State programs under which a 
Just Community must receive priority for State funding, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) plans 
to implement the bill with existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. The bill does 
not affect overall State funding for existing programs, but the distribution of such funding 
may be affected by the prioritization of funding for designated Just Communities. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Overall, local government finances are not anticipated to be materially 
affected, but the distribution of State funding to local governments may be affected by the 
prioritization of funding for designated Just Communities. Local governments that serve 
designated Just Communities may benefit, while others may be negatively affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHCD has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with 
this assessment as discussed below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 241/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Just Community” means the part of a priority funding area that, as 
determined by the Governor, meets specified criteria established under the bill. 
 
The Governor, on the recommendation of the Secretary of Housing and Community 
Development, may designate an area as a Just Community if the Secretary demonstrates 
that past and current trends in homeownership, property values, commercial and residential 
vacancy, and business or housing investment show a need for reinvestment in the area. In 
addition, the area must also have been negatively impacted by a history of (1) forms of 
legal racial segregation, as specified; (2) the demolition of residential neighborhoods 
through the use of eminent domain or State or federal funding; (3) a State imprisonment 
rate higher than 750 per 100,000 persons; or (4) unequal exposure to environmental and 
health hazards, as specified. 
 
To maintain a Just Community designation, every five years the Secretary must make 
designation recommendations for approval by the Governor. 
 
At the time Just Communities are designated or renewed, the Governor must identify State 
programs under which a Just Community must receive priority for State funding. However, 
the prioritization of State funding for Just Communities must not supersede other program 
requirements specified in State law. 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
Among other responsibilities, DHCD provides financing for the economic development 
and maintenance of affordable housing and communities in Maryland. DHCD also 
provides funding for community revitalization projects. As passed by the 
General Assembly, the fiscal 2025 capital and operating budgets include a mixture of 
general obligation bond funds, general funds, special funds, and federal funds for the 
following DHCD programs that provide assistance to homebuyers and facilitate 
community revitalization in Maryland:   
 
 
Strategic Demolition Fund ($60.0 million); 
 
Housing and Building Energy Programs ($38.4 million); 
 
Neighborhood Business Development Program ($28.3 million); 
 
Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative ($20.7 million); 
 
Homeownership Programs ($21.0 million);  
 
Special Loan Programs ($13.4 million); 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 241/ Page 3 
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program ($19.0 million); 
 
Community Development Block Grant Program ($12.0 million); 
 
Seed Community Development Anchor Institution Fund ($10.0 million); 
 
Appraisal Gap Program ($10.0 million); 
 
Downtown Partnership of Baltimore ($9.0 million); 
 
Community Legacy Program ($8.0 million); and 
 
Business Façade Improvement Program ($5.0 million). 
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas 
 
A sustainable community is defined as a part of a priority funding area that (1) is designated 
by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the Secretary of Housing and 
Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base Realignment and Closure 
Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a transit-oriented development. 
 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors. 
 
Designation of Just Communities 
 
DHCD advises that it recently hired an Assistant Secretary of Just Communities and that it 
is actively hiring staff to work with the assistant secretary to assist in the designation of 
Just Communities. DHCD intends to use the designation of Just Communities to prioritize 
funding applications for existing programs. 
 
According to DHCD, the use of the Just Community designation is intended to rectify past 
adverse State action toward communities victimized by exclusionary place-based policies. 
Such policies included historical redlining, federal highway placement that divided 
communities, and other forms of racial segregation. DHCD further advises that by 
concentrating investment in areas that have been historically excluded from the benefits of 
State resources, the people living in those communities should benefit from additional State 
programs. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 241/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  DHCD plans to implement the bill with existing budgeted resources, 
as discussed below. The bill does not affect overall State funding for existing programs, 
but the distribution of such funding may be affected by the prioritization of funding for 
designated Just Communities. 
 
Designation of Just Communities 
 
DHCD advises that it anticipates that the newly hired Assistant Secretary of Just 
Communities and future staff can handle the data collection and analysis necessary for 
determining Just Community designations using existing budgeted resources. However, 
DLS notes that DHCD previously advised that this effort would require hiring a consultant 
at a one-time cost of $325,000 in fiscal 2025 only. Accordingly, to the extent existing staff 
cannot implement the bill, general fund expenditures may increase (in fiscal 2025 only) to 
hire a consultant. 
 
Prioritization of State Funding for Just Communities 
 
As discussed above, the bill requires the Governor to identify State programs under which 
a Just Community must receive priority for State funding. (However, pursuant to the bill, 
the prioritization of State funding for Just Communities must not supersede other program 
requirements specified in State law.) Accordingly, while overall State funding for existing 
programs is not affected, the designation of Just Communities may affect the distribution 
of such funding. 
 
Small Business Effect:  While the bill does not affect overall State funding available for 
existing State programs that provide funding to small businesses, small businesses located 
in Just Communities are given priority over businesses not in those areas in receiving State 
funding awarded to private entities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 308 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Housing and Community Development) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 241/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 241/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Housing and Community Development - Just Community Designation 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB 241 
 
PREPARED BY:  Chuck Cook, Chief Legislative Officer, DHCD 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
No anticipated impact on small businesses. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6