START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 230 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 230 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Transportation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicle Administration and Local Health Departments - Death 
Certificates - Issuance of Copies 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to (1) access 
and issue copies of death certificates and (2) set and collect corresponding fees. The bill 
also clarifies that local health departments (LHDs) have this same authority. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
increase by $83,000 in FY 2025, including $40,000 in one-time-only software development 
costs. Future years reflect ongoing costs. The Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT) can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. Minimal increase in 
general fund revenues beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$83,000 
$43,000 
$43,000 
$43,000 
$43,000 
Net Effect 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  LHD revenues and expenditures may decrease minimally beginning in 
FY 2025, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDOT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 230/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MVA may electronically access a certified or abridged copy of a death 
certificate from MDH. MVA may issue a copy of a death certificate to any authorized 
person on request.  
 
MVA may set and collect a fee for processing and issuing a death certificate to cover its 
administrative costs. The fee set by MVA for this service may not exceed its actual costs. 
From the fee MVA collects, $10 must be transferred to the general fund. 
 
When processing and issuing the death certificate of a first responder, MVA may not 
collect a fee if the death certificate is issued to a surviving spouse or child of a 
first responder, killed in the line of duty, and will be used in connection with a claim for a 
dependent or beneficiary of the first responder.  
 
Current Law:  The Division of Vital Records in MDH maintains a statewide system for 
registering, indexing, filing, and protecting all records of birth, death, fetal death, marriage 
and divorce, adoption, and legitimation and adjudication of paternity for events occurring 
in Maryland.  
 
The Secretary of Health must provide, on request, any person authorized by applicable 
regulations with a certified or abridged copy of a birth, death, fetal death, or marriage (for 
a marriage performed after June 1, 1951) certificate. 
 
LHDs and MVA may electronically access a certified or abridged copy of a birth certificate 
from MDH and, on request, may process and issue a birth certificate to an authorized 
person (or a report that a search of the files was made and the requested birth certificate is 
not on file). MVA or an LHD may set and collect a fee for processing and issuing a birth 
certificate, or for a report that a search of the files was made and the requested record is 
not on file, that covers administrative costs. The fee may not exceed the actual costs to 
MVA or the LHD. Of this fee, $10 must be transferred to the general fund. 
 
LHDs may also process and issue a death certificate to an authorized person (or a report 
that a search of the files was made and the requested death certificate is not on file). The 
fee set by an LHD for processing and issuing a death certificate may not exceed the actual 
costs to the LHD. An LHD is prohibited from collecting a fee for processing and issuing a 
copy of a death certificate of a first responder, killed in the line of duty, if the copy is issued 
to a surviving spouse or child of the first responder and will be used in connection with a 
claim for a dependent or beneficiary of the first responder. 
 
Background:  Chapter 526 of 2018 authorized MVA to electronically access copies of 
birth certificates from MDH and issue copies of birth certificates to any authorized person 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 230/ Page 3 
on request. This authorization allowed MVA to issue birth certificates, at participating 
MVA locations, to customers applying for a driver’s license or identification card who 
were required to present a copy of their birth certificates to apply but forgot to bring their 
birth certificates or were unable to locate one. MVA advises that this initiative has 
improved its customer service experience by reducing the number of repeat visits and 
delays for customers needing to obtain a driver’s license or identification card.  
 
According to MVA, a similar improvement in customer service experience could occur 
under the bill. Permitting MVA to issue death certificates would help customers seeking to 
complete a title transfer of a vehicle (in the case of a deceased owner) by preventing them 
from having to reschedule an appointment at participating MVA locations if they forget to 
bring a copy of the required death certificate with them.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH advises that it currently uses a Work Order Management System (WOMS) to issue 
death certificates. WOMS operates via MD THINK (The Maryland “Total Human-services 
Integrated Network”), a cloud-based shared services platform and data repository shared 
among State agencies to integrate access to programs administered by various State 
agencies. To implement the bill, MDH must (1) update WOMS to allow MVA access to 
the system; (2) add an additional server to MD THINK to support the addition of MVA 
users; and (3) provide training to MVA users on WOMS. MDH advises that LHDs already 
have access to WOMS. 
 
Accordingly, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $82,961 in fiscal 2025. This 
estimate reflects the following:   
 
 
$40,000 in one-time-only contractual expenses for a software developer to make 
necessary revisions to WOMS in order to provide MVA access to the system; and 
 
$42,961 in ongoing operating expenses, including (1) $29,601 for an additional 
software license for the MD THINK platform; (2) $10,000 for an additional 
MD THINK server; and (3) $3,360 for an additional software license to process 
payments when issuing vital records. 
 
Any training to MVA users on WOMS can be provided using existing budgeted resources. 
Beginning in fiscal 2026, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $42,961 to reflect 
ongoing operating expenses described above. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 230/ Page 4 
Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
MDOT advises that MVA can handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources, 
including any necessary computer programming changes. Further, MDOT advises that, as 
all security and audit requirements to provide the issuance of death certificates at MVA 
locations would be implemented according to MDH requirements prior to service 
availability, the bill does not present any security concerns. MDOT notes that full 
implementation would not begin immediately but would be phased in over time; however, 
MDOT did not provide a specific timeline. 
 
MDOT anticipates charging a $10 fee for each copy of a death certificate. As required 
under the bill, $10 of any fee collected by MVA must be transferred to the general fund as 
is currently done with the fees MVA collects for birth certificates. MDOT did not provide 
an estimate of how many death certificates may be issued. MDOT advises that MVA has 
processed nearly 24,000 title transfers since 2021; however, it does not have data available 
showing how frequently customers arrive at an MVA branch without a death certificate to 
complete their titling transaction and, thus, have to reschedule their visit. 
 
Accordingly, any fees collected by MVA accrue to the general fund. To the extent these 
transactions are for death certificates that would not otherwise be obtained, general fund 
revenues increase minimally. The amount of the increase cannot be reliably quantified at 
this time. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland Association of County Health Officers (MACHO) 
advises that it does not anticipate a financial or operational impact to LHDs under the bill, 
assuming that MVA (1) only issues death certificates at the six MVA locations where it 
currently issues birth certificates and (2) does not actively promote itself as a destination 
to obtain death certificates. According to MACHO, MVA has been issuing birth certificates 
at these six locations for approximately five years and has not requested authorization from 
MDH to expand to additional locations. To the extent that MVA expands the issuance of 
death certificates to other MVA locations, MACHO advises that there may be an impact to 
LHDs. 
 
DLS advises that, to the extent the bill results in an increase in demand for copies of death 
certificates from MVA, and a corresponding decrease in demand for copies from LHDs, 
revenues and expenditures for LHDs may decrease beginning as early as fiscal 2025. 
However, any decrease is expected to be minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 230/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 267 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Transportation) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 230/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Motor Vehicle Administration - Death Certificates - Issuance of Copies 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 230 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Maryland Motor Vehicle Administration 
 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 6