START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 618

Chapter 618

(House Bill 262)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Consumer Reporting Agencies – Information in
Consumer Credit Reports

FOR the purpose of altering the items of information that a consumer reporting agency is
prohibited from including in a consumer credit report; and generally relating to
consumer reporting agencies and consumer credit reports.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 14–1203
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

14–1203.

(a) Except as authorized under subsection (b) of this section, no consumer
reporting agency may make any consumer report containing any of the following items of
information:

(1) Bankruptcies which, from date of adjudication of the most recent
bankruptcy, antedate the report by more than 10 years;

(2) Suits and judgments which, from date of entry, antedate the report by
more than seven years or until the governing statute of limitations has expired, whichever
is the longer period;

(3) Paid tax liens which, from date of payment, antedate the report by more
than seven years;

(4) Accounts placed for collection or charged to profit and loss which
antedate the report by more than seven years;

(5) Records of arrest, indictment, or conviction of crime which, from date of
disposition, release, or parole, antedate the report by more than seven years; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 618 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) Any other adverse item of information which antedates the report by
more than seven years.

(b) The provisions of subsection (a) of this section are not applicable in the case of
any consumer credit report to be used in connection with:

(1) A credit transaction involving, or which may reasonably be expected to
involve, a principal amount of [$50,000] $150,000 or more;

(2) The underwriting of life insurance involving, or which may reasonably
be expected to involve, a face amount of [$50,000] $150,000 or more; or

(3) The employment of any individual at an annual salary which equals, or
which may reasonably be expected to equal, [$20,000] $75,000 or more.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2