START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 406

Chapter 406

(House Bill 230)

AN ACT concerning

Motor Vehicle Administration and Local Health Departments – Death
Certificates – Issuance of Copies

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Motor Vehicle Administration and local health
departments to access electronically from the Maryland Department of Health a copy
of a death certificate and, on request, provide any person authorized by regulations
with a certified or abridged copy of a death certificate; authorizing the
Administration and local health departments to set and collect a fee for processing
and issuing death certificates, subject to certain limitations; and generally relating
to the issuance of copies of death certificates.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–217(a), (c), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

4–217.

(a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the Secretary shall
provide, on request, any person authorized by regulations adopted under this subtitle with
a certified or abridged copy of a birth, death, or fetal death certificate registered under this
subtitle or of the certificate of a marriage performed after June 1, 1951.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section and subject to
subsection (h) of this section, a local health department or the Motor Vehicle
Administration may:

(i) Access electronically from the Department a certified or abridged
copy of a birth certificate OR DEATH CERTIFICATE registered under this subtitle; and

(ii) On request, provide any person authorized by regulations
adopted under this subtitle with a certified or abridged copy of a birth certificate OR DEATH
CERTIFICATE registered under this subtitle.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 406 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) (i) The Secretary shall provide on request, to any person authorized
by regulation adopted under this subtitle, a commemorative birth certificate.

(ii) The Department shall set a fee for the commemorative birth
certificate.

(iii) The commemorative birth certificate shall:

1. Be in a form consistent with the need to protect the
integrity of vital records but suitable for display; and

2. Have the same status as evidence as the original birth
certificate.

(iv) A portion of the funds collected under this paragraph shall go to
the Department for the production costs of issuing the commemorative birth certificates.
The remainder of the funds collected shall be paid into the Children’s Trust Fund
established under § 13–2207 of this article to provide funding for the Child Abuse Medical
Providers (Maryland CHAMP) Initiative.

(v) The Secretary shall adopt regulations to implement the
provisions of this paragraph.

(c) (1) Except as otherwise provided by law:

(i) The Department shall collect a $12 fee:

1. For each certified or abridged copy of a fetal death,
marriage, or divorce verification certificate;

2. For a report that a search of the fetal death, marriage, or
divorce verification certificate files was made and the requested record is not on file;

3. For each change to a fetal death, marriage, or divorce
verification certificate made later than [one] 1 year after the certificate has been registered
with the Department; or

4. To process an adoption, foreign adoption, or legitimation;

(ii) The Department shall collect a $10 fee:

1. Except as provided in paragraph (6)(ii) of this subsection,
for each certified or abridged copy of a birth certificate;

2. For the first copy of a certified or abridged death certificate
issued in a single transaction;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 406

3. For a report that a search of the birth or death certificate
files was made and the requested record is not on file; or

4. For each change to a birth or death certificate made later
than 1 year after the certificate has been registered with the Department; and

(iii) The Department shall collect a $12 fee for each additional
certified or abridged copy of a death certificate provided concurrently with an initial
requested death certificate.

(2) From the fee the Department collects under paragraph (1) of this
subsection, the Department shall transfer the entire fee to the General Fund.

(3) (i) Any local health department or the Motor Vehicle
Administration may set and collect a fee for processing and issuing a birth certificate OR
DEATH CERTIFICATE, or for a report that a search of the files was made and the requested
record is not on file, that covers:

1. The administrative costs of providing this service; and

2. The requirements of subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph.

(ii) The fee set by the local health department or the Motor Vehicle
Administration for processing and issuing a birth certificate or for a report under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph may not exceed the actual costs to the local health
department or the Motor Vehicle Administration for processing and issuing a birth
certificate OR DEATH CERTIFICATE or a report.

(iii) From the fee the local health department or the Motor Vehicle
Administration collects under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, $10 shall be transferred
to the General Fund.

(iv) Prior to setting and collecting a fee for processing and issuing a
birth certificate OR DEATH CERTIFICATE or for a report under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, the local health department or the Motor Vehicle Administration shall enter
into a memorandum of understanding with the Maryland Department of Health that
outlines the local health department’s or the Motor Vehicle Administration’s fee structure.

(4) The Department, a local health department, or the Motor Vehicle
Administration may collect a fee for a certificate requested by an agency of the State or any
of its political subdivisions.

(5) The Secretary may waive all or part of a fee if chargeable to an agency
of the United States.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 406 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) (i) The Department may not collect a fee for a copy of a vital record
issued to:

1. A current or former member of the armed forces of the
United States; or

2. The surviving spouse or child of the member, if the copy
will be used in connection with a claim for a dependent or beneficiary of the member.

(ii) 1. In this subparagraph, “homeless individual” has the
meaning stated in the federal McKinney–Vento Homeless Education Assistance
Improvements Act of 2001 [(42 U.S.C. § 11302(a))].

2. Subject to subsubparagraph 4 of this subparagraph, the
Department may not collect a fee for a certified or an abridged copy of a birth certificate
issued to a homeless individual.

3. The Department shall accept as proof of homelessness a
signed written statement from a homeless services provider located in the State that:

A. Affirms that the individual is homeless; and

B. Includes the address to which the copy of the birth
certificate requested under this section may be sent.

4. A homeless individual may receive one copy of a birth
certificate without a fee in a single transaction.

5. The Department shall adopt regulations to implement this
subparagraph.

(iii) The Department may not collect a fee for a certified or abridged
copy of a death certificate of a first responder, as defined in § 18–213.2 of this article, killed
in the line of duty, if the copy is issued to a surviving spouse or child of the first responder
and will be used in connection with a claim for a dependent or beneficiary of the first
responder.

(d) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, any
local health department OR THE MOTOR VEHICLE ADMINISTRATION may set and collect
a fee for processing and issuing a death certificate that covers the administrative costs of
providing this service.

(ii) A local health department OR THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION may not collect a fee for processing and issuing a certified or abridged
copy of a death certificate of a first responder, as defined in § 18–213.2 of this article, killed
in the line of duty, if the copy is issued to a surviving spouse or child of the first responder

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 406

and will be used in connection with a claim for a dependent or beneficiary of the first
responder.

(2) The fee set by the local health department OR THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION for processing and issuing a death certificate under this subsection may
not exceed the actual costs to the local health department OR THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION for processing and issuing a death certificate.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5