START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 364 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 364 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prince George's County - Stop Sign Monitoring Systems - Authorization  
PG 301-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes, for five years, the use of stop sign monitoring systems on State and 
local highways located in a school zone in Prince George’s County to record violations of 
State law requiring obedience to stop signs. Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received 
a citation from a police officer at the time, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject 
to a civil penalty of up to $40 if the motor vehicle is recorded by a stop sign monitoring 
system during commission of the violation. The bill expands existing statutory provisions 
governing collection and disposition of fines collected as a result of automated monitoring 
systems to apply to stop sign monitoring systems. The District Court has exclusive original 
civil jurisdiction in a civil infraction under the bill. In consultation with law enforcement 
agencies, the Chief Judge of the District Court must adopt procedures for the issuance of 
citations, trials for violations, and the collection of civil penalties imposed under the bill. 
The bill also establishes a reporting requirement for Prince George’s County related to 
implementation. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Because the bill is authorizing in nature, the impact on State finances 
generally depends on the extent to which the systems are deployed in 
Prince George’s County, as discussed below. Nevertheless, the District Court must be 
prepared should any systems be deployed, with programming costs totaling $11,100 in 
FY 2025 only. The District Court can likely adopt procedures as required under the bill 
with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature. The impact on local government finances 
depends on the extent to which the systems are deployed in Prince George’s County, as 
discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 364/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Agency” means a law enforcement agency that is authorized to issue a citation for a 
violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law or of local traffic laws or regulations. 
 
“Stop sign monitoring system” means a device designed to capture a recorded image of a 
violation. “Violation,” as defined under the bill, means a violation of specified offenses 
under the Maryland Vehicle Law relating to a failure to come to a complete stop at a stop 
sign. 
 
“Owner” means the registered owner of a motor vehicle or a lessee of a motor vehicle under 
a lease of six months or more. “Owner” does not include a motor vehicle leasing company 
or a specified holder of a special registration plate.  
 
“Recorded image” means images recorded by a stop sign monitoring system (1) on at least 
two photographs, microphotographs, or electronic images; on videotape; or on any other 
medium and (2) showing a motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of tape, 
clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.  
 
Issuance of Citations and Collection and Disposition of Fines  
 
The bill expands existing statutory provisions governing the issuance of citations and the 
collection and disposition of fines collected as a result of automated monitoring systems to 
apply to stop sign monitoring systems. Accordingly, a citation issued as a result of a stop 
sign monitoring system controlled by a political subdivision must provide that, in an 
uncontested case, the penalty be paid directly to the political subdivision; a citation issued 
as a result of a stop sign monitoring system in a case contested in District Court must 
provide that the penalty be paid directly to the District Court. Civil penalties resulting from 
citations issued using a stop sign monitoring system that are collected by the District Court 
must be collected and distributed in accordance with existing statutory provisions.  
 
A political subdivision is not explicitly authorized to recover the costs of implementing 
and administering stop sign monitoring systems from fines collected by the political 
subdivision as a result of violations enforced by stop sign monitoring systems. 
Nevertheless, a political subdivision may spend the “remaining balance” solely for public 
safety purposes, including pedestrian safety programs, as specified under existing statutory 
provisions.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 364/ Page 3 
Admissibility of Recorded Images as Evidence  
 
Consistent with existing evidentiary provisions pertaining to images recorded by 
automated monitoring systems, a recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a stop 
sign monitoring system in accordance with the bill is admissible in a proceeding concerning 
a civil citation issued under the bill for a violation of specified offenses without 
authentication. In any other judicial proceeding, a recorded image produced by a stop sign 
monitoring system is admissible as otherwise provided by law.  
 
Authorized Use of Stop Sign Monitoring Systems 
 
An agency may use stop sign monitoring systems (1) on highways located in a school zone 
maintained by a local jurisdiction, if authorized by the governing body of the local 
jurisdiction or (2) on State highways located in a school zone, if authorized by the State 
Highway Administration (SHA). A stop sign monitoring system may not be used in a local 
jurisdiction unless its use is authorized by the governing body of the local jurisdiction by 
local law enacted after reasonable notice and a public hearing and may only be used at a 
location approved by the Prince George’s County Council. The county must prioritize the 
placement of stop sign monitoring systems within municipalities that have high violation 
rates.  
 
Required Approval and Notice  
 
Before beginning the use of stop sign monitoring systems, an agency must publish notice 
that the agency has adopted the use of stop sign monitoring systems on its website and in 
a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction in which the stop sign monitoring 
system will be used.  
 
Required Signage  
 
Prince George’s County must prominently place signs on highways within the county 
providing notice that stop sign monitoring systems are in use in the county. Similarly, SHA 
must place signs prominently providing notice that stop sign monitoring systems are in use 
on State highways. 
 
Recorded Violations 
 
A recorded image by a stop sign monitoring system indicating that the driver of a motor 
vehicle has committed a violation must include specified information.  
 
Unless the driver of the motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time 
of the violation, the owner or driver of a motor vehicle is subject to a civil penalty of up to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 364/ Page 4 
$40 if the motor vehicle is recorded by a stop sign monitoring system during the 
commission of a violation. The District Court must prescribe a uniform citation form, as 
specified, and a civil penalty, which must be indicated on the citation, to be paid by persons 
who choose to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court.  
 
Citations  
 
An agency generally must mail to the owner liable for a violation recorded by a stop sign 
monitoring system a citation that includes specified information in accordance with the 
bill. The agency may mail a warning notice in place of a citation. Generally, a citation must 
be issued within two weeks of the alleged violation. A person who receives a citation may 
pay the civil penalty in accordance with the instructions on the citation or elect to stand 
trial.  
 
Certifications Alleging a Violation  
 
A certification alleging that a violation occurred, sworn to or affirmed by a duly authorized 
law enforcement officer employed by (or under contract with) an agency, based on the 
inspection of a recorded image, is evidence of the facts contained in the certificate and is 
admissible in any proceeding concerning the alleged violation. Adjudication of liability 
must be based on a preponderance of the evidence.  
 
Defense of Violations  
 
The District Court may consider in defense of a violation (1) that the motor vehicle or 
registration plates of the motor vehicle were stolen before the violation occurred and were 
not under the control or possession of the owner at the time of the violation; (2) evidence 
that the person named in the citation was not operating the vehicle at the time of the 
violation; and (3) any other issues and evidence that the District Court considers pertinent, 
as specified.  
 
If the District Court finds that the person named in the citation was not operating the vehicle 
at the time of the violation or receives specified evidence identifying the person driving the 
vehicle at the time of the violation, the clerk of the court must provide the agency issuing 
the citation a copy of any evidence substantiating who was operating the vehicle at the time 
of the violation. The issuing agency may, within two weeks of receipt of such evidence, 
issue a citation to the person whom the evidence indicates was operating the vehicle at the 
time of the violation.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 364/ Page 5 
Penalties  
 
If the citation is not paid and the violation not contested, the Motor Vehicle Administration 
may refuse to register or reregister or may suspend the registration of the motor vehicle. A 
violation for which a civil penalty is imposed is not a moving violation for the purpose of 
points assessment, may not be recorded on the driving record of the owner or driver of the 
vehicle, and may not be considered in the provision of motor vehicle insurance.  
 
Requirements for Administering Agencies and Contractors  
 
Any agency, or an agent or contractor designated by the agency, must administer and 
process civil citations issued under the bill in coordination with the District Court. A 
contractor’s fee may not be contingent on a pre-ticket basis on the number of citations 
issued or paid.  
 
Reporting Requirement  
 
By December 1, 2025, the Prince George’s County Department of Public Works and 
Transportation must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on: 
 
 
the time period during which stop sign monitoring systems were in use in the county 
and the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of violations recorded 
over the reported time period, by location and date (through October 1, 2025); 
 
the costs associated with implementing and operating stop sign monitoring systems 
and the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations; 
 
appropriate locations for the deployment of stop sign monitoring systems;  
 
the performance and reliability of stop sign monitoring systems used by the county; 
and 
 
the effectiveness of stop sign monitoring systems in reducing violations, crashes, 
and pedestrian injuries in the county and in areas where the systems were 
implemented and used. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Required Stops when Approaching a Stop Sign 
 
Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver of a vehicle 
approaching a stop sign at an intersection must:   
 
 
stop at the near side of the intersection at a clearly marked stop line; 
 
stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no clearly marked stop line, 
before entering any crosswalk; and 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 364/ Page 6 
 
stop at the near side of an intersection and, if there is no crosswalk, at the nearest 
point before entering the intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic 
approaching on the intersecting roadway. 
 
A violation of any of these requirements is a misdemeanor with a maximum $500 fine. The 
prepayment penalty is $90 with one point assessed against the license. If the violation 
contributes to an accident, the prepayment penalty is $130 and three points must be 
assessed against the license. 
 
Automated Monitoring Systems  
 
State law authorizes the use of various automated monitoring systems, including traffic 
control system monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring 
systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed control systems.  
 
State Revenues:  To the extent the District Court collects fines for contested citations 
issued under the bill, general fund revenues increase from fiscal 2025 through 2029. Any 
such impact depends on the extent to which stop sign monitoring systems are deployed in 
Prince George’s County and the amount of the fine established for a violation.  
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, the bill authorizes the use of stop sign monitoring 
systems in school zones by specified law enforcement agencies in Prince George’s County 
and other specified local agencies. The impact on State expenditures depends on the extent 
to which stop sign monitoring system programs are implemented in the county.  
 
To the extent that stop sign monitoring systems are used on State highways in 
Prince George’s County, Transportation Trust Fund expenditures increase for SHA to 
install required signage and for potential planning costs. Any costs are assumed to 
terminate after fiscal 2029. 
 
In addition, in anticipation of any stop sign monitoring systems being deployed by State 
and/or local agencies in Prince George’s County, general fund expenditures for the 
District Court increase for programming changes necessary to collect payments for 
citations that may be issued under the bill. Programming-related costs total approximately 
$11,100.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent that Prince George’s County and/or political 
subdivisions within the county deploy stop sign monitoring systems in school zones, local 
government expenditures increase from fiscal 2025 through 2029 as a result of start-up 
costs, ongoing implementation costs, and for public safety purposes. Local revenues also 
increase over the same time period to the extent local jurisdictions collect penalties from 
citations issued as a result of locally controlled stop sign monitoring systems. As the bill 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 364/ Page 7 
does not explicitly allow for cost recovery (as for other automated enforcement systems), 
revenues are assumed to be expended exclusively for public safety purposes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7