START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 319

Chapter 319

(House Bill 326)

AN ACT concerning

Estates and Trusts – Appointment of Personal Representative – Objections

FOR the purpose of authorizing only an interested person or unpaid claimant, rather than
any person, to file an objection to the appointment of a personal representative of an
estate of a decedent; and generally relating to personal representatives.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Estates and Trusts
Section 7–103
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Estates and Trusts

7–103.

(a) (1) After the appointment of a personal representative, the register shall
have a notice of the appointment published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county of appointment once a week in 3 successive weeks, announcing the appointment and
address of the personal representative, and notifying creditors of the estate to present their
claims.

(2) The personal representative shall file or have filed with the register a
certification that a notice has been published.

(b) The notice of appointment shall be substantially in the following form:

“To all persons interested in the estate of.......................:

This is to give notice that the undersigned, ……… whose address is ……… was, on
………, appointed personal representative of the estate of ……… who died on …… (with)
(without) a will.

[All persons having any objection to the appointment (or to the probate of the will of
the decedent) shall file the same with the register of wills on or before 6 months from the
date of the appointment.]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 319 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ALL INTERESTED PERSONS OR UNPAID CLAIMANTS HAVING ANY OBJECTION
TO THE APPOINTMENT OF THE PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE SHALL FILE THE SAME
WITH THE REGISTER OF WILLS ON OR BEFORE 6 MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF THE
APPOINTMENT.

ALL PERSONS HAVING ANY OBJECTION TO THE PROBATE OF THE WILL OF THE
DECEDENT SHALL FILE THE SAME WITH THE REGISTER OF WILLS ON OR BEFORE 6
MONTHS FROM THE DATE OF THE APPOINTMENT.

All persons having claims against the decedent must present their claims to the
undersigned, or file them with the register of wills on or before the earlier of the following
dates:

(1) 6 months from the date of the decedent’s death; or

(2) 2 months after the personal representative mails or otherwise delivers
to the creditor a copy of this published notice or other written notice, notifying the creditor
that the creditor’s claim will be barred unless the creditor presents the claim within 2
months from the mailing or other delivery of the notice.

Any claim not filed on or before that date, or any extension provided by law, is
unenforceable thereafter.

……………………………
Personal representative
Date of first publication:
……………………………”.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2