START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 840

Chapter 840

(House Bill 353)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Department of Health – 2–1–1 Maryland – Oversight

FOR the purpose of defining the term “Health and Human Services Referral System” for
the purposes of certain provisions of law governing the System to mean a certain
coordinated system for health and human service resources that is accessible to State
residents, rather than a certain telephone service; altering the definition of “2–1–1
Maryland” to clarify that it is the entity that administers the 2–1–1 system in the
State; repealing the requirement that the Maryland Department of Health evaluate
the performance of certain call centers and make certain recommendations regarding
the quality of service provided by call centers and corrective action to be taken by a
call center; and generally relating to 2–1–1 Maryland.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 24–1201 through 24–1204
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

24–1201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Health and Human Services Referral System” means [telephone service that
automatically connects an individual dialing the digits 2–1–1 to an established information
and referral answering point] A COORDINATED SYSTEM FOR HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICE RESOURCES ACCESSIBLE TO ALL STATE RESIDENTS THROUGH 2–1–1 AND
OTHER DESIGNATED TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS.

(c) “2–1–1” means the abbreviated dialing code assigned by the Federal
Communications Commission for consumer access to community information and referral
services.

(d) “2–1–1 Maryland” means the Maryland Information Network, 2–1–1
Maryland, a 501(c)(3) corporation in the State THAT ADMINISTERS THE 2–1–1 SYSTEM.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 840 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(e) “2–1–1 Maryland call center” means a nonprofit agency or organization
designated by 2–1–1 Maryland to provide 2–1–1 services.

24–1202.

(a) The General Assembly:

(1) Recognizes the importance of a statewide information and referral
system for health and human services;

(2) Recognizes that an integrated [telephone] TECHNOLOGY system
would provide ACCESS TO a single source for information and referral to health and human
services, community preparedness, and [crisis information] BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE
COORDINATION and could be accessed toll free from anywhere in Maryland, 24 hours a
day, 365 days a year;

(3) Acknowledges that the three–digit number, 2–1–1, is a nationally
recognized and applied telephone number which may be used for information and referral
and eliminates delays caused by lack of familiarity with health and human services
numbers and by understandable confusion in circumstances of crisis; and

(4) Recognizes a demonstrated need for an easy to remember, easy to use
telephone number that will enable individuals in need to be directed to available
community resources.

(b) The purpose of this subtitle is to establish the three–digit number, 2–1–1, as
the primary information and referral telephone number for health and human services in
the State.

24–1203.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, an agency or organization
shall be approved by 2–1–1 Maryland as a 2–1–1 Maryland call center in order to provide
2–1–1 services in the State.

(b) When approving a 2–1–1 service provider, 2–1–1 Maryland shall consider:

(1) The ability of the proposed 2–1–1 service provider to meet the national
2–1–1 standards recommended by:

(i) The Alliance of Information and Referral Systems and adopted
by the National 2–1–1 Collaborative; or

(ii) An equivalent entity;

(2) The financial stability of the proposed 2–1–1 service provider;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 840

(3) Any community support for the proposed 2–1–1 service provider;

(4) Any experience that the proposed 2–1–1 service provider has with other
information and referral services;

(5) The degree to which the county in which the proposed call center is to
be located has dedicated substantial resources to the establishment of a single telephone
source for non–emergency inquiries regarding county services; and

(6) Any other criteria that 2–1–1 Maryland considers appropriate.

(c) If [a unit] AN AGENCY of the State that provides health and human services
establishes a public information telephone line or hotline, the [unit] AGENCY shall consult
with 2–1–1 Maryland about using the 2–1–1 system to provide public access to information.

24–1204.

(a) The Department shall, in consultation with 2–1–1 Maryland, as appropriate:

(1) Maintain public information available from State agencies, programs,
and departments that provide health and human services;

(2) Support projects and activities that further the development of 2–1–1
Maryland;

(3) Examine and make recommendations to maximize the use of
information technology in making 2–1–1 services available throughout the State; AND

[(4) Evaluate the performance of each 2–1–1 Maryland call center;

(5) Make recommendations to 2–1–1 Maryland regarding the quality of
service provided by call centers or the performance of call centers when issues related to
service quality and performance are presented to the Department;

(6) Make recommendations regarding corrective action to be taken by a call
center, as appropriate; and

(7)] (4) Make recommendations to 2–1–1 Maryland regarding the
establishment of an opt–in mental health services phone call program that:

(i) Requires a call center to call individuals who have opted in to the
mental health services phone call program on a periodic basis, as determined by 2–1–1
Maryland; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 840 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Attempts to connect individuals to a provider of mental health
services if the individual requests to speak to a mental health provider during a call with
2–1–1 Maryland.

(b) The Governor may include in the annual budget bill an appropriation to the
Department in an amount sufficient to carry out subsection [(a)(7)] (A)(4) of this section.

(c) On or before December 31, 2005, and every year thereafter, the Department,
in consultation with 2–1–1 Maryland, shall report to the Governor and, subject to § 2–1257
of the State Government Article, to the General Assembly on the activities performed under
subsection (a) of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) It is the intent of the General Assembly that the 2–1–1 Maryland board of
directors be expanded to include two representatives of 2–1–1 Maryland call centers
nominated by the 2–1–1 Maryland call centers.

(b) On or before July 1, 2024, the 2–1–1 Maryland call centers shall nominate two
representatives to serve on the 2–1–1 Maryland board of directors.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4