START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 398 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 398 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Prince George's County - Taxes on Telecommunications Services - Use of 
Revenue  
PG 406-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes Prince George’s County to impose an excise tax on 
telecommunications services in the county of up to $3.50 per month, per telephone line. 
The excise tax may be in addition to the current sales and use tax imposed on 
telecommunications services. The bill enables the Prince George’s County government to 
use the proceeds from the local telecommunications taxes to meet the State funding 
requirements for the local school system under the maintenance of effort (MOE) 
requirement and local share provision. Under current law, revenue proceeds from the 
telecommunications tax cannot be used to supplant local funding required under the MOE 
or local share provision. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues may increase by up to $48.3 million in 
FY 2025 and by $49.3 million in FY 2029. Prince George’s County expenditures (local 
appropriation) for the county school system may decrease by $13.1 million in FY 2025 and 
by $16.0 million in FY 2029.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Prince George’s County imposes a 9% sales and use tax on 
telecommunications services in the county.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 398/ Page 2 
Use of Telecommunications Tax Revenue 
 
At least 90% of the net proceeds of the tax revenue must be used for operating expenditures 
for the Prince George’s County Public School System. The remainder must be used for 
(1) cash payments for capital expenditures for school renovation projects approved by the 
Prince George’s County Board of Education and Prince George’s County or (2) payment 
of debt service on bonds issued by the governing body of Prince George’s County for 
school renovation projects approved by the Prince George’s County Board of Education 
and Prince George’s County. 
 
The proceeds for the local school system may not be used to supplant any State aid for 
education provided to Prince George’s County or any county funds provided to the local 
school system. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of the MOE requirement or 
the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The per pupil MOE amount is 
based upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment and 
(2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. The local share amount equals the 
local share of the foundation formula, compensatory education, English language learner, 
special education, comparable wage index, full-day prekindergarten, college and career 
ready, transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant 
programs. Also, counties that benefit from the compensatory education State funding floor 
are required to fund the local share of the concentration of poverty grant programs. 
However, for some counties, the combined local share across these several programs is 
subject to adjustments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Under the bill, Prince George’s County is authorized to impose an 
excise tax on telecommunications services in the county of up to $3.50 per month, per 
telephone line. The excise tax may be in addition to the current sales and use tax imposed 
on telecommunications services. 
 
Telecommunications Services Excise Tax 
 
Prince George’s County revenues may increase by up to $48.3 million in fiscal 2025 and 
by up to $49.3 million in fiscal 2029. The estimate is based on 1.15 million telephone lines 
in the county and an excise tax rate of $3.50 per month, per line. This revenue may be used 
to meet the county’s MOE and local share provision.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 398/ Page 3 
Sales and Use Tax on Telecommunications Services 
 
The Prince George’s County government must provide the local school system with an 
annual local appropriation that at least equals the MOE or the local share amount. In fiscal 
2025, the county MOE amount is projected to total $872.1 million, and the local share 
amount is projected to total $909.1 million. In addition, the Prince George’s County 
government is required to provide the local school system with a specified portion of both 
the energy/fuel tax and the telecommunications tax. In fiscal 2025, the energy/fuel tax 
payment is projected to total $53.2 million and the telecommunications tax payment is 
projected to total $13.1 million. Under current law, the required payments from both taxes 
cannot be counted toward the local appropriation amount under the MOE and local share 
provisions. The payments are made in addition to the required county MOE and local share 
funding amounts. 
 
Under the bill, the telecommunications tax payment can be used by the county government 
to cover a portion of the required local appropriation under the MOE and local share 
provisions. As a result, this may result in a reduction in county funding for the local school 
system as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Prince George’s County Funding Requirement for the Local School System 
($ in Millions) 
  
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Current Law 
Local Share Provision 
$909.1 
$949.9 
$979.8 
$1,006.2 
$1,041.9 
Energy Tax 
53.2 
55.9 
58.7 
61.6 
64.7 
Telecommunications Tax 
13.1 
13.8 
14.5 
15.2 
16.0 
Total Funding 
$975.5 
$1,019.5 
$1,052.9 
$1,083.0 
$1,122.6 
Under Bill 
Local Share Provision 
$909.1 
$949.9 
$979.8 
$1,006.2 
$1,041.9 
Energy Tax 
53.2 
55.9 
58.7 
61.6 
64.7 
Total Funding 
$962.4 
$1,005.8 
$1,038.4 
$1,067.8 
$1,106.6 
Difference 
-$13.1 
-$13.8 
-$14.5 
-$15.2 
-$16.0 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 398/ Page 4 
Additional information on State and local funding for local school systems is provided in 
the Local Government Overview Report. A copy of the report is available on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Prince 
George’s 
County; 
Comptroller’s 
Office; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4