START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 315 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 315 
(Delegate Bartlett) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Regulated Firearms - Maryland Judiciary - Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement for the Maryland State Commission on Criminal 
Sentencing Policy (MSCCSP) to report to the Governor and the General Assembly, by 
October 1, 2024, and each October thereafter, on the number of charges, convictions, and 
sentences for violations of § 4-203 of the Criminal Law Article (wearing, carrying, or 
transporting handgun) and § 5-133(d) of the Public Safety Article (restrictions on 
possession of regulated firearms) and instead requires the Maryland Judiciary, by  
October 1, 2024, and each October thereafter, to report that same information. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can handle the bill’s reporting requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances are not anticipated to be 
materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Required Report:  Chapter 651 of 2023 requires MSCCSP, by October 1, 2024, and each 
October thereafter, to report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the number of 
charges, convictions, and sentences for violations of § 4-203 of the Criminal Law Article 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 315/ Page 2 
(wearing, carrying, or transporting handgun) and § 5-133(d) of the Public Safety Article 
(restrictions on possession of regulated firearms). 
 
Prohibitions on Wearing, Carrying, or Transporting a Handgun Under § 4-203 of the 
Criminal Law Article:  With specified exceptions, including possession of a handgun 
permit, a person may not (1) wear, carry, or transport a handgun, whether concealed or 
open, on or about the person; (2) wear, carry, or knowingly transport a handgun, whether 
concealed or open, in a vehicle traveling on a road or parking lot generally used by the 
public, highway, waterway, or airway of the State; (3) violate items (1) or (2) listed above 
while on public school property in the State; (4) violate items (1) or (2) listed above with 
the deliberate purpose of injuring or killing another person; or (5) violate items (1) or 
(2) listed above with a handgun loaded with ammunition. There is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person who transports a handgun does so knowingly. A violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to the penalties listed below. The subsequent offender provisions 
apply to previous convictions under § 4-203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun), 
§ 4-204 (use of handgun or antique firearm in commission of crime), § 4-101 (dangerous 
weapons), and § 4-102 (deadly weapons on school property) of the Criminal Law Article, 
as shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 315/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Specified Handgun Violations 
 
First-time Offender – No prior convictions under 
§§ 4-203, 4-204, 4-101, or 4-102 of the Criminal 
Law Article 
In General – Imprisonment for at least 30 days and 
up to 5 years and/or fine of $250 to $2,500. 
 
Offense on Public School Property – Imprisonment 
for at least 90 days. 
 
Subsequent Offender – One prior conviction under 
§§ 4-203, 4-204, 4-101, or 4-102 of the Criminal 
Law Article 
In General – Imprisonment for at least 1 year and 
up to 10 years. 
 
Offense on Public School Property – Imprisonment 
for at least 3 years and up to 10 years. 
 
Court may not impose less than the applicable 
minimum sentence. 
 
Offense with handgun loaded with ammunition – 
With required notice, court may not suspend any 
part of or impose less than the applicable mandatory 
minimum sentence. Person is not eligible for parole 
during mandatory minimum sentence.* 
 
Subsequent Offender – More than one prior 
conviction under §§ 4-203, 4-204, 4-101, or 4-102 
of the Criminal Law Article 
In General – Imprisonment for at least 3 years and 
up to 10 years. 
 
Offense on Public School Property – Imprisonment 
for at least 5 years and up to 10 years. 
 
Offense with Deliberate Purpose of Injuring or 
Killing Another Person – Imprisonment for at least 
5 years and up to 10 years. 
 
Court may not impose less than the applicable 
minimum sentence. 
 
Offense with handgun loaded with ammunition – 
With required notice, court may not suspend any 
part of or impose less than the applicable mandatory 
minimum sentence. Person is not eligible for parole 
during mandatory minimum sentence.* 
 
* Contains exception for § 4-305 of the Correctional Services Article (parole for an inmate at the Patuxent Institution). 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 315/ Page 4 
Prohibition on Possession of a Regulated Firearm Under § 5-133(d) of the Public Safety 
Article:  Generally, a person who is younger than age 21 may not possess a regulated 
firearm. However, unless a person is otherwise prohibited from possessing a regulated 
firearm, the prohibition does not apply to: 
 
 
the temporary transfer or possession of a regulated firearm if the person is under the 
supervision of another who is at least age 21 and who is not prohibited by State or 
federal law from possessing a firearm and acting with the permission of the parent 
or legal guardian of the transferee or person in possession; 
 
the transfer by inheritance of title, and not of possession, of a regulated firearm; 
 
a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or the National Guard while 
performing official duties; 
 
the temporary transfer or possession of a regulated firearm if the person is 
participating in marksmanship training of a recognized organization and under the 
supervision of a qualified instructor; 
 
a person who is required to possess a regulated firearm for employment and who 
holds a handgun permit; or 
 
the possession of a firearm for self–defense or the defense of others against a 
trespasser into the residence of the person in possession or into a residence in which 
the person in possession is an invited guest. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 319 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State Police; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 315/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 15, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5