START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 367 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 367 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Appropriations and Health and 
Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Community Colleges - Contraception - Access Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each community college, in consultation with students and student 
organizations, to develop and implement a plan to provide students with access to 
over-the-counter (OTC) contraception by August 1, 2025. By September 1, 2025, and 
annually thereafter, each community college must report to the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission (MHEC) on implementation of the plan. By October 1, 2025, and annually 
thereafter, MHEC must report to the General Assembly on the information collected. On 
request, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may assist a community college in 
(1) developing a plan and (2) consulting and collaborating with organizations with 
expertise in providing access to OTC contraception through vending machines. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) higher education expenditures 
may increase, particularly in FY 2025 and 2026, as discussed below. To the extent higher 
education expenditures increase, higher education revenues may increase due to fees 
charged to offset costs. MDH may provide assistance using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community college expenditures increase, particularly in FY 2025 
and 2026, as discussed below. To the extent higher education expenditures increase, higher 
education revenues may increase due to fees charged to offset costs. This bill may impose 
a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 367/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The plan must include access to OTC contraception through the student 
health center, campus retail establishments, vending machines, or any other method that 
provides all students access when on campus. 
 
Each community college must include in their annual report to MHEC (1) how students 
are provided access to OTC contraception; (2) available information regarding the amount 
of OTC contraception provided on campus; and (3) a description of how the community 
college has consulted with students and student organizations to develop and implement 
the plan. 
 
MHEC’s first report to the General Assembly, due October 1, 2025, must focus on the 
implementation plans of community colleges that have not implemented access to OTC 
contraception by August 1, 2025. 
 
Current Law:  Community colleges are not currently required to develop and implement 
a plan to provide students with access to OTC contraception. 
 
Chapters 250 and 251 of 2023 require a public senior higher education institution, in 
consultation with students, to develop and implement a reproductive health services plan, 
to provide at the institution or to refer students to a comprehensive range of reproductive 
health services. Each plan must include the provision of or referral to off-campus services 
for obtaining (1) all methods of federal Food and Drug Administration-approved 
contraception, including prescription emergency contraception; (2) prevention and 
treatment services for sexually transmitted infections, including HIV prevention; and 
(3) abortion care services. 
 
Each plan must also include:   
 
 
24-hour access to OTC contraception through the student health center, retail 
establishments on campus, or vending machines; 
 
the availability of evidence-based reproductive health education services provided 
by the student health center, peer educators, or other health education programs; and 
 
development of a referral network of off-campus reproductive health services 
providers, including pharmacies, located within a reasonable proximity to the 
campus. 
 
Plans must be developed by August 1, 2024, and updated annually. In lieu of developing 
and implementing a plan, the University of Baltimore must provide students with access to 
OTC contraception through on-campus retail establishments or vending machines. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 367/ Page 3 
On request, MDH must assist a public senior higher education institution in developing a 
reproductive health services plan. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  BCCC and local community college higher education 
expenditures may increase for some colleges, depending on the contents of their plan. For 
example, some institutions may choose to purchase vending machines. Expenditures may 
be affected, particularly in fiscal 2025 and 2026, for one-time set-up costs. 
 
To the extent that BCCC higher education and local community college higher education 
expenditures increase, it is assumed that higher education revenues from fees charged 
students increase accordingly. Any such increase is generally assumed to be minimal. 
 
MDH advises that a part-time (50%) contractual physician clinical specialist is required to 
assist community colleges in developing their plans. However, the Department of 
Legislative Services advises that, as the bill is straightforward, extensive consultation by 
MDH is likely not needed and minimal consultation can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. Further, MDH is authorized rather than required to assist community colleges 
under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 527 (Senators Kelly and Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3