START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 385 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 385 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Wage Payment and Collection - Pay Stubs and Pay Statements - Required 
Information 
 
 
This bill expands information that an employer must give to an employee for each 
pay period. The notice required under current law of the employee’s rate of pay, regular 
paydays, and leave benefits that an employer must provide to a new employee at the time 
of hiring must be a written notice. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry must create 
and make freely available to employers a pay stub template that employers may use to 
comply with the bill. The bill specifies enforcement provisions, which include authorizing 
the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to (1) issue orders to comply with the bill; 
(2) impose an administrative penalty of up to $500 for each employee who was not 
provided a pay stub or online pay statement in accordance with the bill; and (3) bring an 
action to enforce the orders under specified conditions. An employer may request an 
administrative hearing under specified conditions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be absorbed within existing budgeted 
resources. The State is not subject to the Wage Payment and Collection Law as an 
employer. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not apply to local governments as employers. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 385/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An employer must give to each employee for each pay period, a written 
statement on the physical pay stub or the online pay statement that includes: 
 
 
the employer’s name registered with the State, address, and telephone number; 
 
the date of payment and the beginning and ending dates of the pay period; 
 
the number of hours worked during the pay period, unless the employee is exempt 
from federal and State overtime requirements; 
 
the rates of pay; 
 
the gross and net pay earned during the pay period; 
 
the amount and name of all deductions; 
 
a list of additional bases of pay, including bonuses, commissions on sales, or other 
bases; and 
 
the applicable piece rates of pay and the number of pieces completed at each piece 
rate for each employee paid at a piece rate. 
 
Current Law:  Maryland’s Wage Payment and Collection Law regulates the payment of 
wages by employers in the State. The law requires employers to pay workers the wage 
promised; establish regular paydays; pay wages when due; pay employees in a specified 
manner; pay employees at least once every two weeks or twice in each month, with 
exceptions; furnish employees with a statement of gross earnings; advise employees of 
their rate of pay and designated payday; and pay employees all wages due on termination 
of employment. Maryland Department of Labor’s Division of Labor and Industry enforces 
the State’s Wage Payment and Collection Law. Unless otherwise specified, the definition 
of “employer” in the State’s Wage Payment and Collection Law does not include units of 
government. 
 
At the time of hiring, an employer must provide a new employee with notice of the 
employee’s rate of pay, regular paydays, and leave benefits. For each pay period, an 
employer must provide each employee with a statement of the employee’s gross earnings 
and deductions. An employer must provide notice of any change in a payday or wage at 
least one pay period in advance, but an employer is not prohibited from increasing an 
employee’s wages without advance notice. 
 
The commissioner may investigate a violation of the Wage Payment and Collection Law 
only upon receipt of a written complaint by an employee. Whenever it is determined that 
the State’s Wage Payment and Collection Law has been violated, the commissioner may  
(1) try to resolve the violation informally through mediation; (2) ask the Office of the 
Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the employee; or (3) bring an action on 
behalf of the employee in the county where the violation allegedly occurred. Employers 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 385/ Page 3 
who violate the State’s Wage Payment and Collection Law are guilty of a misdemeanor 
and may be fined up to $1,000. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may incur administrative costs to adjust their 
payroll reporting systems to provide and maintain the required specified information. If a 
small business does not meet payday notice requirements, an employer may be subject to 
an administrative penalty of up to $500 for each employee who was not provided a pay stub 
or online pay statement in accordance with the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 38 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3