START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 383 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 383 
(Delegates Smith and Shetty) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Cosmetology Licensure Compact 
 
 
This bill enters Maryland into the interstate Cosmetology Licensure Compact for 
cosmetologists and establishes (1) membership requirements for member states; 
(2) eligibility criteria for cosmetologists seeking a multistate license; (3) procedures for 
renewing a multistate license; (4) authority and duties of the Compact Commission and 
member state licensing authorities; (5) disciplinary procedures; and (6) related processes 
for the governance of the compact. The bill is contingent on the enacting of substantially 
similar legislation in six other states. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures may increase to cover the cost of a new multistate 
database and annual membership fees, but a reliable estimate of the amount and timing of 
that increase is not feasible, as discussed below. No material effect on special fund 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The purpose of the compact is to facilitate the interstate practice and 
regulation of cosmetology with the goal of improving public access to, and the safety of, 
cosmetology services and reducing unnecessary burdens related to cosmetology licensure. 
Through the compact, member states seek to establish a regulatory framework that provides 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 383/ Page 2 
for a new multistate licensing program that provides value and mobility to licensed 
cosmetologists in those states. 
 
Through the compact, member states create and establish a joint government agency – the 
Cosmetology Licensure Compact Commission – whose membership consists of all 
member states. The bill includes rules and procedures for the commission’s operation, 
including member terms, finances, and dispute resolution. 
 
Member State Requirements 
 
To be eligible to join the compact, member states must:   
 
 
license and regulate cosmetology; 
 
have a mechanism or entity in place to receive and investigate complaints against 
licensees; 
 
require that licensees pass a cosmetology competency exam prior to being licensed; 
 
require that licensees satisfy educational or training requirements in cosmetology 
prior to being licensed; 
 
implement procedures for considering one or more of the following categories of 
information from applicants for licensure:  criminal history, disciplinary history, or 
background check; 
 
participate in a data system; 
 
share information related to adverse actions with the commission and other member 
states; 
 
notify the commission and other member states of the existence of investigative 
information in the state’s possession regarding a licensee practicing in that state; 
 
comply with rules enacted by the commission; and 
 
accept licensees from other member states. 
 
Multistate License 
 
To be eligible to apply to their home state’s licensing authority for a multistate license, a 
licensee must hold an active and unencumbered single-state license to practice 
cosmetology in the state. Individuals not residing in a member state may still apply for a 
single-state license in that state, but they may not use that license to apply for a multistate 
license. Upon receiving an application for a multistate license, a licensing authority must 
determine whether the applicant meets the criteria for a multistate license. A multistate 
license must be recognized by each member state. 
 
The bill establishes criteria and procedures for the renewal of multistate licenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 383/ Page 3 
Authority and Duties of the Commission and Member States 
 
Nothing in the compact, nor any rule or regulation of the commission, may be construed to 
limit, restrict, or in any way reduce the ability of a member state to enact and enforce laws, 
regulations, or other rules related to the practice of cosmetology in that state as long as they 
are not inconsistent with the provisions of the compact. 
 
The commission may levy and collect an annual assessment from each member state and 
impose fees on licensees that are given a multistate license. Total fee revenue must be 
sufficient to cover the commission’s costs; member fees are established according to a 
formula developed by the commission. 
 
To the extent practical, a state’s licensing authority must cooperate with the commission. 
Discipline is the sole responsibility of each state in which cosmetology services are 
provided. Each authority receives complaints about individuals practicing in that state and 
must communicate all relevant investigative information with member states. Member 
states have exclusive power to impose adverse actions against a licensee’s multistate 
license, as specified. If an adverse action is taken, the licensee’s authorization to practice 
in other member states is deactivated until all encumbrances are removed. 
 
Data System 
 
The commission must provide for the development, maintenance, operation, and use of a 
coordinated database and reporting system. The cost of developing the database and 
reporting system is shared among members of the compact, and each member state must 
provide specified uniform data on each licensee in the state. 
 
Effective Date 
 
The compact takes effect on the date on which the seventh state joins the compact. A 
member state may withdraw from the compact by enacting legislation that repeals its 
membership. Withdrawal takes effect 180 days after enactment of withdrawal legislation. 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Cosmetologists (within the Maryland Department of 
Labor) issues two full-service licenses (cosmetologist and senior cosmetologist) and 
four limited licenses (hairstylist, blow-drying, nail technician, and esthetician). 
 
A cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, 
nail, and esthetic services. The other licenses authorize the licensee to provide just that 
service. The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for licensure must pass a written 
and a practical examination and have successfully completed either a registered 
apprenticeship program or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 383/ Page 4 
While registered as an apprentice cosmetologist, an individual may learn to practice 
cosmetology (or any limited practice of cosmetology) in either a beauty salon or a 
barbershop that is properly licensed. Any such training must take place under the 
supervision of the appropriate type of licensee, depending on the type of license the 
individual is pursuing. 
 
A licensed senior cosmetologist may directly train and supervise up to two apprentices 
learning the practice of cosmetology or any limited practice of cosmetology. Additionally, 
an individual with a specified limited license who has at least two years of experience in 
that limited practice may directly train and supervise up to two apprentices learning the 
same limited practice. 
 
Licensed cosmetologists, estheticians, hairstylists, blow dry technicians, and nail 
technicians generally must perform their services at a permitted beauty salon or barbershop. 
However, subject to specified conditions, these licensees may practice at certain off-site 
locations. 
 
All licensing fees paid to the State Board of Cosmetologists are distributed to the State 
Barbers and Cosmetologists Boards’ Fund, which covers all costs associated with board 
operations. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The compact reduces the need for the board to issue reciprocal 
licenses to out-of-state individuals who wish to practice cosmetology, either on a temporary 
or permanent basis, in the State. The board advises that approximately 40% of its revenue 
is derived from the issuance of reciprocal licenses, so the reduction in those licenses allows 
the board to accommodate any additional workload stemming from membership in the 
compact. It is assumed that any reduction in revenue from reciprocal licenses is made up 
by the board’s issuance of multistate licenses. 
 
The board advises that it anticipates an increase in expenditures to support the development 
of the multistate database and reporting system required by the compact; it will also be 
responsible for ongoing annual fees to support the commission. However, a reliable 
estimate of the State’s share of those costs cannot be made until the compact is enacted and 
the commission determines the cost of the new system and its own budget. Similarly, the 
board advises that only three states have ratified the compact to date, so it is not known if 
or when the expenditures will be necessary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 383/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 27 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5