START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 977

Chapter 977

(House Bill 358)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Workgroup on Health and Wellness

PG 409–24

FOR the purpose of establishing a Workgroup on Health and Wellness in Prince George’s
County to review and evaluate certain information and make certain
recommendations related to health and wellness in Prince George’s County; and
generally relating to the Workgroup on Health and Wellness in Prince George’s
County.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Workgroup on Health and Wellness in Prince George’s County.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(1) the Chair of the Prince George’s County Senate Delegation, or the
Chair’s designee;

(2) the Chair of the Prince George’s County House Delegation, or the
Chair’s designee;

(3) the Chair of the Prince George’s County Council, or the Chair’s
designee;

(4) ~~the~~ ~~Director~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Parks~~ ~~and~~
~~Recreation,~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~Director’s~~ ~~designee;~~ one representative of the Prince George’s County
Parks and Recreation Department, designated by the Chair of the Maryland–National
Capital Park and Planning Commission;

~~(4)~~ (5) the following members, appointed by the Chair of the Prince George’s
County Senate Delegation:

(i) two representatives of small and local health and wellness
businesses; and

(ii) one integrative health and wellness practitioner; and

~~(5)~~ (6) the following members, appointed by the Prince George’s County
Executive:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 977 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) one certified dietitian providing services in Prince George’s
County;

(ii) two health and wellness practitioners in Prince George’s County;

(iii) one representative of the Prince George’s County Food Equity
Council;

(iv) one representative from Nonprofit Prince George’s County; and

(v) one representative from the South County Economic
Development Association.

(c) The Prince George’s County Health Officer shall designate the chair of the
Workgroup.

(d) The Prince George’s County Health Department shall provide staff for the
Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup or a subgroup established under subsection (g) of
this section:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup or
subgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall:

(1) review the availability of health and wellness practices in Prince
George’s County;

(2) review available options for integrative health and wellness programs
in Prince George’s County;

(3) review programs that promote healthy eating within the Prince
George’s County government agencies;

(4) make recommendations regarding the best practices in health and
wellness community programming, including strategies and programs that:

(i) promote healthy eating;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 977

(ii) improve equitable access to healthy, affordable, and accessible
food retailers;

(iii) improve equitable access to environments that are built and
promote physical activity, including:

1. gymnasiums;

2. recreation centers;

3. athletic fields and facilities;

4. playgrounds;

5. sidewalks; and

6. bicycle and walking paths;

(iv) reduce the density in specified areas of calorie–dense and fast
food restaurants and retailers; and

(v) promote healthy eating, physical activity, and nonsedentary
habits for obesity prevention;

(5) make recommendations for incentives that may be provided to
employers, businesses, and Prince George’s County agencies to promote health and
wellness strategies and programs identified under item (4) of this subsection;

(6) review and report on the benefits of incorporating integrative health
into various aspects of Prince George’s County; and

(7) evaluate the benefit and feasibility of creating integrative health and
wellness hubs in Prince George’s County.

(g) (1) The Workgroup may establish a subgroup to assist in carrying out its
duties, including conducting research and producing reports.

(2) A subgroup established under paragraph (1) of this subsection may
include an individual who is not a member of the Workgroup, such as a representative of a
relevant expert.

(h) On or before December 1, 2025, the Workgroup shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Prince George’s County Executive, the Chair of the Prince George’s
County Council, the Governor, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, the General Assembly.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 977 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of June 30, 2026,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4