START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 390 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 390 
(Delegate Henson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Commission on African American History and Culture - Museum Name Change  
 
 
This bill alters the name of the Banneker-Douglass Museum to be the 
Banneker-Douglass-Tubman Museum under specified provisions of State law governing 
the Commission on African American History and Culture. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $10,100 in FY 2025 only. Revenues 
are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Commission on African American History and Culture is an 
independent unit in the Executive Branch. The commission is required to, among other 
things, operate the Banneker-Douglass Museum in Annapolis to house and display 
photographs, objects, oral history tapes, artifacts, and other materials of African American 
historic and cultural significance.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $10,100 in fiscal 2025 for 
one-time creative support, printing, and signage costs incurred to rebrand the museum and 
its materials with its new name. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 390/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 341 (Senator McCray, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Commission on African American History and Culture; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2