START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 379 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 379 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Wildlife - Traveling Animal Acts - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits, with specified exceptions, a person from allowing for the performance 
of a “covered animal” in a “traveling animal act”. A person who violates this prohibition 
is subject to a civil penalty of up to $2,000 per violation. The bill may be enforced by (1) a 
State or local law enforcement officer or (2) the local animal control authority for the 
jurisdiction where the violation occurs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
Any State enforcement can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. Any local enforcement can be handled with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “covered animal” means any of the following animals:  (1) bear; 
(2) cougar; (3) elephant; (4) jaguar; (5) leopard; (6) lion; (7) nonhuman primate; and 
(8) tiger. The term includes a hybrid of one of those animals. A “traveling animal act” 
means any performance of animals for which the animals are transported in a mobile or 
traveling housing facility to, from, or between locations for the purpose of the performance. 
 
The bill’s prohibition does not apply to a performance that takes place at a nonmobile, 
permanent institution or other fixed facility, provided that the covered animal is not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 379/ Page 2 
transported to the institution or facility for a period of less than 60 days for the sole purpose 
of a performance. 
 
The bill may not be construed to preempt or prevail over any ordinance, resolution, law, or 
rule more stringent than the bill. The bill’s provisions are severable. 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Law Relating to Importing, Offering for Sale, Possessing, Breeding, or Exchanging 
Dangerous Animals 
 
Under the Criminal Law Article, a person is generally prohibited from importing into the 
State, offering for sale, trading, bartering, possessing, breeding, or exchanging specified 
live animals. However, that prohibition does not apply to a circus holding a Class C 
Exhibitor’s License under the federal Animal Welfare Act (AWA) that (1) is in the State 
for less than 90 days per calendar year; (2) regularly conducts performances featuring live 
animals and multiple human entertainers, as specified; and (3) does not allow members of 
the public to be in proximity to one of the specified animals, including opportunities to be 
photographed with the animal, without sufficient distance and protective barriers. 
 
The holder of a Class C Exhibitor’s License may not possess a nonhuman primate, bear, 
lion, tiger, leopard, clouded leopard, snow leopard, jaguar, cheetah, or cougar (or a hybrid 
of one of those animals) that was not owned by the license holder on June 30, 2014. 
However, the holder of such a license may acquire or breed one of those animals if the 
holder (1) maintains specified liability insurance; (2) has a paid full-time director; (3) has 
at least one paid full-time staff member trained in the care of each species that the holder 
keeps; (4) has an animal disposition policy that provides for the placement of animals in 
appropriate facilities if the holder’s facility closes; and (5) maintains and implements a 
training plan regarding zoonotic disease and risk prevention. 
 
These provisions may be enforced by any State or local law enforcement officer or the 
local animal control authority for the jurisdiction where the violation occurs. Specified 
criminal penalties apply for violations. 
 
Federal Animal Welfare Act 
 
The transportation, purchase, sale, housing, care, handling, and treatment of animals by 
carriers or persons or organizations engaged in using them for research or experimental 
purposes or for exhibition purposes or holding them for sale as pets (or for any such purpose 
or use) is regulated under AWA. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 379/ Page 3 
Under AWA, generally, individuals or businesses with warm-blooded animals that are on 
display, perform for the public, or are used in education presentations must obtain a license. 
A Class C Exhibitor’s License is issued to a person who is subject to the licensing 
requirements and meets the definition of “exhibitor” and whose business involves the 
showing or displaying of animals to the public. “Exhibitor” means any person (public or 
private) exhibiting any animals that were purchased in commerce or the intended 
distribution of which affects commerce, or will affect commerce, to the public for 
compensation, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture. Licensed exhibitors 
generally include circuses, zoos, education displays, petting farms/zoos, animal acts, 
wildlife parks, marine mammal parks, and some sanctuaries. 
 
Local Regulations 
 
Local jurisdictions in the State may also regulate certain animal exhibitions, such as petting 
zoos and circuses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 547 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of State Police; U.S. Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 15, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3