START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 335 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 335 
(Delegates Addison and Young) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - B-D-7 Licenses - Hours of Sale 
 
 
This bill alters a specified geographic area in the 45th alcoholic beverages district in 
Baltimore City where (1) a holder of a Class B-D-7 beer, wine, and liquor license may not 
sell alcoholic beverages before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. and (2) a license holder, other 
than licensees specified, may not sell alcoholic beverages before 9 a.m. or after 10 p.m. 
and may not be extended if they begin later than 9 a.m. or end before 10 p.m. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City can handle any additional enforcement with existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners may issue a 
Class B-D-7 license if it determines, upon consideration of the number of beer, wine, and 
liquor outlets in the affected area and the outlets’ days of sale, that the license is reasonably 
necessary for public convenience. A Class B-D-7 license authorizes the licensee to sell 
beer, wine, and liquor for on- and off-premises consumption. The annual license fee is 
$1,320.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 335/ Page 2 
A Class B-D-7 licensee, and other license holders, other than licensees specified, may sell 
beer, wine, and liquor from 9 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. in an area bounded on the north by 
North Avenue, on the west by Central Avenue and Harford Avenue, on the south by 
Monument Street as it runs from North Central Avenue to North Wolfe Street and 
McElderry Street as it runs from North Wolfe Street to Luzerne Avenue, and on the east 
by Luzerne Avenue as it runs from Monument Street to Federal Street, then by Rose Street 
as it runs from Federal Street to North Avenue. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 45 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 10, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2