START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 259

Chapter 259

(House Bill 394)

AN ACT concerning

Human Relations – Commission on Civil Rights – Appeal of Final Orders

FOR the purpose of providing that a certain final order of the Commission on Civil Rights
on a complaint alleging a discriminatory act is appealable in accordance with the
Administrative Procedure Act; and generally relating to the Commission on Civil
Rights and appeals of final orders.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 20–101(a) through (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 20–1005(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

20–101.

(a) In Subtitles 1 through 11 of this title the following words have the meanings
indicated.

(b) “Commission” means the Commission on Civil Rights.

(c) “Complainant” means a person that files a complaint alleging a discriminatory
act under this title.

(d) “Discriminatory act” means an act prohibited under:

(1) Subtitle 3 of this title (Discrimination in Places of Public
Accommodation);

(2) Subtitle 4 of this title (Discrimination by Persons Licensed or Regulated
by Maryland Department of Labor);
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 259 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Subtitle 5 of this title (Discrimination in Leasing of Commercial
Property);

(4) Subtitle 6 of this title (Discrimination in Employment);

(5) Subtitle 7 of this title (Discrimination in Housing); or

(6) Subtitle 8 of this title (Aiding, Abetting, or Attempting Discriminatory
Act; Obstructing Compliance).

20–1005.

(d) (1) If there is a finding of no probable cause to believe that a discriminatory
act has been or is being committed, the complainant may file a request for reconsideration
of the finding in accordance with the Commission’s regulations.

(2) Unless the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has
jurisdiction over the subject matter of the complaint, a denial of a request for
reconsideration of a finding of no probable cause by the Commission is a final order
appealable [to the circuit court] as provided in [§ 10–222 of this article] THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE ACT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2