START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 386 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 386 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Meals for Achievement In-Classroom Breakfast Program - Alterations 
(Maryland Meals for Achievement Flexibility Act of 2024) 
 
   
This bill authorizes elementary schools participating in the Maryland Meals for 
Achievement (MMFA) program to serve breakfast in any broadly accessible part of the 
school, including from “Grab and Go” carts after the arrival of students to the school, 
provided that students are allowed to consume the meal in the classroom after the start of 
the school day. To do so, an elementary school must have approval from the Maryland 
State Board of Education (MSDE) and from its local board of education. The bill also 
clarifies that secondary schools that serve breakfast, including from “Grab and Go” carts 
after the arrival of students to the school, must serve these breakfasts in any broadly 
accessible part of the school. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finance.    
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that local boards and nonpublic schools participating in 
MMFA take advantage of the flexibility offered under the bill, the number of breakfasts 
served (and federal and State funding) may be altered on a school-by-school basis, but the 
bill does not substantially alter statewide local participation, which is constrained by the 
annual State appropriation. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 386/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MMFA is a joint effort of MSDE and local boards of education or 
sponsoring agencies for eligible nonpublic schools. MMFA provides funding for schools 
that make an in-class breakfast available to all students enrolled in schools in which 40% 
or more of the students qualify for free or reduced-price meals (FRPMs). A school that for 
one year falls below the 40% FRPM student population eligibility threshold is eligible for 
MMFA funding in that year. However, the school is no longer eligible for MMFA funding 
if its percentage of students falls below 40% in a second consecutive year. 
 
Schools are selected to participate in the program and must serve breakfasts that meet 
MSDE guidelines and federal nutritional standards for schools that participate in the federal 
school breakfast program. Participating schools must serve breakfasts in the classroom 
after arrival of students to the school. However, secondary schools (middle schools and 
high schools) that participate in MMFA may serve breakfast in any part of the school, 
including from “Grab and Go” carts, after arrival of students to the school. Under 
Chapter 628 of 2023, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill $12.05 million 
for MMFA. Accordingly, the fiscal 2025 allowance includes $12.05 million for MMFA.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 425 (Senator Hettleman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2