START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 306

Chapter 306

(House Bill 385)

AN ACT concerning

Wage Payment and Collection – Pay Stubs and Pay Statements – Required
Information

FOR the purpose of requiring that a notice containing certain information provided to an
employee at the time of hiring be written; requiring that the statement regarding
earnings required to be provided to employees by employers be written on the
physical pay stub or online pay statement and include certain information; requiring
the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to create and make available to an employer
at no charge a pay stub template for certain purposes; and generally relating to
information on pay stubs and pay statements.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–504
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–507.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–504.

(a) An employer shall give to each employee:

(1) at the time of hiring, WRITTEN notice of:

(i) the rate of pay of the employee;

(ii) the regular paydays that the employer sets; and

(iii) leave benefits;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 306 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) for each pay period, a WRITTEN statement [of the gross earnings of the
employee and deductions from those gross earnings; and] ON THE PHYSICAL PAY STUB
OR THE ONLINE PAY STATEMENT THAT INCLUDES:

(I) THE EMPLOYER’S NAME REGISTERED WITH THE STATE,
ADDRESS, AND TELEPHONE NUMBER;

(II) THE DATES OF WORK COVERED BY DATE OF PAYMENT AND
THE BEGINNING AND ENDING DATES OF THE PAY PERIOD FOR WHICH THE PAYMENT
IS MADE;

(III) UNLESS THE EMPLOYEE IS EXEMPT FROM OVERTIME UNDER
FEDERAL AND STATE LAW, THE NUMBER OF HOURS WORKED DURING THE PAY
PERIOD;

(IV) THE RATES OF PAY;

(V) THE GROSS AND NET PAY EARNED DURING THE PAY PERIOD;

(VI) THE AMOUNT AND PURPOSE NAME OF ALL DEDUCTIONS;

(VII) A DESCRIPTION OF THE INFORMATION USED BY THE
EMPLOYER TO CALCULATE THE EMPLOYEE’S GROSS AND NET PAY A LIST OF
ADDITIONAL BASES OF PAY, INCLUDING BONUSES, COMMISSIONS ON SALES, OR
OTHER BASES; AND

(VIII) FOR EACH EMPLOYEE PAID AT A PIECE RATE, THE
APPLICABLE PIECE RATES OF PAY AND THE NUMBER OF PIECES COMPLETED AT
EACH PIECE RATE; AND

(3) at least 1 pay period in advance, notice of any change in a payday or
wage.

(b) This section does not prohibit an employer from increasing a wage without
advance notice.

(C) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL CREATE AND MAKE AVAILABLE TO AN
EMPLOYER AT NO CHARGE A PAY STUB TEMPLATE THAT MAY BE USED BY THE
EMPLOYER TO COMPLY WITH THIS SECTION.

3–507.3.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 306

(A) IF THE COMMISSIONER DETERMINES THAT AN EMPLOYER HAS
VIOLATED § 3–504(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE COMMISSIONER MAY ISSUE AN
ORDER THAT:

(1) DESCRIBES THE VIOLATION;

(2) DIRECTS THE EMPLOYER TO PROVIDE THE REQUIRED
INFORMATION; AND

(3) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, IMPOSES AN
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY OF UP TO $500 FOR EACH EMPLOYEE WHO WAS NOT
PROVIDED A PAY STUB OR ONLINE PAY STATEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
3–504(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL SEND AN ORDER ISSUED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO THE EMPLOYER AT THE EMPLOYER’S LAST
KNOWN BUSINESS ADDRESS BY REGULAR MAIL AND CERTIFIED MAIL.

(C) THE AMOUNT OF A PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
BE BASED ON:

(1) THE GRAVITY OF THE VIOLATION;

(2) THE SIZE OF THE EMPLOYER’S BUSINESS;

(3) THE EMPLOYER’S GOOD FAITH; AND

(4) THE EMPLOYER’S HISTORY OF VIOLATIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) THE ACTIONS TAKEN UNDER THIS SUBSECTION ARE SUBJECT TO THE
NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIREMENTS OF TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(E) (1) WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING AN ORDER ISSUED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, AN EMPLOYER MAY REQUEST AN
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.

(2) IF THE EMPLOYER DOES NOT REQUEST A HEARING AS PROVIDED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER,
INCLUDING ANY ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES, IS FINAL.

(F) (1) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE COMMISSIONER ISSUES AN ORDER,
AN EMPLOYER SHALL COMPLY WITH THE ORDER.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 306 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IF AN EMPLOYER DOES NOT COMPLY WITH AN ORDER IN THE TIME
PERIOD STATED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMISSIONER MAY
BRING AN ACTION TO ENFORCE THE ORDER:

(I) IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE EMPLOYER IS LOCATED; OR

(II) IF THE ADDRESS OF THE EMPLOYER CANNOT BE
DETERMINED, IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE EMPLOYEE OR COMMISSIONER IS
LOCATED.

(A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER REMEDY AVAILABLE UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE, IF AN EMPLOYER FAILS TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION REQUIRED
UNDER § 3–504(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE, AN EMPLOYEE OF THE EMPLOYER OR THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY BRING AN ACTION AGAINST THE EMPLOYER.

(B) IF, IN AN ACTION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, A COURT
FINDS A VIOLATION OF § 3–504(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE COURT MAY ORDER:

(1) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF;

(2) UNLESS THE EMPLOYER SHOWS THAT IT ACTED IN GOOD FAITH
AND REASONABLY BELIEVED THAT IT MET THE REQUIREMENTS OF § 3–504(A)(2) OF
THIS SUBTITLE, LIQUIDATED DAMAGES OF $100 FOR EACH WORKWEEK IN WHICH
THE VIOLATION OCCURRED, NOT TO EXCEED $5,000; AND

(3) REASONABLE COUNSEL FEES AND COSTS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4