START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 396 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 396 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Prince George's County - Sales and Use Tax on Energy and Fuel - Use of 
Revenue  
PG 407-24 
 
   
This bill enables the Prince George’s County government to use the proceeds from the local 
sales and use tax on energy and fuel to meet the State funding requirements for the local 
school system under the maintenance of effort (MOE) requirement and local share 
provision. Under current law, the revenue proceeds from the energy and fuel tax cannot be 
used to supplant local funding required under the MOE or local share provision. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures (local appropriation) for the county 
school system may decrease by $53.2 million in FY 2025 and by $64.7 million in FY 2029. 
County revenues are not affected.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Use of Energy and Fuel Tax Revenue 
 
The net proceeds of the energy and fuel taxes in Prince George’s County may only be used 
for funding of (1) specified public ethics provisions or (2) the following public education 
budget categories:  instructional salaries; instructional materials and related costs; special 
education; and fixed charges. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 396/ Page 2 
 
For each fiscal year, Prince George’s County must appropriate local money to the school 
operating budget in an amount not less than the sum of (1) the excess of the amount of the 
projected revenue for the fiscal year from the energy and fuel tax over the projected revenue 
from the tax for the prior fiscal year and (2) the amount of local money that 
Prince George’s County is required by State law to appropriate to the school operating 
budget. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of the MOE requirement or 
the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The per pupil MOE amount is 
based upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment and 
(2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. (There is a certain adjustment for 
fiscal 2024 MOE for specified counties.) The local share amount equals the local share of 
the foundation formula, compensatory education, English language learner, special 
education, comparable wage index, full-day prekindergarten, college and career ready, 
transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant 
programs. Also, counties that benefit from the compensatory education State funding floor 
are required to fund the local share of the concentration of poverty grant programs. 
However, for some counties, the combined local share across these several programs is 
subject to adjustments. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Prince George’s County government must provide the local 
school system with an annual local appropriation that at least equals the MOE or the local 
share amount. In fiscal 2025, the county MOE amount is projected to total $872.1 million, 
and the local share amount is projected to total $909.1 million. In addition, the 
Prince George’s County government is required to provide the local school system with a 
specified portion of both the energy/fuel tax and the telecommunications tax. In fiscal 2025, 
the energy/fuel tax payment is projected to total $53.2 million, and the telecommunications 
tax payment is projected to total $13.1 million. Under current law, the required payments 
from both taxes cannot be counted toward the local appropriation amount under the MOE 
and local share provisions. The payments are made in addition to the required county MOE 
and local share funding amounts.   
 
Under the bill, the energy/fuel tax payment can be used by the county government to cover 
a portion of the required local appropriation under the MOE and local share provisions. As 
a result, this may result in a reduction in county funding for the local school system as 
shown in Exhibit 1.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 396/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Prince George’s County Funding Requirement for the Local School System 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Current Law 
Local Share Provision 
$909.1 
$949.9 
$979.8 
$1,006.2 
$1,041.9 
Energy Tax 
53.2 
55.9 
58.7 
61.6 
64.7 
Telecommunications Tax 
13.1 
13.8 
14.5 
15.2 
16.0 
Total Funding 
$975.5 
$1,019.5 
$1,052.9 
$1,083.0 
$1,122.6 
Under the Bill 
Local Share Provision 
$909.1 
$949.9 
$979.8 
$1,006.2 
$1,041.9 
Telecommunications Tax 
13.1 
13.8 
14.5 
15.2 
16.0 
Total Funding 
$922.3 
$963.7 
$994.2 
$1,021.4 
$1,057.9 
Difference 
($53.2) 
($55.9) 
($58.7) 
($61.6) 
($64.7) 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Additional information on State and local funding for local school systems is provided in 
the Local Government Overview Report. A copy of the report is available on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
     
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Comptroller’s Office; Prince George’s 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 396/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4