START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 300 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 300 
(Delegate Toles, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Family Law - Marriage Ceremony - Designation of Deputy Clerk 
 
 
This bill transfers the authority to designate a deputy clerk to perform a marriage ceremony 
from the county administrative judge to the clerk of the circuit court for the county.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances.    
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A marriage ceremony may be performed in Maryland by specified 
individuals, including (1) any clerk or (2) any deputy clerk designated by the county 
administrative judge of the circuit court for the county.             
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 133 and HB 672 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 136 (Senators Jackson and Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 300/ Page 2 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2