START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 358 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 358 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Workgroup on Health and Wellness  
PG 409-24 
 
 
This bill establishes a Workgroup on Health and Wellness in Prince George’s County. The 
Prince George’s County Health Officer must designate a workgroup chair, and the 
Prince George’s County Health Department must provide staff. By December 1, 2025, the 
workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the Prince George’s County 
Executive, the Chair of the Prince George’s County Council, the Governor, and the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only affects local government operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by approximately 
$120,000 in FY 2025 and 2026, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup comprises several members, including the Chair of the 
Prince George’s County Senate Delegation, the Chair of the Prince George’s County House 
Delegation, the Chair of the Prince George’s County Council, a representative of the  
Prince George’s County Department of Parks and Recreation, and specified local members 
as appointed by the Chair of the Prince George’s County Senate Delegation or the  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 358/ Page 2 
Prince George’s County Executive. Members may not receive compensation but are 
entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
The workgroup must (1) review the availability of health and wellness practices in 
Prince George’s County; (2) review available options for integrative health and wellness 
programs in Prince George’s County; (3) review programs that promote healthy eating 
within Prince George’s County government agencies; (4) make specified recommendations 
regarding best practices in health and wellness community programming; (5) make 
recommendations for incentives that may be provided to employers, businesses, and 
Prince George’s County agencies to promote identified health and wellness strategies and 
programs; (6) review and report on the benefits of incorporating integrative health into 
various aspects of Prince George’s County; and (7) evaluate the benefit and feasibility of 
creating integrative health and wellness hubs in Prince George’s County. 
 
The workgroup may establish a subgroup, which may include an individual who is not a 
member of the workgroup, such as a representative of a relevant expert. 
 
Current Law:  The Prince George’s County Health Department offers health and wellness 
support for county residents. The Division of Health and Wellness Services encourages 
behavioral changes to improve the health of county residents to prevent chronic illness, 
including diabetes and cardiovascular disease.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The Prince George’s County Health Department advises that 
existing staff cannot absorb the additional responsibilities required by the bill. Therefore, 
Prince George’s County expenditures increase by approximately $120,000 in fiscal 2025 
and 2026 to hire one contractual position to staff the workgroup and complete the required 
report. This analysis assumes that the position terminates at the end of fiscal 2026, in 
conjunction with the termination of the bill. To the extent that the workgroup completes its 
work by December 1, 2025 (the due date of the workgroup’s report), expenditures are 
reduced. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 966 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 151 (Senator Muse) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; 
Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 358/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3