START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 306 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 306 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Economic Development - Workgroup on Independent 
Innovation in Prince George's County - Establishment  
PG 402-24 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup on Independent Innovation in Prince George’s County. 
The Urban Business Innovation Initiative within the Maryland Technology Development 
Corporation (TEDCO) must provide staff for the workgroup. Workgroup members may 
not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. By 
January 15, 2026, the workgroup must report recommendations regarding strategies to 
support investments in industry opportunities and potential areas of innovation to the 
Prince George’s County Delegation and the General Assembly. The bill terminates 
September 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  TEDCO can staff the workgroup with existing budgeted resources. Expense 
reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must (1) discuss and make recommendations regarding 
strategies to support investments in industry opportunities and potential areas of 
innovation; (2) identify and collaborate with a group of angel investors based in  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 306/ Page 2 
Prince George’s County in order to encourage investment in the county, including 
investments at the preconceptual stage, and strengthen an innovation-focused 
entrepreneurial system; and (3) collaborate with TEDCO and other stakeholders in order 
to build partnerships and develop strategies to build Prince George’s County’s potential to 
become a hub for entrepreneurs and technology start-up companies. 
 
Current 
Law: 
 
TEDCO 
is 
an 
independent 
entity 
established 
by 
the  
Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of technology from 
universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the growth of 
companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO programs typically assist companies 
based on a company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to 
growth stage. 
 
The Urban Business Innovation Initiative within TEDCO provides technical and business 
assistance to underserved early-stage companies in certain urban areas of the State. The 
program was created administratively, not by legislation. 
 
For further information on TEDCO, including a general overview and recent program 
additions, see the Appendix – Maryland Technology Development Corporation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Commerce; University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; 
Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services  
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 306/ Page 3 
Appendix – Maryland Technology  
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The fiscal 2024 budget includes $54.7 million in general funds for TEDCO 
programs. The following programs have been established by legislation since 2021, with 
mandated appropriations also noted.  
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund – supports the development of start-up companies run by 
entrepreneurs from socially or economically disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder 
access to traditional forms of capital and executive networks at the pre-seed stage. 
The Governor must include appropriations in the budget bill in the following 
amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund – provides capital investment in technology-based businesses that  
(1) would qualify for investment under the Builder Fund, as provided in TEDCO 
regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at least one year after the time 
of investment by an individual or individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program – encourages the establishment and 
expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund – allows unappropriated general fund surplus 
to be invested in a “qualified business” – with a goal to increase private equity and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 306/ Page 4 
venture capital in the State – and the interest earnings and investment returns 
realized to the benefit of participants of the several pension systems managed by the 
State Retirement and Pension System. For fiscal 2024, the Governor was required 
to include an appropriation in the budget bill to the fund equal to 10% of the 
unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of $10.0 million from the 
second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, with a corresponding 
decrease in the typical required appropriation. The maximum amount was 
appropriated. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program – allows eligible small businesses to apply for State 
awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal grants, limited to $25,000 for 
Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. TEDCO may make up to  
20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per fiscal year for a total of 
$1.25 million. 
 
 
Equitech Growth Fund and Commission – supports economic competitiveness 
and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the 
creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that 
builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, 
investments, loans, or other financial assistance to public, nonprofit, or private 
entities in the State. Awards must target workforce development and infrastructure. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from the fund. 
 
 
Cyber Maryland Program and Fund – creates a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, 
serves as a hub for State workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and 
generally coordinates cybersecurity and research and innovation in the State, among 
other things. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor may include an appropriation 
in the annual budget bill of $250,000 for the fund; however, the Governor must 
include an appropriation that is sufficient to hire staff for the program. 
 
 
Human-relevant Research Program and Fund – promotes State-funded research 
intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish a grant and 
loan program, as specified, which includes contracting with an independent 
scientific review board to review research proposals and make recommendations to 
TEDCO. The program is funded by fees on entities conducting research on 
nonhuman animals. 

END OF PAGE 4