START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 58

Chapter 58

(House Bill 390)

AN ACT concerning

Commission on African American History and Culture – Museum Name Change

FOR the purpose of altering the name of a certain museum operated by the Commission on
African American History and Culture in certain provisions of law; and generally
relating to the museum operated by the Commission on African American History
and Culture.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–3707 and 9–3708
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

9–3707.

(a) The Commission shall:

(1) initiate, direct, and coordinate projects that further the understanding
of African American history and culture;

(2) receive and administer any available federal, State, or private money
to plan and execute projects or educational activities that further the understanding of
African American history and culture;

(3) operate the [Banneker–Douglass] BANNEKER–DOUGLASS–TUBMAN
Museum in Annapolis to house and display photographs, objects, oral history tapes,
artifacts, and other materials of African American historic and cultural significance;

(4) locate, preserve, and disseminate to the public information about
significant buildings and sites relating to African American history and culture; and

(5) publish an annual report and any other material that the Commission
considers necessary.

(b) The Commission may provide operational funding to a museum that
specializes in African American history and culture.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 58 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9–3708.

(a) (1) The Commission may seek money from the federal government,
foundations, and private sources in addition to State financing.

(2) The Commission may accept gifts, grants, donations, bequests, or
endowments for any of its purposes.

(b) Money received under subsection (a) of this section, income from the operation
of the [Banneker–Douglass] BANNEKER–DOUGLASS–TUBMAN Museum, and money
from educational materials and activities of the Commission are not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(c) For each fiscal year, the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an
appropriation of $1,600,000 for the Commission.

(d) Money maintained under this section is subject to audit by the State, including
the Legislative Auditor.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2