START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 807

Chapter 807

(House Bill 343)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – ~~Cox~~ ~~Creek~~ ~~Citizens~~ ~~Oversight~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~–~~ ~~Membership~~
~~Alterations~~ Dredged Material – Containment, Redeposit, and Oversight

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Cox Creek Citizens Oversight
Committee; requiring the Committee to provide certain input and recommendations
to the Maryland Port Administration regarding certain management of dredged
material; ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Cox~~ ~~Creek~~ ~~Citizens~~ ~~Oversight~~ ~~Committee~~
authorizing the Department of the Environment to approve the redeposit of certain
dredged material under certain circumstances; authorizing the Department to
approve contained areas at a large redevelopment site for the redeposit of certain
dredged material; authorizing the Board of Public Works to approve a license or an
amendment to a license for the deposit of certain dredged material; altering the
responsibilities of the Hart–Miller–Pleasure Island Citizens Oversight Committee;
and generally relating to the containment, redeposit, and oversight of dredged
material.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 5–1102.1, 5–1103, and 5–1104(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 5–1104(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 16–202(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 16–202(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 807 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

5–1102.1.

(a) (1) The Governor shall appoint a Cox Creek Citizens Oversight Committee.

(2) The terms of the members of the Oversight Committee shall be
determined by the Governor.

(b) The Oversight Committee shall be composed of the following members:

(1) 2 members of the North County Land Trust 1 MEMBER OF THE LAND
TRUST THAT HOLDS THE CONSERVATION EASEMENT OF THE COX CREEK FOREST
CONSERVATION EASEMENT AREA;

(2) 1 delegate to the Greater Pasadena Council who represents a
waterfront community;

(3) 1 member of the Pasadena Sport Fishermen’s Group;

(4) 1 ~~member~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Anne~~ ~~Arundel~~ ~~County~~ ~~Watermen’s~~ ~~Association~~
INDIVIDUAL WHO REPRESENTS RECREATIONAL BIRDING IN ANNE ARUNDEL
COUNTY;

(5) [1 member of the Maryland Saltwater Sport Fishermen’s Association;

(6)] 1 individual who represents the pleasure boating industry in Anne
Arundel County;

[(7)] (6) 1 member of the Pasadena Business Association;

[(8)] (7) 1 member of the Restore Rock Creek organization;

[(9)] (8) 1 member of the [South Baltimore Business Alliance]
BALTIMORE INDUSTRIAL GROUP;

(9) 1 MEMBER OF THE STONEY BEACH ASSOCIATION 2 INDIVIDUALS
WHO REPRESENT A WATERFRONT COMMUNITY IN THE NORTHERN PART OF ANNE
ARUNDEL COUNTY;

(10) 1 MEMBER OF THE RIVIERA BEACH RESIDENTS COUNCIL;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 807

[(10)] (11) 1 resident of legislative district 31; and

[(11)] (12) 1 resident of legislative district 46.

(c) The Oversight Committee shall:

(1) Monitor the ~~redeposit~~ ~~of~~ ~~Anne~~ ~~Arundel~~ ~~County~~ ~~dredged~~ ~~material~~ ~~and~~
other dredged material in the Cox Creek area MANAGEMENT OF DREDGED MATERIAL
AT THE COX CREEK DREDGED MATERIAL CONTAINMENT FACILITY;

(2) (I) Hear and dispose ADVISE THE MARYLAND PORT
ADMINISTRATION of complaints lodged by individuals affected by the redeposit of Anne
Arundel County dredged material and other dredged material in the Cox Creek area; ~~and~~

(II) PROVIDE INPUT AND FEEDBACK TO THE MARYLAND PORT
ADMINISTRATION REGARDING THE MANAGEMENT OF DREDGED MATERIAL AT THE
COX CREEK DREDGED MATERIAL CONTAINMENT FACILITY; AND

(III) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE MARYLAND PORT
ADMINISTRATION ON THE POTENTIAL IMPACT THAT ACTIVITIES AT THE
CONTAINMENT FACILITY MAY HAVE ON NEARBY COMMUNITIES AND NATURAL
RESOURCES; AND

(3) Appoint a member from the Committee to serve as a liaison to the
Innovative [Use Advisory Council] REUSE COMMITTEE.

5–1103.

(a) IN THIS SECTION, “LARGE REDEVELOPMENT SITE” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 4–101.1 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) [Except for dredge spoil from local dredging projects initiated by
Baltimore County in the waters of Baltimore County, the] THE Department may not approve
any contained area for the redeposit of [spoil] DREDGED MATERIAL within 5 miles of the
Hart–Miller–Pleasure Island chain in Baltimore County EXCEPT FOR:

(I) DREDGE SPOIL FROM LOCAL DREDGING PROJECTS
INITIATED BY BALTIMORE COUNTY IN THE WATERS OF BALTIMORE COUNTY; OR

(II) CONTAINED AREAS FOR THE REDEPOSIT OF DREDGED
MATERIAL AT A LARGE REDEVELOPMENT SITE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 807 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A contained area described in paragraph [(1)] (1)(I) of this subsection
may not exceed the approximately 1,100 acre size provided in the projects U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers permit dated November 22, 1976.

(3) (i) Subject to [subparagraph] SUBPARAGRAPHS (ii) AND (III) of
this paragraph, dredge spoil may not be deposited in the Hart–Miller Island Dredged
Material Containment Facility after the first of the following to occur:

1. The maximum height of dredge spoil deposited in the
Hart–Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility reaches:

A. 44 feet above the mean low water mark in the north cell;
and

B. 28 feet above the mean low water mark in the south cell; or

2. January 1, 2010.

(ii) New dredge spoil dredged from a channel may not be deposited in
the south cell.

(III) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, ON OR BEFORE
DECEMBER 31, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT MAY APPROVE THE REDEPOSIT OF
DREDGED MATERIAL AT THE HART–MILLER ISLAND DREDGED MATERIAL
CONTAINMENT FACILITY IF:

1. THE DREDGED MATERIAL IS FROM A LOCATION
WITHIN 1 MILE OF THE SHORELINE OF A LARGE REDEVELOPMENT SITE; AND

2. THE PERSON UNDERTAKING THE DREDGING PROJECT
HAS, AFTER CONSULTATION WITH THE HART–MILLER–PLEASURE ISLAND CITIZENS
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE, ENTERED INTO AN ENFORCEABLE COMMUNITY BENEFITS
AGREEMENT WITH BALTIMORE COUNTY ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2024, THAT:

A. AT THE REQUEST OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF
BALTIMORE COUNTY, WAS PRESENTED TO AND APPROVED BY THE COUNTY
COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE COUNTY; AND

B. REQUIRES THE PERSON TO PAY A SUM OF MONEY TO
BALTIMORE COUNTY AND ESTABLISHES A PAYMENT SCHEDULE FOR THE SUM OF
MONEY, FOR THE PURPOSE OF FUNDING BENEFITS TO COMMUNITIES IN THE
VICINITY OF THE HART–MILLER ISLAND DREDGED MATERIAL CONTAINMENT
FACILITY.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 807

[(b)] (C) (1) Except as provided in [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of
this subsection, only [spoil] DREDGED MATERIAL from the excavation or dredging of
Baltimore Harbor, its approach channels, and Baltimore County tributary [spoil]
DREDGED MATERIAL from an approved dredging project in any of the Baltimore County
tributaries of the Chesapeake Bay may be redeposited in a contained area described in
subsection [(a)] (B)(1)(I) of this section.

(2) Only [dredge spoil] DREDGED MATERIAL from local dredging projects
initiated by Baltimore County in the waters of Baltimore County may be redeposited in any
additional contained area for the redeposit of [spoil] DREDGED MATERIAL authorized
under subsection [(a)(1)] (B)(1)(I) of this section.

(3) ONLY DREDGED MATERIAL FROM A LOCATION WITHIN 1 MILE OF
THE SHORELINE OF A LARGE REDEVELOPMENT SITE MAY BE REDEPOSITED IN A
CONTAINED AREA FOR THE REDEPOSIT OF DREDGED MATERIAL AUTHORIZED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) THE FEE PAYABLE FOR EACH CUBIC YARD OF DREDGED MATERIAL
DEPOSITED AT THE HART–MILLER ISLAND DREDGED MATERIAL CONTAINMENT
FACILITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B)(3)(III) OF THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) NOT EXCEED THE STATE’S ACTUAL INCREMENTAL COSTS OF
OPERATING AND MAINTAINING THE HART–MILLER ISLAND DREDGED MATERIAL
CONTAINMENT FACILITY, TO THE EXTENT SUCH COSTS ARISE FROM THE REDEPOSIT
OF DREDGED MATERIAL DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B)(3)(III) OF THIS SECTION,
EXPRESSED ON A PER–CUBIC–YARD BASIS; AND

(2) BE IN ADDITION TO THE PAYMENTS REQUIRED BY THE
COMMUNITY BENEFITS AGREEMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(3)(III)2 OF THIS
SECTION.

(E) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION SHALL AUTHORIZE THE DEPARTMENT TO
APPROVE THE REDEPOSIT OF DREDGED MATERIAL WITHIN 5 MILES OF THE
HART–MILLER–PLEASURE ISLAND CHAIN IN BALTIMORE COUNTY USING CONFINED
AQUATIC DISPOSAL.

5–1104.

(a) (1) With the advice and consent of the Senate, the Governor shall appoint a
Hart–Miller–Pleasure Island Citizens Oversight Committee.

(2) The terms and qualifications of members of the Oversight Committee
shall be determined by the Governor.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 807 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The Oversight Committee shall:

(1) Monitor and provide oversight regarding:

(i) The future development, use, and maintenance of the
Hart–Miller–Pleasure Island chain; [and]

(ii) The water quality immediately surrounding the islands;

(III) THE REDEPOSIT OF DREDGED MATERIAL AT THE
HART–MILLER ISLAND DREDGED MATERIAL CONTAINMENT FACILITY; AND

(IV) ANY COMMUNITY BENEFITS AGREEMENTS ENTERED INTO IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–1103(B)(3)(III)2 OF THIS SUBTITLE; and

(2) Hear and dispose of complaints lodged by individuals affected by the
future development and the water quality immediately surrounding the
Hart–Miller–Pleasure Island chain.

16–202.

(a) A person may not dredge or fill on State wetlands without a license.

(i) (1) [The] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
Board may not approve a license or an amendment to a license authorizing the dredge
material deposited in the Hart–Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility to
exceed an elevation of:

(i) 44 feet above the mean low water mark in the north cell; and

(ii) 28 feet above the mean low water mark in the south cell.

(2) [On] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, ON or
after January 1, 2010, the Board may not approve a license or an amendment to a license
authorizing the deposit of dredge material at the Hart–Miller ISLAND Dredged Material
Containment Facility.

(3) (I) IN THIS PARAGRAPH, “LARGE REDEVELOPMENT SITE” HAS
THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–101.1 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(II) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, ON OR BEFORE
DECEMBER 31, 2027, THE BOARD MAY APPROVE A LICENSE OR AN AMENDMENT TO A
LICENSE AUTHORIZING THE DEPOSIT OF DREDGED MATERIAL AT THE HART–MILLER
ISLAND DREDGED MATERIAL CONTAINMENT FACILITY IF:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 807

1. THE DREDGED MATERIAL IS FROM A LOCATION
WITHIN 1 MILE OF THE SHORELINE OF A LARGE REDEVELOPMENT SITE; AND

2. THE PERSON UNDERTAKING THE DREDGING PROJECT
HAS, AFTER CONSULTATION WITH THE HART–MILLER–PLEASURE ISLAND CITIZENS
OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE, ENTERED INTO AN ENFORCEABLE COMMUNITY BENEFITS
AGREEMENT, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–1103(B)(III)2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7