START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 316

Chapter 316

(House Bill 325)

AN ACT concerning

Estates and Trusts – Interested Person – Definition

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “interested person” for purposes of provisions
of law governing the estates of decedents, guardians of persons and property, trusts,
and powers of attorney; and generally relating to interested persons.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Estates and Trusts
Section 1–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Estates and Trusts
Section 1–101(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Estates and Trusts

1–101.

(a) In this article the following words have the meanings indicated.

(j) (1) “Interested person” means:

(i) A person named as executor in a will;

(ii) A person serving as personal representative after judicial or
administrative probate;

(iii) A legatee in being, [not fully paid,] whether the legatee’s interest
is vested or contingent, EXCEPT THAT A LEGATEE WHOSE INTEREST HAS BEEN FULLY
PAID OR FULLY ADEEMED CEASES TO BE AN “INTERESTED PERSON” ON RECEIPT OF
PAYMENT OR NOTICE OF THE ADEMPTION;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 316 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) An heir even if the decedent dies testate, except that an heir of a
testate decedent ceases to be an “interested person” when the register has given notice
pursuant to § 2–210 or § 5–403(a) of this article; [or]

(v) An heir or legatee whose interest is contingent solely on whether
some other heir or legatee survives the decedent by a stated period if the other heir or
legatee has died within that period;

(VI) A SURVIVING SPOUSE WHO HAS TIMELY FILED AN ELECTION
TO TAKE AN ELECTIVE SHARE UNDER § 3–403 OF THIS ARTICLE, EXCEPT THAT THE
SURVIVING SPOUSE CEASES TO BE AN “INTERESTED PERSON” ON THE ELECTION
BEING WITHDRAWN OR RULED INEFFECTIVE BY A COURT OF COMPETENT
JURISDICTION; OR

(VII) A PERSON WHO TIMELY FILES A PETITION TO CAVEAT
UNDER § 5–207 OF THIS ARTICLE, EXCEPT THAT THE PERSON CEASES TO BE AN
“INTERESTED PERSON” ONCE THE CAVEAT PROCEEDING HAS BEEN DISPOSED OF.

(2) “Interested person” includes:

(i) A minor or other person under a disability; or

(ii) The judicially appointed guardian, committee, conservator or
trustee for such person, if any, and if none, then the parent or other person having assumed
responsibility for such person.

(3) “INTERESTED PERSON” DOES NOT INCLUDE AN ASSIGNEE OF A
LEGATEE OR AN HEIR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2