START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 337

Chapter 337

(House Bill 367)

AN ACT concerning

Community Colleges – Contraception – Access Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring, on or before ~~a~~ certain ~~date~~ dates, each community college to
develop and implement a plan to provide students with access to over–the–counter
contraception; requiring each community college to submit a certain report to the
Maryland Higher Education Commission each year; requiring the Commission to
submit a certain report to the General Assembly each year; authorizing the
Maryland Department of Health, on request, to provide certain assistance to a
community college; and generally relating to community colleges and contraception
access requirements.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 16–111
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

16–111.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “OVER–THE–COUNTER CONTRACEPTION” MEANS A
CONTRACEPTIVE DRUG OR DEVICE APPROVED BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION THAT CAN BE PURCHASED OBTAINED FOR USE WITHOUT A
PRESCRIPTION.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER AUGUST 1, 2024 2025, EACH
COMMUNITY COLLEGE, IN CONSULTATION WITH STUDENTS AND STUDENT
ORGANIZATIONS, SHALL DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A PLAN TO PROVIDE STUDENTS
WITH ACCESS TO OVER–THE–COUNTER CONTRACEPTION.

(2) THE PLAN UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE 24–HOUR ACCESS TO OVER–THE–COUNTER CONTRACEPTION THROUGH:
THE STUDENT HEALTH CENTER, RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS ON CAMPUS, OR
~~VENDING~~ ~~MACHINES~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 337 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE STUDENT HEALTH CENTER;

(II) RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS ON CAMPUS;

(III) VENDING MACHINES; OR

(IV) ANY OTHER METHOD THAT PROVIDES ALL STUDENTS
ACCESS WHEN ON CAMPUS.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY SEPTEMBER 1, 2025, AND EACH JULY
SEPTEMBER 1 THEREAFTER, ON A FORM PROVIDED BY THE COMMISSION, EACH
COMMUNITY COLLEGE SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COMMISSION ON
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PLAN REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION, INCLUDING:

(I) HOW STUDENTS ARE PROVIDED ACCESS TO
OVER–THE–COUNTER CONTRACEPTION ON CAMPUS;

(II) AVAILABLE INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMOUNT OF
OVER–THE–COUNTER CONTRACEPTION PROVIDED ON CAMPUS; AND

(III) A DESCRIPTION OF HOW THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE HAS
CONSULTED WITH STUDENTS AND STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS TO DEVELOP AND
IMPLEMENT THE PLAN UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 1, 2025, AND EACH
SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 1 THEREAFTER, THE COMMISSION SHALL REPORT TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, ON THE INFORMATION COLLECTED FROM THE COMMUNITY COLLEGES
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, ON REQUEST, MAY
PROVIDE ASSISTANCE TO A COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN:

(1) DEVELOPING A PLAN UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(2) CONSULTING AND COLLABORATING WITH ORGANIZATIONS WITH
EXPERTISE IN PROVIDING ACCESS TO OVER–THE–COUNTER CONTRACEPTION
THROUGH VENDING MACHINES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Maryland Higher
Education Commission shall ensure that the focus of the report due to the General
Assembly on or before ~~September~~ October 1, 2025, under § 16–111 of the Education Article
as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall be on the implementation plans of community

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 337

colleges that have not implemented the institution’s access to over–the–counter
contraception on or before ~~October~~ August 1, 2025.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3