START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 375 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 375 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Port of Baltimore - Renaming 
 
 
This bill changes various references in State law that refer to the “Port of Baltimore” to 
instead refer to the “Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature. The Port of Baltimore was renamed as 
the Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore in 2006. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: The Maryland Port Administration (MPA), through its efforts to increase 
waterborne commerce, promotes the economic well-being of the State and manages the 
State-owned facilities at the Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore. MPA is governed by 
its Executive Director and the Maryland Port Commission. 
 
According to the Maryland State Archives, in June 2006, Maryland Governor  
Robert L. Ehrlich, Jr. announced that he had officially renamed the Port of Baltimore as 
the Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 375/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 156 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State 
Archives; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2