START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 345 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 345 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Fish and Wildlife - Endangered and Threatened Species - Definitions, Petitions, 
and Regulations 
 
 
This bill modifies the Endangered Species of Fish Conservation Act and the Nongame and 
Endangered Species Conservation Act to (1) require that a petition proposing to remove a 
species from, or add a species to, the lists of endangered species and threatened species 
include specified information; (2) require the Secretary of Natural Resources to 
periodically review and, if warranted, update the lists of endangered species and threatened 
species; and (3) modify the definitions of “fish” and “wildlife” under the Acts. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill can be implemented with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Petition to Add or Remove an Endangered or Threatened Species 
 
The bill establishes that a petition submitted by an interested person – proposing to remove 
a species from, or add a species to, the list of endangered species or the list of threatened 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 345/ Page 2 
species under the Endangered Species of Fish Conservation Act or the Nongame and 
Endangered Species Conservation Act – must include:   
 
 
a description of the biological distribution of the species in the State; 
 
the life needs and habitat requirements of the species; 
 
evidence (1) of the species’ decline, if the species is an unlisted species or (2) that 
the species is more common than previously believed and documented, if the species 
is a listed species; 
 
all known threats that jeopardize the continued existence of the species; 
 
any other relevant biological and ecological data or other life history information 
pertinent to the status of the species; 
 
evidence that the species is recognized as a valid species, or an infraspecific taxon 
(or infraspecific taxa, in the case of wildlife or plants) of regional or national 
significance); and 
 
adequate documentation that the species occurs naturally and is permanently 
established in the State. 
 
Review of Regulations at Least Every Five Years 
 
The bill requires the Secretary of Natural Resources – by July 1, 2026, and at least every 
five years thereafter – to review and, if warranted, update regulations adopted under the 
Endangered Species of Fish Conservation Act and the Nongame and Endangered Species 
Conservation Act that contain the lists of endangered species and threatened species. 
 
Definitions of “Fish” and “Wildlife” 
 
Under the Endangered Species of Fish Conservation Act, the bill modifies the definition of 
“fish” so that it includes (1) invertebrates that spend the majority of their life cycle in water 
and (2) any product of any fish. Under the modified definition, “fish” means finfish, 
crustaceans, mollusks, invertebrates, amphibians, and reptiles that spend the majority of 
their life cycle in water, and includes any part, egg, offspring, product, or dead body of any 
fish. 
 
Under the Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act, the bill modifies the 
definition of “wildlife” so that it means “any nondomesticated species or subspecies of the 
animal kingdom,” in place of “every living creature, not human, wild by nature, endowed 
with sensation and power of voluntary motion.” The definition is also modified to include 
(1) mollusks, invertebrates, and crustaceans that spend a majority of their life cycle on land 
and (2) any product of any wildlife. Under the full, modified definition, “wildlife” means 
any nondomesticated species or subspecies of the animal kingdom, and includes 
(1) mammals, birds, amphibians, mollusks, invertebrates, crustaceans, and reptiles that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 345/ Page 3 
spend a majority of their life cycle on land and (2) any part, egg, offspring, product, or dead 
body of any wildlife. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Petition to Add or Remove an Endangered or Threatened Species 
 
Under the Endangered Species of Fish Conservation Act and the Nongame and Endangered 
Species Conservation Act, the Secretary of Natural Resources, upon the petition of an 
interested person, must conduct a review of any listed or unlisted species proposed to be 
removed from or added to the lists of endangered species and threatened species (with the 
exception of species determined to be endangered or threatened pursuant to the federal 
Endangered Species Act) if the Secretary publishes notice that the person has presented 
substantial evidence which warrants a review. 
 
Department of Natural Resources regulations (COMAR 08.03.08.02C) require a petition 
to list or delist a species to include the same information that the bill requires in statute. 
 
Regulations Containing Lists of Endangered or Threatened Species 
 
Under the Endangered Species of Fish Conservation Act, the Secretary must adopt rules 
and regulations containing a list of all species of fish normally occurring within the State 
determined to be endangered species and a list of all species determined to be threatened 
species. 
 
Under the Nongame and Endangered Species Conservation Act, the Secretary must adopt 
regulations containing a list of all species of wildlife and plants normally occurring within 
the State determined to be endangered species and a list of all species determined to be 
threatened species. 
 
Definitions of “Fish” and “Wildlife” 
 
“Fish” is defined in statute to mean finfish, crustaceans, mollusks, and amphibians and 
reptiles that spend the majority of their life cycle in water and any part, egg, offspring, or 
dead body of any of these species. This definition applies to Title 4 (“Fish and Fisheries”) 
of the Natural Resources Article, which includes the Endangered Species of Fish 
Conservation Act. 
 
“Wildlife” is defined in statute to mean every living creature, not human, wild by nature, 
endowed with sensation and power of voluntary motion. “Wildlife” includes mammals, 
birds, amphibians, and reptiles that spend a majority of their life cycle on land or any part, 
egg, offspring, or dead body of any of them. This definition applies to Title 10 (“Wildlife”) 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 345/ Page 4 
of the Natural Resources Article, which includes the Nongame and Endangered Species 
Conservation Act. 
 
Under the federal Endangered Species Act, the term “fish or wildlife” means any member 
of the animal kingdom, including without limitation any mammal, fish, bird (including any 
migratory, nonmigratory, or endangered bird for which protection is also afforded by treaty 
or other international agreement), amphibian, reptile, mollusk, crustacean, arthropod or 
other invertebrate, and includes any part, product, egg, or offspring thereof, or the dead 
body or parts thereof. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 916 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4