START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 814

Chapter 814

(House Bill 381)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Examiners in Optometry – Criminal History Records Checks

FOR the purpose of requiring an applicant for a license to practice optometry ~~or~~ and certain
applicants for the renewal of a license to submit to a criminal history records check;
and generally relating to criminal history records checks for optometry licenses.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 11–302, 11–303, 11–306, and 11–307.1, ~~and~~ ~~11–308~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 11–302.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

11–302.

(a) To qualify for a license, an applicant shall be an individual who meets the
requirements of this section.

(b) The applicant shall be of good moral character.

(c) The applicant shall be at least 18 years old.

(d) (1) The applicant shall submit to the Board satisfactory evidence of
scholastic and professional education that is at least equal to the current standards set by
the Board. However, an applicant who is licensed to practice optometry in any other state
shall submit satisfactory evidence of scholastic and professional education that is at least
equal to the standards set by the Board at the time of the applicant’s completion of
scholastic and professional education.

(2) On written request, the Board shall provide information as to the
current scholastic and professional education standards that the Board sets. In the case of
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 814 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

an out–of–state applicant the Board shall provide information on the educational and
professional standards in effect at the time of an applicant’s completion of scholastic and
professional education.

(e) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the applicant shall pass an
examination given by the Board under this subtitle.

(F) THE APPLICANT SHALL SUBMIT TO A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS
CHECK IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 11–302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

11–302.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “CENTRAL REPOSITORY” MEANS THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE INFORMATION SYSTEM CENTRAL REPOSITORY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

(B) AN APPLICANT SHALL APPLY TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY FOR A
STATE AND NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

(C) AS PART OF AN APPLICATION TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY FOR A
STATE AND NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK, AN APPLICANT SHALL
COMPLETE AND SUBMIT TO THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY:

(1) A COMPLETE SET OF LEGIBLE FINGERPRINTS TAKEN IN A FORMAT
APPROVED BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AND THE DIRECTOR
OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION;

(2) THE FEE AUTHORIZED UNDER § 10–221(B)(7) OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE FOR ACCESS TO MARYLAND CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS;
AND

(3) THE MANDATORY PROCESSING FEE REQUIRED BY THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION FOR A NATIONAL CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK.

(D) IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 10–201 THROUGH 10–229 OF THE CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE ARTICLE, THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY SHALL FORWARD TO THE
BOARD AND THE INDIVIDUAL THE INDIVIDUAL’S CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD
INFORMATION.

(E) INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY UNDER
THIS SECTION:

(1) IS CONFIDENTIAL;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 814

(2) MAY NOT BE REDISSEMINATED; AND

(3) SHALL BE USED ONLY FOR THE LICENSING PURPOSE AUTHORIZED
BY THIS TITLE.

(F) THE SUBJECT OF A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK UNDER THIS
SECTION MAY CONTEST THE CONTENTS OF THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD
INFORMATION ISSUED BY THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY AS PROVIDED IN § 10–223 OF
THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

(G) IF CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION IS REPORTED TO THE
CENTRAL REPOSITORY AFTER THE DATE OF THE INITIAL CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORDS CHECK, THE CENTRAL REPOSITORY SHALL PROVIDE TO THE BOARD AND
THE INDIVIDUAL REVISED CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION FOR THE
INDIVIDUAL.

11–303.

To apply for a license, an applicant shall:

(1) Submit an application to the Board on the form that the Board requires;
[and]

(2) Pay to the Board the application fee set by the Board; AND

(3) SUBMIT TO A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 11–302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

11–306.

(A) The Board shall issue a license to any applicant who:

(1) Meets the requirements of this title; [and]

(2) Pays to the Board the license fee set by the Board; AND

(3) SUBMITS TO A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 11–302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) ON RECEIPT OF THE CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION OF AN
APPLICANT FOR LICENSURE, IN DETERMINING WHETHER TO GRANT A LICENSE, THE
BOARD SHALL CONSIDER:

(1) THE AGE AT WHICH THE CRIME WAS COMMITTED;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 814 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE NATURE OF THE CRIME;

(3) THE CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE CRIME;

(4) THE LENGTH OF TIME THAT HAS PASSED SINCE THE CRIME;

(5) SUBSEQUENT WORK HISTORY;

(6) EMPLOYMENT AND CHARACTER REFERENCES; AND

(7) OTHER EVIDENCE THAT DEMONSTRATES WHETHER THE
APPLICANT POSES A THREAT TO PUBLIC HEALTH OR SAFETY.

11–307.1.

(a) An applicant for a limited license shall [submit]:

(1) SUBMIT to the Board:

[(1)] (I) An application on the form the Board requires; and

[(2)] (II) A written confirmation of participation from the institution in
which the applicant intends to participate in a postgraduate teaching, research, or training
program; AND

(2) SUBMIT TO A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 11–302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(b) The Board may waive the examination requirements of this subtitle and issue
a limited license to practice optometry to an individual who:

(1) Is qualified for a postgraduate teaching, research, or training position;

(2) Is applying to participate in a postgraduate teaching, research, or
training program approved by the Board under this subsection;

(3) Is eligible to sit for the Maryland licensure examination;

(4) Is licensed, at the time of application, to practice optometry in another
state; and

(5) Pays the fee set by the Board.

(c) A limited license authorizes the licensee for 1 year to practice optometry only:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 814

(1) At the institution that has been approved by the Board and is
designated on the individual’s license;

(2) At other institutions that are affiliated with the designated institution;
and

(3) On the patients of the designated institution or its affiliates.

(d) The Board may renew a limited license once for an additional 1–year term if
the holder:

(1) Otherwise meets the requirements of this section;

(2) Submits a renewal application to the Board on the form that the Board
requires; [and]

(3) Pays to the Board the limited license renewal fee set by the Board; AND

(4) SUBMITS TO THE BOARD SATISFACTORY EVIDENCE OF HAVING
COMPLETED A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECK IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
11–302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~11–308.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~A~~ ~~license~~ ~~expires~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~date~~ ~~set~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board,~~ ~~unless~~ ~~the~~ ~~license~~ ~~is~~ ~~renewed~~
~~for~~ ~~an~~ ~~additional~~ ~~term~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~ ~~A~~ ~~license~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~be~~ ~~renewed~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~term~~
~~longer~~ ~~than~~ ~~2~~ ~~years.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~At~~ ~~least~~ ~~1~~ ~~month~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~license~~ ~~expires,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~send~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~licensee,~~
~~by~~ ~~electronic~~ ~~means~~ ~~or~~ ~~first–class~~ ~~mail~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~last~~ ~~known~~ ~~electronic~~ ~~or~~ ~~physical~~ ~~address~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~licensee,~~ ~~a~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~notice~~ ~~that~~ ~~states:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~date~~ ~~on~~ ~~which~~ ~~the~~ ~~current~~ ~~license~~ ~~expires;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~date~~ ~~by~~ ~~which~~ ~~the~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~application~~ ~~must~~ ~~be~~ ~~received~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
~~Board~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~issued~~ ~~and~~ ~~mailed~~ ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~license~~ ~~expires;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~The~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~fee.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~Before~~ ~~the~~ ~~license~~ ~~expires,~~ ~~a~~ ~~licensee~~ ~~periodically~~ ~~may~~ ~~renew~~ ~~it~~ ~~for~~ ~~an~~
~~additional~~ ~~2–year~~ ~~term,~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~licensee:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~Otherwise~~ ~~is~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~licensed;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Pays~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~a~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~fee~~ ~~set~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board;~~ ~~and~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 814 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(3)~~ ~~Submits~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~A~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~application~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~form~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~requires;~~ ~~and~~

(ii) Satisfactory evidence of [compliance]:

1. COMPLIANCE with the continuing education
requirements set under this subtitle for license renewal; AND

2. HAVING COMPLETED A CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS
CHECK IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 11–302.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~(d)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~renew~~ ~~the~~ ~~license~~ ~~of~~ ~~and~~ ~~issue~~ ~~a~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~certificate~~ ~~to~~ ~~each~~
~~licensee~~ ~~who~~ ~~meets~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~

~~(e)~~ ~~If~~ ~~an~~ ~~optometrist~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~renew~~ ~~a~~ ~~license~~ ~~before~~ ~~its~~ ~~expiration~~ ~~date,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~
~~shall~~ ~~send~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~optometrist~~ ~~a~~ ~~notice~~ ~~stating~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~license~~ ~~will~~ ~~expire~~ ~~30~~ ~~days~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~
~~notice~~ ~~is~~ ~~sent~~ ~~unless~~ ~~the~~ ~~optometrist~~ ~~applies~~ ~~for~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~grace~~ ~~period.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) This section applies only:

(1) with respect to the first application for the renewal of a license that is
submitted on or after January 1, 2026; and

(2) to a licensed optometrist whose initial license was issued before the
effective date of this Act.

(b) In addition to the requirements of § 11–308 of the Health Occupations Article,
a licensed optometrist who applies for the renewal of the license shall submit to the State
Board of Examiners in Optometry:

(1) satisfactory evidence of having completed a criminal history records
check in accordance with § 11–302.1 of the Health Occupations Article, as enacted by
Section 1 of this Act; and

(2) an attestation that the licensee has submitted to a State and national
criminal history records check.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6