START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 323 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 323 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Commission on Climate Change Membership - Addition 
 
 
This bill adds the Chair of the Public Service Commission (PSC) and the Secretary of 
Emergency Management, or their designees, to the Maryland Commission on Climate 
Change (MCCC). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for additional MCCC members are assumed 
to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Commission on Climate Change 
 
MCCC, originally created by executive order, was codified in statute pursuant to 
Chapter 429 of 2015 to advise the Governor and the General Assembly on ways to mitigate 
the causes of, prepare for, and adapt to the consequences of climate change. MCCC is 
required to submit annual updates to the Governor and the General Assembly on the State’s 
efforts to mitigate the causes of, prepare for, and adapt to the consequences of climate 
change, including any future plans and recommendations for legislation. The Maryland 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 323/ Page 2 
Department of the Environment and the Department of Natural Resources jointly staff the 
commission. 
 
In addition to other designated and appointed members, MCCC includes the secretaries of 
the Environment, Agriculture, Natural Resources, Planning, Transportation, and 
General Services, plus the Director of the Maryland Energy Administration and the 
People’s Counsel (or their designees). 
 
Public Service Commission 
 
PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies subject to its jurisdiction to 
(1) ensure their operation in the interest of the public and (2) promote adequate, 
economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in the State without unjust 
discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, the economy of the State, 
the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected workers, the conservation of 
natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, the achievement of the State’s 
climate commitments for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and the protection of a public 
service company’s infrastructure against cybersecurity threats. PSC must also enforce 
compliance with legal requirements by public service companies. 
 
“Public service company” means a common carrier company, electric company, gas 
company, sewage disposal company, telegraph company, telephone company, water 
company, or any combination of public service companies. 
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
Chapters 287 and 288 of 2021 established the Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management (MDEM) as a principal department of the Executive Branch of State 
government and as the successor to the Maryland Emergency Management Agency. 
MDEM is responsible for coordinating the State response in any major emergency or 
disaster. This includes supporting local governments as needed or requested and 
coordinating assistance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other 
federal partners. MDEM manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad range of 
initiatives leading to enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of natural 
and man-made disasters that could threaten the State’s citizens. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 323/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 337 (Senator Feldman, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Public Service 
Commission; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3