START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 741

Chapter 741

(House Bill 315)

AN ACT concerning

Regulated Firearms – ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~Police~~ Maryland Judiciary –
Reporting Requirements

FOR the purpose of repealing and altering a reporting requirement to require the
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~Police~~ Maryland Judiciary, instead of the State Commission on
Criminal Sentencing Policy, to report on the number of charges, convictions, and
sentences for certain regulated firearm violations; and generally relating to
reporting requirements of the ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~Police~~ Maryland Judiciary.

BY repealing
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 6–215
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 5–148
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 6–215 of Article – Criminal Procedure of the Annotated Code of Maryland
be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Public Safety

5–148.

(A) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, AND EACH OCTOBER 1 THEREAFTER,
THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE MARYLAND JUDICIARY SHALL REPORT TO
THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE NUMBER OF CHARGES, CONVICTIONS,
AND SENTENCES FOR VIOLATIONS OF § 4–203 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE AND
§ 5–133(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 741 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THE INFORMATION INCLUDED IN THE REPORT SHALL BE
DISAGGREGATED BY JURISDICTION, RACE, AND GENDER.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2