START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 220

Chapter 220

(House Bill 371)

AN ACT concerning

Election Law – Recounts – Procedures

FOR the purpose of requiring a petitioner for a recount to select the method for conducting
the recount; limiting the methods from which the selection must be made; requiring
a local board of elections to preserve and store certain voter–verifiable paper records
and conduct a recount in a certain manner ~~and~~ ~~count~~ ~~duplicate~~ ~~ballots~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~manual~~
~~recount~~ ~~after~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~review;~~ and generally relating to recount procedures.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 9–102(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Election Law
Section 12–108
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

9–102.

(a) In this section, a “voter–verifiable paper record” includes:

(1) a paper ballot prepared by the voter for the purpose of being read by a
precinct–based optical scanner;

(2) a paper ballot prepared by the voter to be mailed to the applicable local
board, whether mailed from a domestic or an overseas location; and

(3) a paper ballot created through the use of a ballot marking device.

12–108.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 220 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DUPLICATE BALLOT” MEANS A PAPER BALLOT THAT:

(I) IS CREATED BY A LOCAL BOARD FOR PURPOSES OF VOTE
TABULATION BY AN OPTICAL SCANNER BECAUSE THE VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER
RECORD SUBMITTED BY THE VOTER IS NOT ACCEPTABLE FOR VOTE TABULATION BY
AN OPTICAL SCANNER; AND

(II) IS A COPY OF A VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD THAT:

1. FOR AN ABSENTEE BALLOT RETURNED BY MAIL,
REFLECTS THE INTENT OF THE VOTER; OR

2. FOR A PROVISIONAL BALLOT, INCLUDES ONLY THE
VOTES FOR CONTESTS FOR WHICH THE VOTER IS ELIGIBLE TO VOTE.

(3) “VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD” HAS THE MEANING STATED
IN § 9–102 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) IN A RECOUNT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH
(2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PETITIONER SHALL SELECT THE METHOD FOR
CONDUCTING THE RECOUNT.

(2) THE PETITIONER MAY SELECT ONLY ONE OF THE FOLLOWING
METHODS:

(I) RESCANNING THE BALLOTS USING:

1. THE SAME VOTE TABULATING EQUIPMENT THAT WAS
USED IN THE ELECTION; OR

2. ALTERNATIVE VOTE TABULATING EQUIPMENT, IF
ALTERNATIVE EQUIPMENT IS AVAILABLE AND ITS USE IS FEASIBLE, AS DETERMINED
BY THE STATE BOARD;

(II) A MANUAL RECOUNT OF VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER
RECORDS; OR

(III) ANY OTHER RECOUNT METHOD APPROVED BY THE STATE
ADMINISTRATOR.

(C) A LOCAL BOARD SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 220

(1) PRESERVE THE VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD
CORRESPONDING TO EACH DUPLICATE BALLOT THAT IS CREATED; AND

(2) STORE EACH DUPLICATE BALLOT THAT IS CREATED TOGETHER
WITH THE CORRESPONDING VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD; AND

(3) IN A MANUAL RECOUNT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, COUNT THE
DUPLICATE BALLOT AFTER REVIEW OF THE VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD.

(D) IN A RECOUNT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, A LOCAL BOARD SHALL:

(1) EXAMINE THE VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD AND
DUPLICATE BALLOT; AND

(2) (I) IF THE VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD AND
DUPLICATE BALLOT DO NOT MATCH, CREATE A NEW DUPLICATE BALLOT THAT
ACCURATELY REFLECTS THE VOTER’S INTENT AND COUNT THAT DUPLICATE
BALLOT; OR

(II) IF THE VOTER–VERIFIABLE PAPER RECORD AND
DUPLICATE BALLOT MATCH, COUNT THE DUPLICATE BALLOT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3