START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

Chapter 256

(House Bill 309)

AN ACT concerning

Cooperative Housing Corporations – Dispute Settlement

FOR the purpose of altering procedures for the dispute settlement mechanism under the
Maryland Cooperative Housing Corporation Act; and generally relating to dispute
settlement in cooperative housing corporations.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 5–6B–30
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Corporations and Associations

5–6B–30.

(a) The dispute settlement mechanism provided by this section applies to any
complaint or demand formally arising on or after [January 1, 2015] OCTOBER 1, 2023,
unless the bylaws of the cooperative housing corporation or the proprietary lease of the
member who is a party to the dispute state otherwise.

(b) (1) Except as provided in this subsection, a governing body may not impose
a fine, suspend voting, bring an action in court to evict, or infringe on any other rights of a
member for a violation of:

(i) The rules of the cooperative housing corporation; or

(ii) The provisions of the member’s proprietary lease.

(2) The governing body shall [serve] SEND TO the member [with], VIA
CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED, AT THE ADDRESS OF RECORD FOR
NOTICE PURPOSES WITH THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION a written
demand to cease and desist from the alleged violation specifying:

(i) The alleged violation;

(ii) The action required to abate the violation; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 256 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) 1. A time period of not less than [10] 15 days during which
the violation may be abated without further sanction if the violation is a continuing one; or

2. A statement that any further violation of the same rule
may result in the imposition of sanction after notice and THE OPPORTUNITY FOR A
hearing if the violation is not continuing.

(3) (i) If the violation continues past the period specified under
paragraph (2)(iii)1 of this subsection, or if the same rule is violated subsequently, the
governing body shall [serve] SEND TO the member [with], VIA CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN
RECEIPT REQUESTED, AT THE ADDRESS OF RECORD FOR NOTICE PURPOSES WITH
THE COOPERATIVE HOUSING CORPORATION A written notice of THE MEMBER’S RIGHT
TO REQUEST a hearing to be held by the governing body in session.

(ii) The [hearing] notice shall specify:

1. The nature of the alleged violation;

[2. The time and place of the hearing, which time may be not
less than 10 days from the giving of the notice;

3. An invitation to attend the hearing and produce any
statement, evidence, and witnesses on behalf of the member; and]

[4.] 2.The proposed sanction to be imposed;

3. THE PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTING A HEARING; AND

4. THE TIME FRAME FOR REQUESTING A HEARING,
WHICH MAY NOT BE LESS THAN 10 DAYS BEGINNING ON THE DATE OF THE NOTICE.

(4) (i) [The] IF THE MEMBER REQUESTS A HEARING WITHIN THE
TIME FRAME SPECIFIED IN THE NOTICE GIVEN UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE governing body shall hold a hearing on the alleged violation in
executive session[, in accordance with the notice provided under paragraph (3) of this
subsection].

(II) THE GOVERNING BODY SHALL GIVE THE MEMBER AT LEAST
10 DAYS’ WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE TIME AND PLACE OF THE HEARING.

[(ii)] (III) At the hearing, the member shall have the right to present
evidence and to present and cross–examine witnesses regarding the alleged violation.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 256

[(iii)] (IV) Prior to imposing any sanction on the member, the
governing body shall place in the minutes of the meeting proof of the notice provided to the
member under paragraph (3) of this subsection, which shall include:

1. A copy of the notice, together with a statement of the date
and manner of [the delivery of] PROVIDING the notice; or

2. A statement that the member in fact appeared at the
hearing.

[(iv)] (V) The governing body shall place in the minutes of the
meeting the results of the hearing and the sanction, if any, imposed on the member.

(5) IF THE MEMBER DOES NOT REQUEST A HEARING WITHIN THE TIME
FRAME SPECIFIED IN THE NOTICE GIVEN UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE GOVERNING BODY, AT THE NEXT MEETING, SHALL DELIBERATE
AS TO WHETHER THE VIOLATION OCCURRED AND DECIDE WHETHER A SANCTION IS
APPROPRIATE FOR THE VIOLATION.

(c) A member may appeal a decision of a governing body made in accordance with
the dispute settlement procedure described in this section to the courts of Maryland.

(d) (1) If a member fails to comply with this subtitle, the bylaws of a
cooperative housing corporation, or a decision rendered by the governing body in accordance
with this section, the governing body or any other member of the cooperative housing
corporation may sue the member for any damages caused by the failure or for injunctive
relief.

(2) The prevailing party in a proceeding authorized under this subsection
is entitled to an award for reasonable attorney’s fees as determined by court.

(e) The failure of a governing body to enforce a provision of this title, the
proprietary lease of a member, or the bylaws of the cooperative housing corporation on any
occasion is not a waiver of the right to enforce the provision on any other occasion.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
application to any complaint or demand formally arising under the rules of a cooperative
housing corporation or the provisions of a member’s proprietary lease before the effective
date of this Act, unless the bylaws of the cooperative housing corporation or the proprietary
lease of the member who is a party to the dispute states otherwise.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3