START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 376 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 376 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Study on the Feasibility of Relocating the Prince George's County Public School 
System Headquarters  
PG 501-24 
 
 
This bill requires the Prince George’s County Board of Education to hire an independent 
consultant to complete a comprehensive study on the feasibility of relocating the board 
headquarters. The consultant must complete certain specified actions relating to studying 
and making recommendations on the feasibility of relocating the board headquarters. The 
county board must develop a solicitation process for hiring an independent consultant and 
cover the cost of the required study. The study must be completed before the county board 
enters into a new long-term lease. On or before June 1, 2026, the independent consultant 
must report its findings and recommendations to the county board. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Stadium Authority can assist in the completion of the study 
as needed using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by an estimated $375,000 
for the completion of the required study. Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a 
mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 376/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The independent consultant must: 
 
 
conduct a thorough site selection analysis to identify and evaluate potential locations 
within Prince George’s County that are suitable for the construction of a new board 
headquarters when factoring a potential site’s (1) accessibility; (2) central location 
in the county and proximity to public schools; (3) proximity to public transportation 
and mass transit; and (4) potential for providing community amenities and 
resources; 
 
undertake a comprehensive financial analysis to estimate the costs associated with 
land acquisition, construction, and outfitting of a new headquarters; 
 
assess 
potential 
funding 
sources 
to 
support 
construction, 
including 
public-private partnerships and local, State, and federal funding; 
 
evaluate the environmental impact of the proposed relocation, including stormwater 
mitigation and energy efficiency considerations; 
 
ensure compliance during the relocation process by engaging with State and county 
agencies, including the Department of Permitting, Inspections and Enforcement; the 
Maryland Stadium Authority; the Department of Public Works and Transportation; 
and any other units the independent consultant considers necessary; 
 
explore opportunities to provide multi-use, multigenerational community amenities, 
including community spaces, libraries, recreational facilities, and educational 
training centers; 
 
conduct interviews with key stakeholders, including representatives from public 
schools in the county, school board members, county and State officials, 
parent-teacher associations, and local community organizations; 
 
conduct community surveys and questionnaires to solicit input and suggestions from 
stakeholders, county residents, and local businesses; 
 
establish a timeline that incorporates fund allocation, design, engineering, and 
construction phases; and 
 
explore any other pertinent information required to complete the study. 
 
Current Law:  The Prince George’s County Board of Education currently is headquartered 
in the Sasscer Administration Building in Upper Marlboro. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Prince George’s County Public Schools advises that, based on the 
cost of similar studies, completion of the report by June 1, 2026, would cost approximately 
$375,000. Prince George’s County Public Schools further advises that there may be 
significant additional costs associated with implementing any recommendations of the 
study. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 376/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland Stadium Authority; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3