START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 353 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 353 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Department of Health - 2-1-1 Maryland - Oversight 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “Health and Human Services Referral System” to mean a 
coordinated system for health and human service resources accessible to all State residents 
through 2-1-1 and other designated technology systems. The bill repeals the requirements 
that the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in consultation with 2-1-1 Maryland, 
(1) evaluate the performance of each 2-1-1 Maryland call center; (2) make 
recommendations to 2-1-1 Maryland regarding the quality of service provided by call 
centers or the performance of call centers when issues related to service quality and 
performance are presented to MDH; and (3) make recommendations regarding corrective 
action to be taken by a call center, as appropriate. The bill expresses legislative intent that 
2-1-1 Maryland expand membership of its board of directors to include two representatives 
of 2-1-1 Maryland call centers (as nominated by the call centers by July 1, 2024). The bill 
also makes conforming changes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any change in State activities does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Health and Human Services Referral System is a telephone service 
that automatically connects an individual dialing the digits 2-1-1 to an established 
information and referral answering point. MDH oversees the 2-1-1 Maryland call centers 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 353/ Page 2 
and operation of the Health and Human Services Referral System in the State. MDH, in 
consultation with 2-1-1 Maryland, (1) maintains public information available from State 
agencies, programs, and departments that provide health and human services; (2) supports 
projects and activities that further 2-1-1 Maryland development; (3) examines and make 
recommendations to maximize the use of information technology in making 2-1-1 services 
available throughout the State; (4) evaluates the performance of each call center; (5) makes 
recommendations to 2-1-1 Maryland regarding the quality of service provided or the 
performance of call centers; and (6) makes recommendations regarding corrective action 
to be taken by a call center. By December 31 each year, MDH must report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly on these activities. 
 
Additional Comments:  2-1-1 Maryland is a private, nonprofit organization that maintains 
an information and referral service network that is available to Maryland residents via 
telephone and Internet. 2-1-1 Maryland offers guidance 24 hours a day and seven days a 
week regarding access to health, crisis, and social services. As noted above, the bill 
expresses legislative intent that 2-1-1 Maryland add two representatives to its board of 
directors, as nominated by 2-1-1 Maryland call centers by July 1, 2024. The Department 
of Legislative Services notes that 2-1-1 Maryland cannot be required to do so due to its 
status as a private, nonprofit organization. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 340 and SB 890 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 445 (Senators Zucker and Augustine) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2