START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 337 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 337 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Bike Lanes and Shoulders - Yielding Right-of-Way (Sarah 
Debbink Langenkamp Memorial Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes increased penalties for a driver of a vehicle who fails to yield the 
right-of-way in a designated bike lane or shoulder to a person lawfully riding a bicycle, an 
electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD), or a motor scooter if the driver 
contributes to the serious physical injury or death of a person riding a bicycle, EPAMD, or 
motor scooter. A violator is subject to imprisonment for up to two months and/or a 
maximum fine of $2,000. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $56,900 in FY 2025 
only for programming changes. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially affect State 
finances or operations. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
56,900 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($56,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 337/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to § 21-1209(d) of the Transportation Article, the driver of a 
vehicle must yield the right-of-way to a person who is lawfully riding a bicycle, an 
EPAMD, or a motor scooter in a designated bike lane or shoulder if the driver of the vehicle 
is about to enter or cross the designated bike lane or shoulder. A violation is a misdemeanor 
that carries a fine of up to $500. The prepayment penalty is $80 for a standard violation 
and $120 for a violation that contributes to an accident. The Motor Vehicle Administration 
must assess one point for a standard violation and three points for a violation that 
contributes to an accident. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Judiciary advises that, in fiscal 2023, there were 
six violations (charges) and two guilty dispositions (convictions) under § 21-1209(d) of the 
Transportation Article in the District Court and one citation and zero guilty dispositions in 
the State’s circuit courts. In fiscal 2022, there were five violations and four guilty 
dispositions in the District Court under § 21-1209(d); no charges were filed in the 
circuit courts. The Judiciary advises that its data does not indicate which, if any, of the 
violations charged in fiscal 2022 and 2023 involved the serious physical injury or death of 
a person riding a bicycle, an EPAMD, or a motor scooter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 315 (Senator Kelly) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Maryland State Commission on Criminal 
Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2