START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 397 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 397 
(Delegate Charkoudian) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Utilities – Thermal Energy Network Systems – Authorization and 
Establishment (Working for Accessible Renewable Maryland Thermal Heat 
(WARMTH) Act) 
 
 
This bill authorizes an electric company, a gas company, or a water company to own, 
manage, and recover costs associated with a thermal energy network system, subject to 
Public Service Commission (PSC) approval and other specified requirements. By 
July 1, 2025, each gas company that serves at least 75,000 customers must submit one or 
two proposals for a pilot thermal energy network system to PSC for approval. PSC may 
decide on the proposals by December 31, 2025. The Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA) must coordinate specified funding sources to assist an electric, gas, or water 
company in covering the costs for all behind-the-meter projects, as specified, and must 
reserve $9.0 million in related federal funding for pilot systems. MEA must also coordinate 
with the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to provide 
services or funding for weatherization for all low- or moderate-income housing within a 
pilot system’s area. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC administrative costs increase by 
$367,700 to $730,600 annually from FY 2025 through 2029; special fund revenues for PSC 
increase correspondingly from assessments imposed on public service companies. Special 
fund expenditures for MEA increase by $1.1 million in FY 2025 and by $103,600 to 
$117,900 annually from FY 2025 through 2029. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) 
expenditures increase by $25,000 to $50,000 in FY 2025 for the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT) to conduct a disparity study. Other federal/special funds for MEA 
and DHCD are assumed to be reallocated beginning in FY 2026. Other potential and 
operational effects are discussed below. The effect on utility rates is discussed in the 
Additional Comments section below. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 397/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  While there are likely local permitting activities associated with thermal 
energy network systems, overall, the bill does not materially affect local government 
finances or operations. The effect on utility rates is discussed in the Additional Comments 
section below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. The effect on utility rates is discussed in the 
Additional Comments section below. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Key Definitions 
 
“Thermal energy network system” means a system:   
 
 
of closed loop underground piping infrastructure, including geothermal boreholes, 
leading up to a utility meter for the conveyance or storage of renewable, 
nongreenhouse gas (GHG)-emitting thermal energy; and 
 
that creates a network of customers with thermal energy for heating and cooling 
through noncombusting electric heat pumps. 
 
“Pilot system” means a pilot thermal energy network system developed by a gas company 
to replace gas infrastructure with a thermal energy network system. 
 
“Behind-the-meter project” means a project that involves a physical, operational, or 
behavioral modification on the customer side of a utility meter, including replacement of 
appliances, retrofits, and panel upgrades. “Front-of-meter project” means a project that 
impacts the utility side of a meter. 
 
General Authorizations and Requirements for Thermal Energy Network Systems 
 
An electric company, a gas company, or a water company may own, manage, and recover 
costs associated with a thermal energy network system subject to the approval of PSC, and 
may drill a geothermal borehole in a public utility right-of-way where feasible to meet the 
requirements of the bill.  
 
For any front-of-meter or behind-the-meter projects related to the construction of any 
thermal energy network system under the bill, an electric company, a gas company, or a 
water company must work with employees already under contract with the company or use 
qualified contractors that abide by a community benefit agreement (with specified 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 397/ Page 3 
requirements). The company must also provide its employee bargaining unit an opportunity 
to (1) work on any front-of-meter or behind-the-meter projects related to the construction 
of any thermal energy network system and (2) provide maintenance and operations for any 
thermal energy network system. The company must also require a contractor or 
subcontractor on a project to meet specified labor requirements, such as paying the area 
prevailing wage and offering healthcare and retirement benefits.  
 
Gas Company Pilot Program 
 
 
Application Process 
 
By October 1, 2024, each gas company that serves at least 75,000 customers in its 
distribution territory must begin to develop a plan for a pilot system or systems and file 
notice with PSC that the company has begun plan development, subject to additional 
specified requirements. In practice, this applies to Baltimore Gas and Electric Company 
and Washington Gas Light Company. A gas company that serves fewer than 
75,000 customers in its distribution territory may develop a plan for a pilot system or 
systems in accordance with the bill. 
 
By July 1, 2025, each gas company that serves at least 75,000 customers in its distribution 
territory must submit either one or two proposals for a pilot system to PSC for approval, 
subject to various specified requirements. A gas company that serves fewer than 
75,000 customers in its distribution territory may submit a proposal for a pilot system to 
PSC after providing at least 60 days’ advance notice.   
 
A proposal for a pilot system must (1) ensure that at least 80% of a pilot system’s customers 
are from low- or moderate-income housing and (2) demonstrate that the gas company has 
obtained, or is reasonably certain to obtain, any available federal funding. Each proposal 
must address multiple aspects of the pilot system, including:   
 
 
how the pilot system will develop useful information for the adoption of regulations 
governing thermal energy network systems; 
 
how the pilot system furthers GHG emissions reduction goals; 
 
how the pilot system advances financial and technical approaches to equitable and 
affordable building electrification; 
 
how the pilot system creates benefits to its customers, employees, and society at 
large; 
 
how the pilot system contributes to avoiding costs to electric distribution and 
transmission systems and gas pipe replacement; 
 
the extent to which the proposal gives priority to underserved or overburdened 
communities, as defined; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 397/ Page 4 
 
safety, reliability, operations, maintenance, customer complaint resolution, and 
emergency response. 
 
Each proposal must include (1) a proposed rate structure for the pilot system that is 
projected to ensure that any customer participating in the pilot system does not pay more 
for utilities than if the customer had not participated and (2) a proposed set of 
measurements of energy units and accounting standards. 
 
A municipality, county, or community organization may submit neighborhoods to gas 
companies for consideration as part of a pilot system; if such an entity does so, it must 
submit a copy of the proposal to PSC.  
 
 
Evaluation and Approval Process 
 
By December 31, 2025, PSC may approve, approve with modifications, or reject a 
proposal. If PSC determines that a proposal is in the public interest and is cost-effective, it 
may approve, approve with modifications, or reject the proposal, subject to specified 
requirements. In making the determination, PSC must:   
 
 
consider the projected costs and benefits of the projects proposed for inclusion in 
the pilot system by using a test that includes (1) societal costs and benefits and  
(2) avoided energy and infrastructure investments; 
 
determine whether the pilot system is in the public interest and in the interest of 
ratepayers; 
 
determine how each pilot system’s performance will be evaluated during the pilot 
system’s duration;  
 
ensure that each pilot system has a provision for customer opt-outs and details 
ratepayer impacts; and 
 
determine whether the proposal is cost-effective, as specified. 
 
Each gas company must complete construction of a pilot system within one year after PSC 
approves the system, although PSC may extend the deadline for good cause. Upon 
completion of a pilot system, the gas company must file with PSC any information relevant 
to the above decision criteria. Each gas company implementing a pilot system must 
participate in standardized data collection coordinated by PSC, as specified.  
 
Each pilot system must meet the requirements for pilot systems under the bill for two years 
after the pilot system is initiated and operational. After that, PSC, in consultation with 
MEA, the Office of People’s Counsel (OPC), the company, a representative of the 
employees of the company, and participating customers, must determine whether to make 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 397/ Page 5 
the pilot system permanent. A pilot system made permanent must still continue to meet 
requirements in place for pilot systems. 
 
 
Cost Recovery 
 
A gas company may request approval from PSC to track the costs of developing a proposal 
for a pilot thermal energy system under the bill. PSC must approve the request if the 
proposed plan and costs are found to be necessary to meet the requirements of the bill, 
reasonable, and in the public interest. At a gas company’s next rate case, PSC may 
authorize recovery of prudently incurred costs associated with developing the proposal and 
any carrying costs that PSC deems appropriate. If a determination is made that a pilot 
system will not be made permanent, PSC may approve recovery of all prudently incurred 
costs necessary for a gas company to comply with the determination. 
 
Behind-the-meter Funding and Project Coordination 
 
Before October 1, 2025, MEA must provide grants to community-based organizations for 
outreach in neighborhoods to increase participation in a pilot system and coordinate the 
implementation of an approved pilot system. A grant may be up to $1.0 million to each 
organization. The funding may be from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) or 
any other source of State or federal funding.  
 
MEA must coordinate funding sources, including federal funding, philanthropic funding, 
EmPOWER Maryland funding, and SEIF funding allocated to energy efficiency, to assist 
an electric company, a gas company, or a water company in covering the costs for all 
behind-the-meter projects, including full electrification, associated with a thermal energy 
network system, ensuring affected residential customers are not required to pay for 
connection to the system or any appliance replacements required for electrification. Funds 
from the federal Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 may not exceed $14,000 per residential 
unit and $9.0 million in total. This requirement does not apply specifically or only to pilot 
systems.  
 
Unless precluded by federal law, regulation, or program requirement guidelines, MEA 
must reserve $9.0 million of federal funding from the U.S. Department of Energy to ensure 
adequate funding for appliances installed in connection with a pilot system. Such funds 
must be allocated no later than June 30, 2028, and spent no later than June 30, 2030. In 
providing funding made available under the federal Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 for 
behind-the-meter projects, MEA must give priority to low- and moderate-income housing; 
this requirement also does not apply specifically or only to pilot systems. 
 
MEA must also coordinate with DHCD to provide services or funding for weatherization 
for all low- or moderate-income housing within a pilot system’s area. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 397/ Page 6 
A gas company implementing a pilot program must be responsible for construction, 
including any necessary renovations, for behind-the-meter projects related to any appliance 
or panel replacements or upgrades necessary to connect to a thermal energy network system 
and operate without gas. The gas company must also pursue all tax credits and federal 
funding available for front-of-the-meter and behind-the-meter projects and coordinate with 
MEA to access funds available under the federal Inflation Reduction Act, rebates and 
credits under EmPOWER Maryland, and any other available funds. 
 
An electric, gas, or water company that owns and manages a pilot system must pay for any 
cost not covered by the funds and tax credits described above. Generally, any costs incurred 
by the company after all funds and tax credits have been applied may be recovered within 
one year through rate adjustments or another mechanism approved by PSC. However, if 
the company is required to own behind-the-meter infrastructure for a specified period of 
time in order to qualify for funding, (1) the costs must be recovered within that period of 
time; (2) the company must maintain the infrastructure during the ownership period; and 
(3) ownership must subsequently transfer to the customer. These requirements do not 
authorize or prohibit a company from recovering costs for behind-the-meter infrastructure 
that does not meet the requirements of the bill. 
 
Minority Business Enterprise Requirements 
 
To the extent practicable and authorized by the U.S. Constitution, an approved pilot system 
applicant and the Maryland Environmental Service must comply with the State’s Minority 
Business Enterprise (MBE) Program. 
 
Within six months after the approval of a pilot system, the Governor’s Office of Small, 
Minority, and Women Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Office of the 
Attorney General and the gas company operating the approved pilot system, must establish 
a clear plan for setting reasonable and appropriate MBE participation goals and procedures 
for the pilot system. To the extent practicable, the goals and procedures must be based on 
the requirements of the State’s Certified Local Farm and Fish Program.  
 
Decommissioning 
 
PSC must adopt regulations addressing the decommissioning or discontinuance of a pilot 
system, including regulations ensuring that the customers who participated in the pilot 
system do not incur additional expenses for the decommissioning or installation of an 
appliance that is used in the pilot system and is decommissioned before the end of its useful 
life. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 397/ Page 7 
Current Law:  
 
Public Service Commission 
 
PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies subject to its jurisdiction to  
(1) ensure their operation in the interest of the public and (2) promote adequate, 
economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in the State without unjust 
discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, the economy of the State, 
the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected workers, the conservation of 
natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, the achievement of the State’s 
climate commitments for reducing GHG emissions, and the protection of a public service 
company’s infrastructure against cybersecurity threats. PSC must also enforce compliance 
with legal requirements by public service companies. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program 
and the implementing SEIF to decrease energy demand and increase energy supply to 
promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. SEIF is funded through the proceeds from 
the auction of carbon allowances to power plants under the Regional Greenhouse Gas 
Initiative (RGGI), and the fund also receives alternative compliance payment revenues 
generated under Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard. RGGI proceeds 
received by SEIF are allocated as follows: 
 
 
at least 50% to an energy assistance account, for energy assistance programs in the 
Department of Human Services; 
 
at least 20% to a low- and moderate-income efficiency and conservation programs 
account and a general efficiency and conservation programs account for energy 
efficiency and conservation programs, projects, or activities and demand response 
programs (at least one-half of which must be used for low- and moderate-income 
programs);  
 
at least 20% to a renewable and clean energy programs’ account for (1) renewable 
and clean energy programs and initiatives; (2) energy-related public education and 
outreach; and (3) climate change and resiliency programs; and  
 
up to 10% but no more than $7.5 million to an administrative expense account for 
costs related to the administration of the fund.  
 
Among various renewable and clean energy programs funded by SEIF, MEA operates a 
Clean Energy Rebate Program established in MEA regulations that provides both 
residential and commercial clean energy rebates. The rebate amount for residential solar 
energy systems is $1,000. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 397/ Page 8 
EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act  
 
In 2008, the General Assembly passed the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act, 
which set target reductions of 15% in per capita electricity consumption and peak demand, 
respectively, by 2015 from a 2007 baseline. Legislation in 2017 extended the program 
through its 2018-2020 and 2021-2023 program cycles and established a new annual energy 
savings goal of 2.0% per year, based on each electric company’s 2016 sales. 
 
Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) further increased the goal to 2.25% 
per year in 2025 and 2026 and to 2.5% annually thereafter. The Act also specified that the 
core objective of the reductions must include development and implementation of a 
portfolio of mutually reinforcing goals, including GHG emissions reduction, energy 
savings, net customer benefits, and reaching underserved customers. The Act included 
related administrative requirements in uncodified language. 
 
DHCD participates in EmPOWER through two special fund programs:  the Limited 
Income Energy Efficiency Program (LIEEP) and the Multifamily Energy Efficiency and 
Housing Affordability (MEEHA) Program. LIEEP helps low-income households 
undertake energy conservation projects in their homes at no charge, while MEEHA 
promotes energy efficiency and affordability in the State’s multifamily rental housing 
developments for low- and moderate-income households. Approved program costs are 
recovered by electric companies on customer bills. Chapter 572 of 2023 required that 
DHCD energy efficiency and conservation programs be designed to achieve a target annual 
incremental gross energy savings compared to 2016 of at least 0.53% in calendar 2024, 
0.72% in calendar 2025, and 1.0% in calendar 2026 – a significant increase from savings 
in prior EmPOWER program cycles.   
 
Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
MDOT is designated in State regulations as the State’s MBE certification agency. See the  
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program for additional information. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Pilot Program Evaluation and Approval – Public Service Commission and Office of 
People’s Counsel 
 
PSC requires two additional staff and consultant services to implement the bill, which 
includes evaluating the gas company pilot proposals, development of evaluation criteria, 
monitoring project progress, evaluating completed projects, and determining viability of a 
permanent program. The bill also establishes permanent, general authorizations for thermal 
energy network systems, subject to PSC approval. As such, this estimate assumes PSC staff 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 397/ Page 9 
are permanent and consultant services related to pilot system evaluation are required 
through fiscal 2029.  
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $367,728 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a six-month start-up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one regulatory economist and one staff attorney to work with the consultant to complete 
the tasks described above. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
ongoing operating expenses, and $250,000 for consultant services.  
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$100,756 
Consultant Costs 
250,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
16,972 
Total FY 2025 PSC Expenditures 
$367,728 
 
Future year expenditures, which range from $703,398 in fiscal 2026 to $730,620 in 
fiscal 2029, reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover; (2) annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) consultant costs of $500,000 annually. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
Special fund expenditures for OPC for consultants to evaluate the pilot program may also 
increase beginning as early as fiscal 2026 when applications are first filed and continuing 
through fiscal 2029 as pilot systems are evaluated, although OPC advises that it depends 
on the number of rate cases and other matters requiring OPC’s resources in the fiscal year 
of the determination. OPC is also funded through assessments on public service companies; 
thus, any additional special fund expenditures are funded through a corresponding increase 
in special fund revenues from assessments imposed on public service companies.   
 
Program Implementation 
 
MEA must coordinate funding sources, including federal funding, philanthropic funding, 
EmPOWER Maryland funding, and SEIF funding allocated to energy efficiency, to assist 
an electric, gas, or water company in covering the costs for all behind-the-meter projects, 
including full electrification, associated with a thermal energy network system, ensuring 
affected residential customers are not required to pay for connection to the system or any 
appliance replacements required for electrification. The bill limits federal Inflation 
Reduction Act funding for behind-the-meter costs on approved thermal energy pilot 
systems to $9.0 million, with a limit of $14,000 per residential unit, and also reserves that 
funding for pilot systems, subject to specified requirements.  

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 397/ Page 10 
The $9.0 million in reserved federal funds, and SEIF energy efficiency funds, are assumed 
to be used for similar purposes absent the bill, on a similar timeline. An unknown amount 
of DHCD special and/or federal funds for EmPOWER are assumed to be reallocated to 
provide weatherization to low- or moderate-income housing within the pilot system’s area 
– the funds would have been otherwise used for similar purposes. This estimate also 
assumes that total funding for grants to community-based organizations is $1.0 million and 
is provided from SEIF in fiscal 2025, and that MEA requires one additional full-time staff 
to coordinate the funding (and that sufficient SEIF administrative funds are available). 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for MEA increase by $1,059,901 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for a six-month startup delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one program manager to coordinate the multiple sources of funding across multiple 
agencies and thermal energy network systems. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and $1.0 million in grants to community-based 
organizations. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$52,915 
Grants to Community-Based Organizations 
1,000,000 
Operating Expenses 
6,986 
Total FY 2025 MEA Expenditures 
$1,059,901 
 
Future year MEA administrative expenditures, which range from $103,594 in fiscal 2026 
to $117,872 in fiscal 2029, reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Additionally, $9.0 million of federal funding for MEA, an unknown amount of SEIF 
energy efficiency funds, and an unknown amount of special and/or federal funds for 
DHCD’s EmPOWER programs are reallocated beginning in fiscal 2026 and potentially 
through fiscal 2029 or later, although exact amounts and timing are unknown. State 
finances are further affected if other funds are provided for pilot and/or nonpilot systems, 
additional grants are provided to community-based organizations, and/or MEA experiences 
additional administrative costs. 
 
DHCD anticipates a small operational impact from the requirement to coordinate with 
MEA on the use of EmPOWER funds, which the department anticipates can be 
accomplished with existing resources. 
 
The bill specifies certain enforcement and administrative requirements related to 
community benefit agreements for the Maryland Department of Labor, which can be 
accomplished with existing resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 397/ Page 11 
Minority Business Enterprise Goals 
 
TTF expenditures increase by $25,000 to $50,000 in fiscal 2025 for MDOT to conduct a 
disparity study (independent of an ongoing statewide disparity study scheduled for 
completion in September 2024) in accordance with constitutional requirements for the 
MBE program. After completion of the study, it is assumed that GOSBA can establish a 
plan for setting MBE goals for covered projects with existing resources.      
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide geothermal heat pump equipment 
and installations may benefit from the projects funded and undertaken due to the bill. Some 
property owners may also benefit from subsidized new equipment and appliances, 
depending on the systems authorized by PSC. 
 
Additional Comments:  MEA advises that federal guidance issued in November 2023 
indicates that the federal investment tax credit available under the federal Inflation 
Reduction Act of 2022 cannot be used for projects where the utility owns part of the 
geothermal system (such as underground coils) and a property owner owns another part 
(such as appliances or pumps). The guidance is still under review at the federal level and 
it is not possible to predict when or if the matter will be resolved. The bill is structured for 
utility ownership.  
 
Generally, costs not covered by federal, State, or other funding sources for thermal energy 
network systems, plus a rate of return on the utility-owned systems, can be expected to be 
recovered through utility rates, although the magnitude of any increase is unknown at this 
time. The effect on any particular unit of government or small business is unknown and 
depends on the increase in rates for the affected customer class. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 570 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 397/ Page 12 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Energy Administration; Public Service Commission; 
Office of People’s Counsel; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department 
of General Services; Maryland Department of the Environment; Office of the Attorney 
General; Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; Maryland 
Environmental Service; Harford County; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; 
Baltimore Gas and Electric Company; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 397/ Page 13 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. The 
Maryland Department of Transportation is the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
In August 2013, GOSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2024. GOSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total +2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 397/ Page 14 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require GOSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the 
State’s MBE program, the State conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is 
continued evidence that MBEs are underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The disparity study completed in 2017 serves as the basis for the most recent 
reauthorization of the MBE program. It found continued and ongoing disparities in the 
overall annual wages, business earnings, and rates of business formation between 
nonminority males and minorities and women in Maryland. For instance, average annual 
wages for African Americans (both men and women) were 37% lower than for comparable 
nonminority males; average annual wages for nonminority women were 33% lower than 
for comparable nonminority males. It also found continued disparities in the use of MBEs 
by the State compared to their availability in the marketplace to perform work in designated 
categories of work. For instance, African American-owned construction businesses were 
paid 5.1% of State construction contract dollars, but they made up 10.3% of the 
construction sector in the relevant State marketplace. Nonminority women-owned 
construction businesses were paid 7.5% of State construction contract dollars but made up 
13.7% of the construction sector. According to the analysis, these differences were large 
and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; Chapters 137 and 138 of 2023, 
which reauthorized the program for the tenth time since its inception, also extended the due 
date for the new disparity study to September 2024 to inform the subsequent 
reauthorization process. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation rates for major 
Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during fiscal 2022 and 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 397/ Page 15 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2022 and 2023 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
Aging 
4.2% 
1.2% 
Agriculture 
4.4% 
3.2% 
Budget and Management 
7.4% 
32.9% 
Commerce 
1.8% 
53.8% 
Education 
23.0% 
11.5% 
Environment 
18.9% 
37.9% 
Executive Department 
6.6% 
4.6% 
General Services 
20.1% 
19.5% 
Health 
5.5% 
8.4% 
Higher Education Commission 
2.1% 
3.0% 
Housing and Community Development 
36.7% 
48.5% 
Human Services 
15.0% 
10.5% 
Information Technology 
1.6% 
14.4% 
Juvenile Services 
6.0% 
6.5% 
Labor 
1.4% 
18.6% 
Military 
0.7% 
22.3% 
Natural Resources 
0.6% 
10.2% 
Planning 
0.3% 
0.0% 
State Police 
13.3% 
20.9% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
41.0% 
6.2% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.6% 
22.1% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
61.8% 
20.2% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
26.9% 
48.5% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
9.7% 
13.1% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
20.9% 
21.7% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
24.8% 
12.0% 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
18.8% 
19.4% 
Statewide Total1 
17.3% 
17.9% 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 397/ Page 16 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A socially disadvantaged individual is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An economically disadvantaged 
individual is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2024 is $2,073,412. 

END OF PAGE 16