START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 43

Chapter 43

(House Bill 380)

AN ACT concerning

State Emergency Medical Services Board – Licenses and Certificates –
Application Requirements

FOR the purpose of prohibiting the State Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Board from
requiring an applicant to provide proof that the applicant is lawfully present in the
United States or have a Social Security number or Individual Taxpayer
Identification Number as a condition for licensure or certification; requiring the EMS
Board to require each applicant for a license to disclose the Social Security number
or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number of the applicant or, as permitted
under federal law, provide alternative documentation, and record the number or
alternative documentation in the application file to be provided upon request to the
Child Support Administration of the Department of Human Services for purposes of
collecting child support from an obligor in arrears; and generally relating to
application requirements for licensure and certification by the EMS Board.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 13–516(a)(1), (3), and (9), (b)(1), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 13–516(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 10–119.3(a), (c)(1) and (2), and (d)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 10–119.3(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 43 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Education

13–516.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(3) “Certificate” means a certificate issued by the EMS Board to provide
emergency medical services in the State, except where the context requires otherwise.

(9) “License” means a license issued by the EMS Board to provide
emergency medical services in the State, unless the context requires otherwise.

(b) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, an individual may not
provide emergency medical services in the State unless issued a license or certificate by the
EMS Board under this section.

(c) (1) To apply for a license or certificate, an individual shall:

(i) Submit an application on the form that the EMS Board requires;
and

(ii) Pay to the EMS Board any application fee set by the EMS Board
under subsection (m) of this section.

(2) The EMS Board may not [charge]:

(I) REQUIRE AS A CONDITION FOR LICENSURE OR
CERTIFICATION THAT AN APPLICANT:

1. PROVIDE PROOF THAT THE APPLICANT IS LAWFULLY
PRESENT IN THE UNITED STATES, AS ALLOWED UNDER 8 U.S.C. § 1621; OR

2. HAVE A SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER OR INDIVIDUAL
TAXPAYER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER; OR

(II) CHARGE a licensing, certifying, testing, or retesting fee to any
individual who is a member or employee of any governmental or volunteer fire, rescue, or
emergency medical services company at the date of application.

(3) The EMS Board shall provide for the term and renewal of licenses or
certificates issued under this section.

(d) (1) The EMS Board may adopt rules, regulations, protocols, orders, and
standards to carry out the provisions of this section.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 43

(2) Any regulations of the EMS Board relating to the practice of medicine
shall be adopted jointly with the Board of Physicians.

(3) Any regulations of the EMS Board relating to the practice of nursing
shall be adopted in collaboration with the Board of Nursing.

Article – Family Law

10–119.3.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “License” means any license, certificate, registration, permit, or other
authorization that:

(i) is issued by a licensing authority;

(ii) is subject to suspension, revocation, forfeiture, or termination by
a licensing authority; and

(iii) is necessary for an individual to practice or engage in:

1. a particular business, occupation, or profession; or

2. recreational hunting or fishing.

(3) (i) “Licensing authority” means a department, unit of a department,
commission, board, office, or court of the State.

(ii) “Licensing authority” includes:

1. the Maryland Department of Labor;

2. the Maryland Department of Health;

3. the Department of Human Services;

4. the Department of Transportation;

5. the Department of the Environment;

6. the Comptroller of the Treasury;

7. the Department of Agriculture;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 43 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

8. the Maryland Insurance Administration;

9. the Public Service Commission;

10. the Secretary of State;

11. the State Department of Education;

12. the Department of Natural Resources;

13. the Office of the Attorney General;

14. the clerks of the court that are authorized to issue a license
or certificate for professional services or recreational uses; and

15. the Supreme Court of Maryland.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, a
licensing authority shall:

(i) require each applicant for a license to disclose the Social Security
number of the applicant; and

(ii) record the applicant’s Social Security number on the application.

(2) The Department of Natural Resources shall:

(i) require an applicant for a recreational hunting or fishing license
to disclose only the last four digits of the Social Security number of the applicant instead of
the full Social Security number; and

(ii) record the applicant’s partial Social Security number on the
application.

(3) Each health occupations board AND THE STATE EMERGENCY
SERVICES BOARD shall:

(i) require each applicant for a license to:

1. disclose the Social Security number or Individual
Taxpayer Identification Number of the applicant; or

2. provide alternative documentation as permitted by the
Department of Health and Human Services under Section 466(a)(13) of the Social Security
Act; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 43

(ii) record the applicant’s Social Security number, Individual
Taxpayer Identification Number, or alternative documentation provided under item (i) of
this paragraph in the application file.

(c) (1) To carry out its responsibility under State and federal law, the
Administration may request from a licensing authority information concerning any obligor
in arrears in paying child support through a support enforcement agency.

(2) A request for information by the Administration under paragraph (1) of
this subsection:

(i) shall contain:

1. the full name of the obligor; and

2. A. the Social Security number or, as appropriate, the
partial Social Security number of the obligor, if known; or

B. the Individual Taxpayer Identification Number of the
obligor, if known; and

(ii) may be transmitted to a licensing authority using an electronic
format.

(d) (1) Upon receipt of a request for information under subsection (c) of this
section, a licensing authority shall submit the following information to the Administration
with respect to each obligor who is licensed by, or has applied for a license from, the
licensing authority:

(i) the full name of the obligor;

(ii) the address of the obligor, if known;

(iii) if known:

1. the Social Security number or, as appropriate, the partial
Social Security number of the obligor; or

2. the Individual Taxpayer Identification Number of the
obligor; and

(iv) a description of the license held by the obligor.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 43 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6