START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 336 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 336 
(Delegate Forbes, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Program - Materials for 
Individualized Education Program, Individualized Family Service Plan, and 504 
Plan Meetings 
 
 
This bill requires the State Treasurer to develop written informational materials about the 
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE), which must be distributable 
electronically or by hand, and provide those materials to the State Board of Education and 
local boards of education for distribution to parents during individualized education 
program (IEP), individualized family service plan (IFSP), or 504 plan meetings as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State general fund revenues decrease, potentially significantly, beginning as 
early as FY 2025 to the extent the bill results in additional subtraction modifications 
claimed against the personal income tax for contributions to and distributions from new 
ABLE accounts. State Treasurer nonbudgeted revenues increase, potentially significantly, 
from fees associated with new accounts, while nonbudgeted expenditures likewise increase 
for distributions. The State Treasurer can generate informational materials with existing 
resources. Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) expenditures increase 
minimally in FY 2025 only related to distribution of those materials, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant decrease in revenue to the extent more individuals 
claiming subtraction modifications for contributions to ABLE accounts decrease taxable 
income. Local school systems can distribute the informational materials as specified with 
existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 336/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Maryland ABLE informational materials must be provided at the 
initial evaluation meeting and at least one time each year during an IEP or IFSP team 
meeting. As with other IEP or IFSP informational materials, if a parent’s native language 
is not English, the information must be provided in the parent’s native language. If a child 
who has an IEP or IFSP developed in another school system moves to a different local 
school system, the new school system must provide the information again in the  
first communication regarding the child’s IEP or IFSP. Failure to provide information does 
not constitute grounds for a due process complaint. 
 
The informational materials must also be provided at least one time each year at a student’s 
504 plan meeting. If a student’s 504 plan meeting does not occur at least one time each 
year, the written informational materials must be provided at each 504 plan meeting. If a 
parent’s native language is not English, the written informational materials must be 
provided in the parent’s native language. Parents may request the written informational 
materials be provided at any subsequent meeting. 
 
Current Law:  The Stephen Beck, Jr., Achieving a Better Life Experience Act of 2014 
established a new § 529A of the Internal Revenue Code that permits a state (or a state 
agency or instrumentality) to establish and maintain another type of tax-advantaged savings 
program, a qualified ABLE program, under which contributions may be made to an account 
that is established for the purpose of meeting the qualified disability expenses of the 
designated beneficiary of the account. Chapter 39 of 2016 required the 
Maryland 529 Board, in consultation with the Maryland Department of Disabilities, to 
establish, administer, manage, and promote the Maryland ABLE Program. Chapter 113 of 
2023 abolished the Maryland 529 Board and transferred administration of the Maryland 
ABLE Program to the State Treasurer. State programs must adhere to minimum federal 
guidelines to be considered qualified ABLE programs under federal law. Individuals with 
disabilities for whom the onset of the disability occurred prior to age 26 are considered 
“eligible individuals” under Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regulations. Eligible 
individuals who establish an ABLE account and are the owner of such account are 
“designated beneficiaries” under IRS regulations. 
 
Chapter 637 of 2023 allowed for an ABLE account to be established by the eligible 
individual or a person selected by the eligible individual. If the eligible individual is unable 
to establish an ABLE account, the eligible individual’s agent under power of attorney may 
establish an account. If the eligible individual does not have a power of attorney, in priority 
order, an ABLE account may be opened for the eligible individual by the individual’s 
(1) conservator or legal guardian; (2) spouse; (3) parent; (4) sibling; (5) grandparent; or 
(6) representative payee appointed by the Social Security Administration. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 336/ Page 3 
The assets and income of ABLE accounts are exempt from State and local taxation. Money 
and assets in the accounts established under the Maryland ABLE Program or an ABLE 
program in any other state may not be considered for the purpose of determining eligibility 
to receive, or the amount of, any assistance or benefits from local or State means-tested 
programs. The money and assets in each ABLE account must be less than federal limits. 
 
Each contributor to an ABLE account may subtract up to $2,500 per year, per designated 
beneficiary, from Maryland taxable income for contributions to an ABLE account. Each 
spouse on a joint tax return is treated separately for this limited purpose. Contributions 
exceeding $2,500 may be carried over for 10 successive tax years. 
 
Federal law limits total contributions to a single ABLE account in a year to the amount 
allowed for tax-free gifts. The State Treasurer must refund to an ABLE account contributor 
any amount contributed to an ABLE account over this limit. There is also an addition 
modification for expenses that do not meet program requirements and ABLE account 
refunds. 
 
Individualized Education Programs 
 
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that a child with 
disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student turns 
21 years old, in accordance with an IFSP or IEP specific to the individual needs of the 
child. An IFSP is for children with disabilities from birth up to age 3, and up to age 5 under 
Maryland’s Extended IFSP Option if a parent chooses the option. An IEP is for students 
with disabilities ages 3 through 21. Local school systems are required to make a free 
appropriate public education available to students with disabilities from ages 3 through 21. 
However, the State, under its supervisory authority required by IDEA, has the ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring that this obligation is met. 
 
An IEP is a written statement for each child with a disability that, among other things, must 
indicate the present levels of academic achievement and functional performance of a child, 
measurable academic and functional goals for the child, how the child’s progress toward 
meeting these goals will be measured, and the special education and related services that 
are to be provided for the child. The parent of a child with a disability is a member of the 
IEP team that is responsible for developing and reviewing a child’s IEP and for revisions 
to the IEP. 
 
At the initial evaluation meeting, the parents of a child with a disability must be provided 
certain information, including (1) in plain language, a verbal and written explanation of the 
parents’ rights and responsibilities in the process and a program procedural safeguards 
notice; (2) written information that the parents may use to contact early intervention and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 336/ Page 4 
special education family support services and staff members within the local school system 
and a brief description of the services provided by staff members; and (3) written 
information on the Special Education Ombudsman and toll-free telephone number. If a 
parent’s native language is not English, the information must be provided in the parent’s 
native language. The parents may request this information at any subsequent meeting. If a 
child who has an IEP developed in another school system moves to a different local school 
system, the new school system must provide the information in the first communication 
regarding the child’s IEP. Failure to provide information does not constitute grounds for a 
due process complaint. 
 
Section 504 Plans  
 
Under Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, an organization that receives 
federal money, including public and many private schools, may not discriminate against a 
person on the basis of a disability. Section 504 requires schools to make a “reasonable 
accommodation” for students with disabilities to allow them to participate in school and 
school-related activities. Section 504 plans can be created to help students with disabilities 
receive accommodations that are not covered by their IEP. Students with disabilities who 
do not need an IEP may still receive accommodations through a Section 504 plan.  
 
For example, a student who has diabetes may have a Section 504 plan that includes a 
schedule for getting medication. A student who uses a wheelchair may have a Section 504 
plan that provides for special transportation during field trips.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill likely results in new ABLE accounts being created beginning 
as early as fiscal 2025. Accordingly, State Treasurer nonbudgeted revenues for ABLE 
accounts increase, potentially significantly, from fees associated with the new accounts. 
Likewise, nonbudgeted expenditures increase for distributions. Any such increase in ABLE 
accounts has additional impacts, as discussed below. 
 
Income Tax Subtraction Modifications:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that, for 
tax year 2022, 1,340 tax filers claimed about $4.2 million in income subtraction 
modifications for contributions to ABLE accounts. Based on data from tax years 2017 
through 2021, on average, 4.4% of the value of income tax subtraction modifications is 
foregone in State revenues. Assuming State tax revenues continue to decrease by about 
4.4% of the total amount of subtraction modifications claimed and each tax filer continues 
to subtract an average of $3,134 in contributions, for every 1,000 additional filers claiming 
the subtraction modification, State revenues decrease by approximately $137,500. Given 
the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date and assuming information is disseminated beginning 
in the final six months of 2024, new accounts may be opened in 2024 and subtraction 
modifications claimed when 2024 taxes are filed in 2025; therefore, any revenue impacts 
of the bill could begin as early as fiscal 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 336/ Page 5 
An additional 300 tax filers claimed about $550,000 in subtraction modifications for 
distributions from ABLE accounts. However, the total impact of the bill on distributions 
from ABLE accounts is difficult to quantify given the potential for distributions to occur 
many years after any initial contributions. 
 
Means-tested Programs:  New ABLE accounts created as a result of the bill would have 
their assets excluded from means testing for State programs such as Medicaid and, 
therefore, could increase the number of eligible individuals in those programs. However, 
given the size of the Medicaid budget, the impact is not likely to significantly affect the 
program. Any such impact has not been accounted for in this analysis. 
 
Distribution of Informational Materials:  The State Treasurer’s Office advises that 
Maryland 529 already possesses informational materials that satisfy the requirements of 
the bill and can deliver those materials as specified with existing resources. Minimal costs 
may be incurred in fiscal 2025 to translate those materials, as needed, for distribution to 
parents with a native language other than English. Any future updates to informational 
materials may necessitate additional expenditures for translation services; however, any 
such costs are likely absorbable with existing resources. Also, as MSDE must ensure 
distribution, including to parents whose native language is not English, MSDE 
expenditures increase minimally. Specifically, MSDE advises that system enhancements 
are necessary to encompass a check box (and appropriate language versions of that check 
box) to track distribution to parents of students during IEP, IFSP, or 504 plan meetings as 
specified.  
 
Local Revenues:  Although an exact estimate of the total impact of new ABLE subtraction 
modifications on local governments is not feasible, local revenues decrease beginning as 
early as fiscal 2025 to the extent additional individuals claim an income subtraction 
modification as a result of the bill. For tax year 2022, 1,340 tax filers claimed about 
$4.2 million in income subtraction modifications for contributions to ABLE accounts. 
Based on data from tax years 2017 through 2021, on average, 2.8% of the value of income 
tax subtraction modifications is foregone in local tax revenues. Therefore, assuming local 
tax revenues continue to decrease by about 2.8% of the total amount of subtraction 
modifications claimed and each tax filer continues to subtract an average of $3,134 in 
contributions, for every 1,000 additional filers claiming the subtraction modification, local 
revenues decrease by approximately $88,500. 
 
An additional 300 tax filers claimed about $550,000 in subtraction modifications for 
distributions from ABLE accounts. However, the total impact of the bill on distributions 
from ABLE accounts is difficult to quantify given the potential for distributions to occur 
many years after any initial contributions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 336/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 592 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Comptroller’s Office; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - June 3, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6