START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 394 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 394 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Human Relations - Commission on Civil Rights - Appeal of Final Orders 
 
 
This bill expands the judicial review available when there is a finding of no probable cause 
by the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) by establishing that (unless 
otherwise specified) such a finding is a final order appealable in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the operations or finances of 
the Judiciary or MCCR. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MCCR is the independent State agency charged with the enforcement of 
laws prohibiting discrimination in employment, housing, public accommodations, and 
State contracting. Procedures for alleging discrimination and available remedies are 
specified in statute and differ depending on the type of discrimination alleged. Generally, 
an individual alleging discrimination may initiate the process by filing a complaint with 
MCCR within timeframes specified in statute. 
 
In general, following the receipt of a properly filed complaint, the case is assigned to an 
MCCR investigator to determine whether there is probable cause that discrimination has 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 394/ Page 2 
occurred. If at the conclusion of the investigatory stage MCCR believes there is no probable 
cause that discrimination occurred, it issues a finding of no probable cause. 
 
Upon receipt of a finding of no probable cause, a complainant may file a request for 
reconsideration of the finding in accordance with MCCR’s regulations. A denial of a 
request for reconsideration of a finding of no probable cause by MCCR is a final order 
appealable to the circuit court, unless the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission has jurisdiction over the subject matter of the complaint, as specified. 
 
The Supreme Court of Maryland held in Rowe v. MCCR, 483 Md. 329 (2023) that there is 
no express statutory grant of review in the Appellate Court of Maryland of circuit court 
rulings on judicial review of no-probable-cause findings by MCCR. According to the court, 
the plain language of the statute demonstrates that the General Assembly intended to 
confine judicial review of MCCR’s no probable cause determinations to the circuit court. 
For further discussion of the court’s holding in Rowe, please see the discussion in the Cases 
and Decisions Update prepared by the Department of Legislative Services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 50 (Senator Lam, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2