START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 372 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 372 
(Delegates Harris and Stewart) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Montgomery County and Prince George's County - Rent Court Workforce 
Solutions Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Rent Court Workforce Solutions Pilot Program in Montgomery 
and Prince George’s counties. The programs are to provide individuals in failure to pay 
rent cases with workforce resources and information on workforce development, registered 
apprenticeships, and other employment opportunities. In fiscal 2026 through 2028, the 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $200,000 to be used 
for the pilot program, as specified. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No assumed effect in FY 2024 or 2025. General fund expenditures increase 
by $200,000 annually beginning in FY 2026 to fund the pilot program. Expenditures 
though FY 2028 reflect the mandated appropriation; expenditures beyond FY 2028 assume 
discretionary funding, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes 
a mandated appropriation for FY 2026 to 2028.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect operations or finances in Montgomery or 
Prince George’s counties, as it is assumed that funds mandated under the bill are disbursed 
directly to designated organizations via the State budget.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 372/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The pilot program must be administered by a “designated organization” 
(defined in the bill as the fiscal and administrative agent of a county’s local workforce 
development board). The program’s purpose is to provide a “covered individual” (defined 
in the bill as a defendant tenant of a residential rental property in a failure to pay rent case 
filed under § 8‐401 of the Real Property Article) with workforce resources and information 
on workforce development, registered apprenticeships, and other employment 
opportunities.  
 
The District Court may allow at least one representative from a designated organization to 
operate in a District Court courthouse on days on which failure to pay rent cases are heard. 
The operation of a designated organization in a District Court courthouse must be governed 
by a memorandum of understanding signed by a representative of the designated 
organization and the administrative judge for the applicable District Court. However, the 
District Court is not required to provide access enabling a designated organization to 
operate within a courtroom. 
 
By January 1, 2026, and each year thereafter, a designated organization must report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on the number of individuals that were connected to 
workforce development programs or employment opportunities through the pilot program. 
 
Current Law:  In general, a landlord seeking to evict a tenant must file the appropriate 
action (e.g., failure to pay rent, breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. If awarded a 
judgment by the court, the landlord files a warrant of restitution, which, once reviewed and 
signed by the court, authorizes an eviction. The warrants of restitution are forwarded to the 
local sheriff’s office who is then authorized to carry out the evictions. Statute sets forth 
numerous specific requirements for such actions, including those related to written notice 
prior to filing certain actions. This includes specific requirements for written notice prior 
to initiating a failure to pay rent action.  
 
In failure to pay rent actions, if judgment is in favor of the landlord and the tenant does not 
return the premises to the landlord or otherwise satisfy the judgment by paying the 
applicable rent and late fees within 4 days, as specified, the court must, at any time after 
4 days have elapsed, issue a warrant of restitution. The court may, upon presentation of a 
certificate signed by a physician certifying that surrendering the property within the 4-day 
period would endanger the health or life of the tenant or other occupant, extend the time 
for surrender of the premises as justice may require up to 15 days. Statutory provisions also 
authorize stays of execution in other specified circumstances, such as in the event of 
extreme weather conditions. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 372/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $200,000 annually beginning 
in fiscal 2026 to provide pilot program funding. This estimate (1) assumes that, despite the 
bill’s effective date of June 1, 2024, the pilot program does not commence (and/or incur 
expenses) until mandated State funding is provided; (2) reflects the mandated appropriation 
in fiscal 2026 through 2028; and (3) assumes discretionary funding continues to be 
provided after fiscal 2028. This analysis also assumes the mandated funding is appropriated 
within the budget for the Maryland Department of Labor for further disbursement directly 
to the designated organizations.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 354 (Senators Waldstreicher and Jackson) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3