START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 961

Chapter 961

(House Bill 378)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Dietetic Practice – ~~Dietician–Nutritionists~~
Dietitian–Nutritionists – ~~Licensure~~ Application Requirements

FOR the purpose of altering the ~~educational~~ application requirements that an individual
must meet to be licensed as a ~~dietician–nutritionist~~ dietitian–nutritionist; and
generally relating to ~~dietician–nutritionists~~ dietitian–nutritionists.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 5–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 5–101(c), 5–302, and 5–305
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

5–101.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the State Board of Dietetic Practice.

(c) “Certified nutrition specialist” means an individual certified by the
[Certification] Board for CERTIFICATION OF Nutrition Specialists, the accrediting body
of the American [College of] Nutrition ASSOCIATION.

5–302.

(a) To qualify for a license, an applicant shall be an individual who meets the
requirements of this section.

(b) The applicant must be of good moral character.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 961 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The applicant must be at least 18 years old.

(d) The applicant for licensure as a dietitian–nutritionist shall:

(1) (i) 1. Have satisfactorily completed academic requirements for
the field of dietetics as approved by the Board; and

2. Have received AT A MINIMUM a [baccalaureate]
MASTER’S degree from a college or university accredited by an educational accrediting
association recognized by the Council on Higher Education and Accreditation AS
REQUIRED BY THE COMMISSION ON DIETETIC REGISTRATION; or

(ii) Have received a master’s or doctoral degree from a college or
university accredited by an educational accrediting association recognized by the Council
on Higher Education and Accreditation in nutritional sciences (with emphasis in human
nutrition), food and nutrition, dietetics, human nutrition, community nutrition, public
health nutrition, or equivalent training approved by the Board;

(2) Have satisfactorily completed a program of supervised clinical
experience approved by the Board; and

(3) (i) Submit to the Board proof of certification by the [Certification]
Board for [Nutritional] CERTIFICATION OF NUTRITION Specialists; or

(ii) Submit to the Board proof of registration AS A DIETITIAN with
the Commission on Dietetic Registration of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.

(e) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the applicant must pass an
examination approved by the Board under this subtitle.

(f) The applicant shall meet any other qualifications or requirements that the
Board establishes for license applicants.

5–305.

(a) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Board may waive an examination
requirement of this title for an individual who:

(1) Is licensed to practice dietetics in another state or country;

(2) Is registered to practice dietetics AS A DIETITIAN by the Commission
on Dietetic Registration of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics; or

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 961

(3) Is certified by the [Certification] Board for CERTIFICATION OF
Nutrition Specialists.

(b) The Board may grant a waiver under this section only if the applicant:

(1) Pays the application fee set by the Board under § 5–206 of this title; and

(2) Provides adequate evidence that the applicant:

(i) Meets the qualifications otherwise required by this subtitle; and

(ii) 1. Became licensed in the other state or country after
passing, in that state or country, an examination that the Board determines to be
comparable to the examination for which the applicant is seeking the waiver;

2. Became registered AS A DIETITIAN by the Commission on
Dietetic Registration of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics after meeting the
examination waiver requirements of that Commission or its predecessor; or

3. Became certified by the [Certification] Board for
CERTIFICATION OF Nutrition Specialists after meeting the examination waiver
requirements of that Certification Board or its predecessor.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3