START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 927

Chapter 927

(House Bill 300)

AN ACT concerning

Family Law – Marriage Ceremony – Designation of Deputy Clerk

FOR the purpose of transferring, from the county administrative judge of the circuit court
for the county to the clerk of the circuit court for the county, the authority to
designate a deputy clerk to perform a marriage ceremony; and generally relating to
marriage ceremonies.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 2–406(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Family Law

2–406.

(a) (1) In this subsection, “judge” means:

(i) a judge of the District Court, a circuit court, the Appellate Court
of Maryland, or the Supreme Court of Maryland;

(ii) a judge approved under Article IV, § 3A of the Maryland
Constitution and § 1–302 of the Courts Article for recall and assignment to the District
Court, a circuit court, the Appellate Court of Maryland, or the Supreme Court of Maryland;

(iii) a judge of a United States District Court, a United States Court
of Appeals, or the United States Tax Court; or

(iv) a judge of a state court if the judge is active or retired but eligible
for recall.

(2) A marriage ceremony may be performed in this State by:

(i) any official of a religious order or body authorized by the rules
and customs of that order or body to perform a marriage ceremony;

(ii) any clerk;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 927 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) any deputy clerk designated by the [county administrative
judge] CLERK of the circuit court for the county; or

(iv) a judge.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2