START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 381 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 381 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Examiners in Optometry - Criminal History Records Checks 
 
 
This bill requires an applicant for an initial license or limited license to practice optometry 
from the State Board of Examiners in Optometry to submit to a criminal history records 
check (CHRC). On the first application for renewal of a license submitted on or after 
January 1, 2026 by an applicant whose initial license was issued prior to October 1, 2024, 
the applicant must also submit satisfactory evidence of having completed a CHRC. An 
applicant must obtain a State and national CHRC from the Criminal Justice Information 
System Central Repository (CJIS-CR) in the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS). CJIS-CR must forward the individual’s criminal history record 
information (CHRI) to the board and the individual. The board must consider certain 
specified elements in determining whether to grant a license upon receipt of an individual’s 
CHRI. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Processing of CHRC results can be handled by the board with existing 
budgeted resources. Any additional payments to CJIS-CR for CHRCs are anticipated to 
cover the costs associated with the additional checks. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Information obtained from CJIS-CR is confidential, may not be 
disseminated, and must be used only for licensing purposes authorized under the bill. The 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 381/ Page 2 
subject of a CHRC under the bill may contest the contents of the CHRC as specified. If the 
CHRI is reported to CJIS-CR after the date of the initial CHRC, CJIS-CR must provide the 
board and the individual a revised CHRI. 
 
As part of an application to obtain a CHRC from CJIS-CR, an applicant must complete and 
submit:  (1) a complete set of legible fingerprints taken in a format approved by the Director 
of CJIS-CR and the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI); (2) the applicable 
fee for access to Maryland criminal history records; and (3) the mandatory processing fee 
required by the FBI for a national CHRC. 
 
On receipt of the CHRI of an applicant for licensure, in determining whether to grant a 
license, the board must consider (1) the age at which the crime was committed; (2) the 
nature of the crime; (3) the circumstances surrounding the crime; (4) the length of time that 
has passed since the crime; (5) subsequent work history; (6) employment and character 
references; and (7) other evidence that demonstrates whether the applicant poses a threat 
to public health or safety. 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Examiners in Optometry is responsible for licensing 
individuals to practice optometry in the State, regulating the practice of optometry, 
investigating alleged violations of the Maryland Optometry Act, and taking disciplinary 
actions where warranted.  
 
In general, to qualify for a license, an applicant must be of good moral character, be at least 
18 years old, meet certain educational criteria, and pass an examination given by the board. 
Licenses may be renewed upon expiration for a term no longer than two years provided the 
licensee is otherwise entitled to be licensed, pays the renewal fee, and submits a renewal 
application including satisfactory evidence of compliance with continuing education 
requirements as specified. Under certain specified circumstances, the board may waive the 
examinations requirements and issue a limited license for one year to practice optometry 
to certain individuals. 
 
All but four of Maryland’s health occupations boards currently require at least a State 
CHRC either as part of the initial licensure process or at both initial and renewal licensure. 
In addition to the State Board of Examiners in Optometry, the following boards do not 
require any CHRC:  the State Acupuncture Board; the State Board of Dietetic Practice; and 
the State Board of Environmental Health Specialists. 
 
CJIS-CR collects, manages, and disseminate Maryland CHRI for criminal justice and 
noncriminal justice (e.g., employment and licensing) purposes. The FBI charges a fee of 
$13.25 for a national check. CJIS-CR collects the fee from the applicant and reimburses 
the FBI. CJIS-CR submits requests for national criminal records to the FBI electronically. 
When State legislation includes a national check, the FBI requires that the bill contain 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 381/ Page 3 
certain specific language. If the FBI does not approve the language of an enacted bill, 
national checks will not be provided. 
 
Each individual who uses CJIS-CR to conduct a CHRC is required to pay $51.25 for a 
State and national CHRC, including a $20 fingerprinting fee, a $13.25 FBI fee, an $18 fee 
to CJIS-CR. 
 
Additional Comments:  DPSCS advises that it has already requested FBI review and 
approval of the language in the bill but that it cannot give a timeline for approval. The 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the language in the bill is consistent with 
existing statutory language regarding CHRCs for other health occupations boards. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 175 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3