START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 363 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 363 
(Delegate Ghrist, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Caroline County – Alcoholic Beverages – Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting 
License 
 
 
This bill expands, in Caroline County, the existing one-day beer and wine tasting license 
to be the one-day beer, wine, and liquor tasting (BWLT) license. The Caroline County 
Board of License Commissioners is authorized to issue the license to an organization that 
qualifies for a Class C per diem beer, a Class C per diem beer and wine (BW), or a Class C 
per diem beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license. Among other samples authorized under 
current law, an individual may consume beer, wine, or liquor covered by the BWLT license 
in a quantity of up to (1) nine ounces of beer from all offerings in a day (increased from 
eight ounces under current law), and (2) 0.5 ounce from each offering of liquor, and 
2.5 ounces from all offerings in a day. The bill also makes conforming changes. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Caroline County operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:    
 
One-day Beer and Wine Tasting License 
 
The Caroline County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to issue a one-day 
BWTL license to the holder of a current license or an organization that qualifies for a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 363/ Page 2 
Class C beer or Class C beer and wine license. The license authorizes the license holder to 
allow the consumption of beer or wine for tasting if (1) the consumer is not charged for the 
beer, wine, or liquor, and (2) the beer or wine is consumed on the licensed premises. The 
license may not be issued to a person more than 26 times in a calendar year. The board 
need not publish a license application before granting the license.  
 
An individual may consume beer or wine covered by the license in a quantity of up to 
(1) three ounces from each offering of beer, and eight ounces from all offerings in a day, 
and (2) one ounce from each offering of wine, and four ounces from all offerings in a day. 
At the end of the day for which the license is valid, the license holder must dispose of beer 
or wine that remains in a container that was opened for tasting. The license fee is $50.       
 
Class C Per Diem Licenses – Generally 
 
A Class C per diem B, Class C per diem BW, or Class C per diem BWL license entitles 
the license holder to exercise any of the privileges conferred by the respective class of 
license:  (1) for the use of a person holding an entertainment event that is conducted by a 
club; (2) at the place described in the license; and (3) for a period not exceeding  
seven consecutive days.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 529 (Caroline County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2