START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 378 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 378 
(Delegate Guzzone) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Dietetic Practice - Dietitian-Nutritionists - Application 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill alters the requirements for licensure as a dietician-nutritionist from the State Board 
of Dietetic Practice. To qualify, an individual must, at a minimum, receive a baccalaureate 
degree from a college or university accredited by an educational accrediting association as 
required by the Commission on Dietetic Registration (instead of as recognized by the 
Council on Higher Education Accreditation). The bill also updates the name of the 
Certification Board for Nutritional Specialists to be the Board for Certification of Nutrition 
Specialists, and the name of the American College of Nutrition to be the American 
Nutrition Association. The bill makes other technical changes to clarify instances in which 
current law applies to dietitians. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature and does not directly affect government 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Dietetic Practice, established in 1985, fulfills its 
mission by issuing dietitian-nutritionist licenses, setting standards for the practice of 
dietetics, developing and enforcing regulations, resolving complaints, and educating the 
public. The board also enforces title protection of “licensed dietitian-nutritionist” to those 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 378/ Page 2 
individuals licensed by the board. The board oversees approximately 2,917 licensed 
dietitian-nutritionists. 
 
Generally, to qualify for a license as a dietician-nutritionist, an applicant must be at least 
18 years old, of good moral character, meet certain educational requirements (detailed 
below), pass an examination approved by the board, and meet any other qualifications or 
requirements established by the board. 
 
An individual may satisfy the educational requirements for licensure by either 
(1) satisfactorily completing academic requirements for the field of dietetics as approved 
by the board and receiving a baccalaureate degree from a college or university accredited 
by an educational accrediting association recognized by the Council on Higher Education 
and Accreditation (CHEA) or (2) receiving a master’s or doctoral degree from a college or 
university accredited by an education accreditation association recognized by CHEA in 
nutritional sciences (with emphasis in human nutrition), food and nutrition, dietetics, 
human nutrition, community nutrition, public health nutrition, or equivalent training 
approved by the board. 
 
All applicants must also have satisfactorily completed a board-approved program of 
supervised clinical experience and submit proof of certification by the Certification Board 
for Nutrition Specialists (renamed under the bill) or of registration with the Commission 
on Dietetic Registration of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 330 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2