START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 294

Chapter 294

(House Bill 372)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County and Prince George’s County – Rent Court Workforce
Solutions Pilot Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Rent Court Workforce Solutions Pilot Program in
Montgomery County and Prince George’s County to provide certain individuals with
certain resources and information on workforce development and employment
opportunities; and generally relating to the Rent Court Workforce Solutions Pilot
Program.

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 8–1001 through 8–1006 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10. Rent Court
Workforce Solutions Pilot Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

SUBTITLE 10. RENT COURT WORKFORCE SOLUTIONS PILOT PROGRAM.

8–1001.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COVERED INDIVIDUAL” MEANS A DEFENDANT TENANT OF A
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY IN A FAILURE TO PAY RENT CASE FILED UNDER §
8–401 OF THIS TITLE.

(C) “DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION” MEANS THE FISCAL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT OF A COUNTY’S LOCAL WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
BOARD.

(D) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE RENT COURT WORKFORCE SOLUTIONS
PILOT PROGRAM.

8–1002.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 294 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES ONLY IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY AND PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY.

8–1003.

(A) THERE IS A RENT COURT WORKFORCE SOLUTIONS PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE COVERED
INDIVIDUALS WITH:

(1) WORKFORCE RESOURCES; AND

(2) INFORMATION ON:

(I) WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT; AND

(II) EMPLOYMENT REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIPS AND OTHER
EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES.

(C) A DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE PILOT
PROGRAM.

8–1004.

(A) THE DISTRICT COURT SHALL MAY ALLOW AT LEAST ONE
REPRESENTATIVE FROM A DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION TO OPERATE IN A DISTRICT
COURT COURTHOUSE ON DAYS ON WHICH CASES FILED FOR A FAILURE TO PAY RENT
UNDER § 8–401 OF THIS TITLE ARE HEARD.

(B) THE OPERATION OF A DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION IN A DISTRICT
COURT COURTHOUSE SHALL BE GOVERNED BY A MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING SIGNED BY A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DESIGNATED
ORGANIZATION AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE FOR THE APPLICABLE DISTRICT
COURT.

(B) (C) NOTHING IN THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE THE
DISTRICT COURT TO ALLOW A REPRESENTATIVE FROM A DESIGNATED
ORGANIZATION TO OPERATE WITHIN A COURTROOM.

(C) IF BOTH PARTIES AGREE, THE COURT MAY GRANT A CONTINUANCE OR A
~~STAY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EVICTION~~ ~~PROCEEDING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~FAILURE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PAY~~ ~~RENT~~ ~~SO~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~A~~
COVERED INDIVIDUAL MAY PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 294

8–1005.

ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026, AND EACH JANUARY 1 THEREAFTER, A
DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY ON THE NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS THAT WERE CONNECTED TO
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS OR EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES
THROUGH THE PILOT PROGRAM.

8–1006.

FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2026 THROUGH 2028, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF:

(1) $100,000 TO THE DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION FOR
MONTGOMERY COUNTY OFFICE OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE TO BE USED FOR THE
PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(2) $100,000 TO THE DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION FOR PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY OFFICE OF THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE TO BE USED FOR THE
PILOT PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3