START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

Chapter 564

(House Bill 397)

AN ACT concerning

Public Utilities – Thermal Energy Network Systems – Authorization and
Establishment
(Working for Accessible Renewable Maryland Thermal Heat (WARMTH) Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring ~~each~~ certain gas ~~company~~ companies and authorizing certain
gas companies to develop a plan for a pilot thermal energy network system or
systems on or before a certain date; requiring ~~each~~ certain gas ~~company~~ companies
to submit a certain proposal or proposals to the Public Service Commission for
approval on or before a certain date; authorizing a municipal corporation, county, or
community organization to submit neighborhoods to gas companies for consideration
as part of a pilot system; establishing requirements and authorizations for the
development and implementation of a proposal and thermal energy network system;
~~requiring~~ authorizing the Commission to approve, approve with modifications, or
reject each proposal on or before a certain date; requiring the Commission, in
consultation with the Maryland Energy Administration ~~and,~~ the Office of People’s
Counsel, a certain company, a certain certified representative, and certain
customers, to make a determination on whether to make a pilot system permanent
after the completion of the pilot system’s pilot period; establishing funding
requirements for the Administration to ~~cover~~ assist certain companies in covering
certain costs; providing for the payment and recovery of certain costs; requiring the
Administration to coordinate with the Department of Housing and Community
Development to provide certain services or funding; requiring ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Environmental~~ ~~Service~~ ~~to~~ ~~issue~~ ~~certain~~ ~~procurements~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~ ~~projects~~ a gas
company to be responsible for certain costs associated with certain
behind–the–meter projects; establishing certain employment and wage
requirements for certain projects; and generally relating to thermal energy network
systems.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–703(f)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–1001 through 7–1006 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 10. Thermal
Energy Network Systems”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – ~~Environnent~~ Environment
Section 1–701(a)(1), (7), and (8)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–1801(a) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

7–703.

(f) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
indicated.

(ii) “Area median income” has the meaning stated in § 4–1801 of the
Housing and Community Development Article.

(iii) “Low or moderate income housing” means housing that is
affordable for a household with an aggregate annual income that is below 120% of the area
median income.

SUBTITLE 10. THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEMS.

7–1001.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ADMINISTRATION” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENERGY
ADMINISTRATION.

(C) “BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECT” MEANS A PROJECT THAT INVOLVES A
PHYSICAL, OPERATIONAL, OR BEHAVIORAL MODIFICATION ON THE CUSTOMER SIDE
OF A UTILITY METER, INCLUDING REPLACEMENT OF APPLIANCES, RETROFITS, AND
PANEL UPGRADES.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

(D) “COMMUNITY BENEFIT AGREEMENT” MEANS AN AGREEMENT
APPLICABLE TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF ANY THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM
AND ANY ACCOMPANYING RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIFICATION THAT:

(1) PROMOTES INCREASED OPPORTUNITIES FOR LOCAL BUSINESSES
AND SMALL, MINORITY, WOMEN–OWNED, AND VETERAN–OWNED BUSINESSES IN THE
CLEAN ENERGY INDUSTRY;

(2) ENSURES THE TIMELY, SAFE, AND EFFICIENT COMPLETION OF
THE PROJECT BY:

(I) FACILITATING A STEADY SUPPLY OF HIGHLY SKILLED
CRAFT WORKERS WHO SHALL BE PAID NOT LESS THAN THE PREVAILING WAGE RATE
DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF LABOR AND INDUSTRY UNDER TITLE 17,
SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE; AND

(II) GUARANTEEING THAT THE CONSTRUCTION WORK
PERFORMED IN CONNECTION WITH THE PROJECT WILL BE SUBJECT TO AN
AGREEMENT THAT:

1. ESTABLISHES THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT AT THE CONSTRUCTION SITE OF THE PROJECT OR A PORTION OF THE
PROJECT;

2. GUARANTEES AGAINST STRIKES, LOCKOUTS, AND
SIMILAR DISRUPTIONS;

3. ENSURES THAT ALL WORK ON THE PROJECT FULLY
CONFORMS TO ALL RELEVANT STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS, RULES, AND
REGULATIONS, INCLUDING ALL REQUIRED TRAINING FOR EMPLOYEES;

4. CREATES MUTUALLY BINDING PROCEDURES FOR
RESOLVING LABOR DISPUTES ARISING DURING THE TERM OF THE PROJECT;

5. SETS FORTH OTHER MECHANISMS FOR
LABOR–MANAGEMENT COOPERATION ON MATTERS OF MUTUAL INTEREST AND
CONCERN, INCLUDING PRODUCTIVITY, QUALITY OF WORK, SAFETY, AND HEALTH;
AND

6. BINDS ALL CONTRACTORS AND SUBCONTRACTORS TO
THE TERMS OF THE AGREEMENT THROUGH THE INCLUSION OF APPROPRIATE
PROVISIONS IN ALL RELEVANT SOLICITATION AND CONTRACT DOCUMENTS;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) PROMOTES SAFE COMPLETION OF THE PROJECT BY ENSURING
THAT AT LEAST 80% OF THE CRAFT WORKERS ON THE PROJECT HAVE COMPLETED
AN OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION 10–HOUR COURSE;

(4) PROMOTES CAREER TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES IN THE
MANUFACTURING, MAINTENANCE, AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRIES FOR LOCAL
RESIDENTS, VETERANS, WOMEN, MINORITIES, AND FORMERLY INCARCERATED
INDIVIDUALS;

(5) INCLUDES PROVISIONS FOR LOCAL HIRING AND THE HIRING OF
HISTORICALLY DISADVANTAGED GROUPS;

(6) REFLECTS A 21ST–CENTURY LABOR–MANAGEMENT APPROACH BY
DEVELOPERS AND SUPPLIERS BASED ON COOPERATION, HARMONY, AND
~~PARTNERSHIP~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~PROACTIVELY~~ ~~SEEKS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ENSURE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WORKERS~~ ~~CAN~~ ~~FREELY~~
CHOOSE TO BOTH ORGANIZE AND COLLECTIVELY BARGAIN;

(7) USES LOCALLY, SUSTAINABLY, AND DOMESTICALLY
MANUFACTURED CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND COMPONENTS TO THE EXTENT
PRACTICABLE;

(8) (7) PROMOTES THE USE OF SKILLED LOCAL LABOR,
PARTICULARLY WITH REGARD TO THE CONSTRUCTION AND MANUFACTURING
COMPONENTS OF THE PROJECT, USING METHODS INCLUDING OUTREACH, HIRING,
OR REFERRAL METHODS THAT ARE AFFILIATED WITH REGISTERED
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAMS UNDER TITLE 11, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE LABOR AND
EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE; AND

(9) (8) AUTHORIZES THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND
THE COMMISSION TO CONSIDER, REVIEW, AND ENFORCE A PUBLIC SERVICE
COMPANY’S COMPLIANCE WITH ANY COMMUNITY BENEFIT AGREEMENT.

(E) “FINANCING PROGRAM” MEANS THE ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE
REINVESTMENT CATEGORY OF THE TITLE 17 CLEAN ENERGY FINANCING PROGRAM.

(E) (F) “FRONT–OF–METER PROJECT” MEANS A PROJECT THAT IMPACTS
THE UTILITY SIDE OF A METER.

(F) (G) “GEOTHERMAL BOREHOLE” MEANS A GEOTHERMAL SHAFT
DRILLED INTO THE EARTH FOR USE IN A SYSTEM THAT USES THE THERMAL
PROPERTIES OF THE EARTH OR GROUNDWATER TO HEAT OR COOL BUILDINGS.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

(H) “GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION FUND” MEANS THE GREENHOUSE GAS
REDUCTION FUND UNDER THE FEDERAL INFLATION REDUCTION ACT OF 2022.

(G) (I) “LEARNING FROM THE GROUND UP” MEANS THE LEARNING
FROM THE GROUND UP RESEARCH TEAM FORMED BY THE HOME ENERGY
EFFICIENCY TEAM.

(H) (J) “LOW OR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 7–703(F)(1)(III) OF THIS TITLE.

(I) (K) “PILOT SYSTEM” MEANS A PILOT THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK
SYSTEM DEVELOPED BY A GAS COMPANY TO REPLACE GAS INFRASTRUCTURE WITH
A THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM.

(J) (L) “PJM CAPACITY MARKET” MEANS THE CAPACITY MARKET OF
PJM INTERCONNECTION, LLC OR ANY SUCCESSOR ORGANIZATION THAT SERVICES
THE PJM REGION.

(K) (M) “THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM” MEANS A SYSTEM:

(1) OF CLOSED LOOP UNDERGROUND PIPING INFRASTRUCTURE,
INCLUDING GEOTHERMAL BOREHOLES, LEADING UP TO A UTILITY METER FOR THE
CONVEYANCE OR STORAGE OF RENEWABLE, NONGREENHOUSE GAS–EMITTING
THERMAL ENERGY; AND

(2) THAT CREATES A NETWORK OF CUSTOMERS WITH THERMAL
ENERGY FOR HEATING AND COOLING THROUGH NONCOMBUSTING ELECTRIC HEAT
PUMPS.

7–1002.

(A) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, EACH GAS COMPANY
THAT SERVES AT LEAST 75,000 CUSTOMERS IN ITS DISTRIBUTION TERRITORY
SHALL:

(I) 1. BEGIN TO DEVELOP A PLAN FOR A PILOT SYSTEM OR
SYSTEMS; AND

(II) 2. FILE NOTICE WITH THE COMMISSION THAT THE
COMPANY HAS BEGUN PLAN DEVELOPMENT.

(II) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, A GAS COMPANY THAT
SERVES FEWER THAN 75,000 CUSTOMERS IN ITS DISTRIBUTION TERRITORY MAY

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DEVELOP A PLAN FOR A PILOT SYSTEM OR SYSTEMS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

(2) IN DEVELOPING A PLAN FOR A PILOT SYSTEM, A GAS COMPANY
SHALL COORDINATE WITH COMMUNITY GROUPS, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, ANY
CERTIFIED REPRESENTATIVES OF THE EMPLOYEES OF THE GAS COMPANY, THE
COMMISSION, THE ADMINISTRATION, AND ANY OTHER GROUPS THE GAS COMPANY
CONSIDERS NECESSARY TO ALLOW FOR DIVERSE DESIGN AMONG PILOT SYSTEMS.

(3) EACH GAS COMPANY SHALL INCLUDE IN THE NOTICE FILED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) DETAILS OF ANY COORDINATION WITH COMMUNITY
GROUPS, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, CERTIFIED REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
EMPLOYEES OF THE GAS COMPANY, THE COMMISSION, THE ADMINISTRATION, AND
ANY OTHER GROUPS THE GAS COMPANY CONSIDERS NECESSARY TO ALLOW FOR
DIVERSE DESIGN AMONG PILOT SYSTEMS; AND

(II) ANY LETTERS OF SUPPORT FROM INTERESTED GROUPS.

(B) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025, EACH GAS COMPANY THAT
SERVES AT LEAST 75,000 CUSTOMERS IN ITS DISTRIBUTION TERRITORY SHALL
SUBMIT EITHER ONE OR TWO PROPOSALS FOR A PILOT SYSTEM TO THE COMMISSION
FOR APPROVAL.

(II) A GAS COMPANY THAT SERVES FEWER THAN 75,000
CUSTOMERS IN ITS DISTRIBUTION TERRITORY MAY SUBMIT A PROPOSAL FOR A
PILOT SYSTEM TO THE COMMISSION AFTER PROVIDING AT LEAST 60 DAYS’ NOTICE
TO THE COMMISSION OF THE COMPANY’S INTENT TO FILE A PROPOSAL.

(2) A PROPOSAL FOR A PILOT SYSTEM SHALL ENSURE THAT AT LEAST
80% OF ITS CUSTOMERS ARE FROM LOW OR MODERATE INCOME HOUSING.

(3) A CUSTOMER MAY CHOOSE TO OPT OUT OF A PILOT SYSTEM
BEFORE THE PROPOSAL FOR THE PILOT SYSTEM IS SUBMITTED.

(4) EACH PROPOSAL FOR A PILOT SYSTEM SHALL DEMONSTRATE
THAT THE GAS COMPANY HAS SOUGHT ACCESS TO OBTAINED, OR IS REASONABLY
CERTAIN TO OBTAIN, ANY AVAILABLE FEDERAL FUNDING IN THE FORM OF A MATCH,
GRANT, LOAN, OR TAX CREDIT, INCLUDING THOSE ESTABLISHED UNDER THE
ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE REINVESTMENT CATEGORY OF THE TITLE 17 CLEAN
ENERGY FINANCING PROGRAM AND THE GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION FUND
UNDER THE FEDERAL INFLATION REDUCTION ACT OF 2022.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

(5) EACH GAS COMPANY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ENSURING THAT EACH
PROPOSAL SUBMITTED BY THE GAS COMPANY COMPLIES WITH ALL APPLICABLE
FEDERAL STATUTES, REGULATIONS, AND GUIDANCE RELATING TO ANY FEDERAL
FUNDING.

(6) EACH PROPOSAL SHALL ADDRESS:

(I) HOW THE PILOT SYSTEM WILL DEVELOP USEFUL
INFORMATION FOR THE ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS GOVERNING THERMAL
ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEMS;

(II) HOW THE PILOT SYSTEM FURTHERS GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS REDUCTION GOALS;

(III) HOW THE PILOT SYSTEM ADVANCES FINANCIAL AND
TECHNICAL APPROACHES TO EQUITABLE AND AFFORDABLE BUILDING
ELECTRIFICATION;

(IV) HOW THE PILOT SYSTEM CREATES BENEFITS TO ITS
CUSTOMERS, EMPLOYEES, AND SOCIETY AT LARGE, INCLUDING PUBLIC HEALTH
BENEFITS, QUALITY JOB RETENTION OR CREATION, RELIABILITY, AND INCREASED
AFFORDABILITY OF RENEWABLE THERMAL ENERGY OPTIONS;

(V) HOW THE PILOT SYSTEM CONTRIBUTES TO AVOIDING COSTS
TO ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS THAT WOULD
OTHERWISE BE REQUIRED FOR ELECTRIFICATION BY COMPARING THE PROPOSED
SYSTEM TO THE COST OF ELECTRIFICATION USING THE MOST WIDELY
COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE AIR–SOURCE HEAT PUMPS;

(VI) HOW THE PILOT SYSTEM CONTRIBUTES TO AVOIDING COSTS
RELATED TO GAS PIPE REPLACEMENT;

(VII) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE PROPOSAL GIVES PRIORITY TO
UNDERSERVED OR OVERBURDENED COMMUNITIES AS DEFINED IN § 1–701(A) OF
THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE;

(VIII) THE PILOT SYSTEM’S ABILITY TO BID DEMAND REDUCTION
INTO THE PJM CAPACITY MARKET;

(IX) NEIGHBORHOODS AT THE END POINT OF A GAS SYSTEM
WHERE A FULL TRANSITION FROM GAS SYSTEMS TO ELECTRIFICATION COULD BE
FACILITATED WITHIN THE PILOT PERIOD OR WITHIN 5 YEARS AFTER THE PILOT
PERIOD CONCLUDES;
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(X) SAFETY;

(XI) RELIABILITY;

(XII) ENVIRONMENTAL ACCEPTABILITY OF THE FLUID
TECHNOLOGY EMPLOYED;

(XIII) OPERATIONS;

(XIV) MAINTENANCE;

(XV) CUSTOMER COMPLAINT RESOLUTION;

(XVI) EMERGENCY RESPONSE;

(XVII)POINTS OF INTERCONNECTION BETWEEN THE GAS
COMPANY AND HOMEOWNER FOR ANY FLUID TRANSFER;

(XVIII) TECHNOLOGY TO BE USED TO SHUT OFF FLUID FLOW
TO CUSTOMERS;

(XIX) CUSTOMER SERVICE TERMINATION IN THE EVENT OF BILL
NONPAYMENT;

(XX) LIFE EXPECTANCY OF THE GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM; AND

(XXI) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE PROPOSAL IS COST–EFFECTIVE
FOR RATEPAYERS; AND

(XXI) (XXII) ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS AS DETERMINED BY THE
COMMISSION.

(7) EACH PROPOSAL SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A PROPOSED RATE STRUCTURE FOR THE PILOT SYSTEM
THAT ~~ENSURES~~ IS PROJECTED TO ENSURE THAT ANY CUSTOMER PARTICIPATING IN
THE PILOT SYSTEM DOES NOT PAY MORE FOR UTILITIES THAN IF THE CUSTOMER
HAD NOT PARTICIPATED; AND

(II) A PROPOSED SET OF MEASUREMENTS OF ENERGY UNITS
AND ACCOUNTING STANDARDS.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

(8) (I) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, COUNTY, OR COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATION MAY SUBMIT NEIGHBORHOODS TO GAS COMPANIES FOR
CONSIDERATION AS PART OF A PILOT SYSTEM.

(II) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, COUNTY, OR COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATION THAT SUBMITS A NEIGHBORHOOD TO A GAS COMPANY FOR
CONSIDERATION AS PART OF A PILOT SYSTEM UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH SHALL SUBMIT A COPY OF ITS PROPOSAL TO THE COMMISSION.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2025, THE COMMISSION MAY
SHALL MAY APPROVE, APPROVE WITH MODIFICATIONS, OR REJECT A PROPOSAL.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF THE
COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT A PROPOSAL IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST AND IS
COST–EFFECTIVE, THE COMMISSION SHALL MAY APPROVE, APPROVE WITH
MODIFICATIONS, OR REJECT THE PROPOSAL.

(3) (I) IN DETERMINING WHETHER TO APPROVE, APPROVE WITH
MODIFICATIONS, OR REJECT A PROPOSAL, THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(I) 1. CONSIDER THE PROJECTED COSTS AND BENEFITS OF
THE PROJECTS PROPOSED FOR INCLUSION IN THE PILOT SYSTEM BY USING A TEST
THAT INCLUDES:

1. A. SOCIETAL COSTS AND BENEFITS; AND

2. B. AVOIDED ENERGY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS;

(II) 2. DETERMINE WHETHER THE PILOT SYSTEM IS IN THE
PUBLIC INTEREST AND IN THE INTEREST OF RATEPAYERS;

(III) 3. DETERMINE HOW EACH PILOT SYSTEM’S
PERFORMANCE WILL BE EVALUATED DURING THE PILOT SYSTEM’S DURATION; AND

(IV) 4. ENSURE THAT EACH PILOT SYSTEM:

1. A. HAS A PROVISION FOR CUSTOMERS WHO MAY WISH TO
OPT OUT DURING THE COURSE OF THE PILOT PERIOD; AND

2. B. DETAILS RATEPAYER IMPACTS FOR PILOT SYSTEM
PARTICIPANTS AND ALL CUSTOMERS IN THE GAS COMPANY’S SERVICE TERRITORY;
AND

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

5. DETERMINE WHETHER THE PROPOSAL IS
COST–EFFECTIVE IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(II) A PROPOSAL UNDER THIS SECTION IS COST–EFFECTIVE IF
THE COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT:

1. THE PROJECTED BENEFITS ARE GREATER THAN THE
PROJECTED COSTS FOR ALL RATEPAYERS IN THE GAS COMPANY’S SERVICE
TERRITORY;

2. THE GAS COMPANY HAS OBTAINED, OR IS
REASONABLY CERTAIN TO OBTAIN, FEDERAL FUNDING UNDER THE FINANCING
PROGRAM OR THE GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION FUND TO SUPPORT THE COSTS
OF A PILOT SYSTEM; AND

3. THE FEDERAL FUNDING THAT THE GAS COMPANY HAS
OBTAINED, OR IS REASONABLY CERTAIN TO OBTAIN, TO SUPPORT THE COSTS OF A
PILOT SYSTEM WOULD NOT BE MORE COST–EFFECTIVE IN MEETING OTHER
GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION OR ELECTRIFICATION MEASURES IN THE STATE.

(4) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, EACH GAS COMPANY SHALL COMPLETE CONSTRUCTION OF A PILOT
SYSTEM WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER THE COMMISSION APPROVES THE SYSTEM.

(II) THE COMMISSION MAY EXTEND THE DEADLINE UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH FOR GOOD CAUSE SHOWN.

(5) IF THE COMMISSION APPROVES A PROPOSAL WITH
MODIFICATIONS, THE COMMISSION SHALL GIVE THE GAS COMPANY A REASONABLE
AMOUNT OF TIME TO MAKE THE NECESSARY MODIFICATIONS.

(6) ON COMPLETION OF A PILOT SYSTEM, THE GAS COMPANY SHALL
FILE WITH THE COMMISSION FOR EVALUATION ANY INFORMATION RELEVANT TO
THE CRITERIA ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) (1) EACH PILOT SYSTEM SHALL MEET THE REQUIREMENTS FOR
PILOT SYSTEMS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE FOR 2 YEARS AFTER THE PILOT SYSTEM IS
INITIATED AND OPERATIONAL.

(2) (I) ONCE THE 2–YEAR PERIOD UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION HAS PASSED, THE COMMISSION, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
ADMINISTRATION, AND THE OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL, THE ELECTRIC, GAS,
OR WATER COMPANY THAT OWNS AND MANAGES THE PILOT SYSTEM, A CERTIFIED

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EMPLOYEES OF THE ELECTRIC COMPANY, GAS COMPANY,
OR WATER COMPANY THAT OWNS AND MANAGES THE PILOT SYSTEM, AND
PARTICIPATING CUSTOMERS, SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER TO MAKE THE PILOT
SYSTEM PERMANENT.

(II) A PILOT SYSTEM MADE PERMANENT UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL CONTINUE TO MEET THE
REQUIREMENTS PLACED ON PILOT SYSTEMS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(III) IF A DETERMINATION IS MADE THAT A PILOT SYSTEM WILL
NOT BE MADE PERMANENT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
COMMISSION SHALL MAY APPROVE RECOVERY OF ALL PRUDENTLY INCURRED
COSTS NECESSARY FOR A GAS COMPANY TO COMPLY WITH THE DETERMINATION.

(3) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS ADDRESSING THE
DECOMMISSIONING OR DISCONTINUANCE OF A PILOT SYSTEM, INCLUDING
REGULATIONS ENSURING THAT THE CUSTOMERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE PILOT
SYSTEM DO NOT INCUR ADDITIONAL EXPENSES FOR THE DECOMMISSIONING OR
INSTALLATION OF AN APPLIANCE THAT IS USED IN THE PILOT SYSTEM AND IS
DECOMMISSIONED BEFORE THE END OF ITS USEFUL LIFE.

(E) (1) EACH GAS COMPANY IMPLEMENTING A PILOT SYSTEM SHALL
PARTICIPATE IN STANDARDIZED DATA COLLECTION COORDINATED BY THE
COMMISSION.

(2) ANY STANDARDIZED DATA COLLECTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) BE FILED WITH THE COMMISSION BY THE APPROPRIATE
GAS COMPANY; AND

(II) INCLUDE DATA FROM THE LEARNING FROM THE GROUND
UP AND ANY OTHER NATIONAL RESEARCH PROJECT FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF
THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEMS THAT THE COMMISSION CONSIDERS
APPROPRIATE.

(F) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL PROVIDE FUNDING IN THE FORM OF
GRANTS TO COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATIONS THAT PERFORM OUTREACH IN
NEIGHBORHOODS TO INCREASE PARTICIPATION IN A PILOT SYSTEM AND
COORDINATE THE IMPLEMENTATION OF AN APPROVED PILOT SYSTEM.

(2) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY PROVIDE UP TO $1,000,000 IN
FUNDING TO A COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) FUNDING UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE PROVIDED ONLY
BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025.

(4) FUNDING UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE PROVIDED FROM THE
STRATEGIC ENERGY INVESTMENT FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–20B–05 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE OR ANY OTHER SOURCE OF STATE OR FEDERAL
FUNDING.

(G) (1) A GAS COMPANY MAY REQUEST APPROVAL FROM THE
COMMISSION TO TRACK THE COSTS OF DEVELOPING A PROPOSAL UNDER THIS
SECTION.

(2) A REQUEST UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE A PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND BUDGET.

(3) THE COMMISSION SHALL APPROVE A REQUEST UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON FINDING THAT THE PROPOSED PLAN AND
COSTS ARE NECESSARY TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS SECTION,
REASONABLE, AND IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST.

(4) AT A GAS COMPANY’S NEXT RATE CASE PROCEEDING FOLLOWING
THE APPROVAL OF A REQUEST UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL
MAY AUTHORIZE RECOVERY OF PRUDENTLY INCURRED COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
DEVELOPING THE PROPOSAL AND ANY CARRYING COSTS THAT THE COMMISSION
DETERMINES ARE APPROPRIATE.

7–1003.

(A) (1) (I) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL COORDINATE FUNDING
SOURCES, INCLUDING ALL AVAILABLE FEDERAL FUNDING, PHILANTHROPIC
FUNDING, FUNDING AVAILABLE UNDER THE EMPOWER MARYLAND PROGRAM,
AND STRATEGIC ENERGY INVESTMENT FUND FUNDING ALLOCATED TO ENERGY
EFFICIENCY, TO COVER ASSIST AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A
WATER COMPANY IN COVERING THE COSTS FOR ALL BEHIND–THE–METER
PROJECTS, INCLUDING FULL ELECTRIFICATION AND WEATHERIZATION,
ASSOCIATED WITH A THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM SO THAT ANY AFFECTED
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS ARE NOT REQUIRED TO PAY FOR CONNECTION TO THE
THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM OR ANY APPLIANCE REPLACEMENTS
REQUIRED FOR ELECTRIFICATION.

(II) FUNDS FROM THE FEDERAL INFLATION REDUCTION ACT
MAY NOT EXCEED:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

1. $14,000 PER RESIDENTIAL UNIT; AND

2. $9,000,000 IN TOTAL.

(2) (I) UNLESS PRECLUDED BY FEDERAL LAW, REGULATION, OR
PROGRAM REQUIREMENT GUIDELINES, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL RESERVE
$12,000,000 $9,000,000 OF FEDERAL FUNDING FROM THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY TO ENSURE ADEQUATE FUNDING FOR ANY APPLIANCES INSTALLED IN
CONNECTION WITH A PILOT SYSTEM.

(II) FUNDS RESERVED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH SHALL BE ALLOCATED NOT LATER THAN DECEMBER 31, 2029 JUNE 30,
2028, AND SPENT NOT LATER THAN DECEMBER 31, 2031 JUNE 30, 2030.

(3) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TO PROVIDE
SERVICES OR FUNDING FOR WEATHERIZATION FOR ALL LOW OR MODERATE INCOME
HOUSING WITHIN THE PILOT SYSTEM’S AREA.

(4) IN PROVIDING FUNDING MADE AVAILABLE UNDER THE FEDERAL
INFLATION REDUCTION ACT OF 2022 FOR BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECTS, THE
ADMINISTRATION SHALL GIVE PRIORITY TO LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING.

(B) THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE A GAS COMPANY
IMPLEMENTING A PILOT SYSTEM SHALL:

(1) SHALL ISSUE PROCUREMENTS BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
CONSTRUCTION, INCLUDING ANY NECESSARY RENOVATIONS, FOR
BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECTS RELATING TO ANY APPLIANCE OR PANEL
REPLACEMENTS OR UPGRADES NECESSARY TO CONNECT TO A THERMAL ENERGY
NETWORK SYSTEM AND OPERATE WITHOUT GAS;

(2) PURSUE ALL TAX CREDITS AND FEDERAL FUNDING AVAILABLE
FOR FRONT–OF–METER AND BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECTS; AND

(3) COORDINATE WITH THE ADMINISTRATION TO ACCESS FUNDS
AVAILABLE UNDER THE FEDERAL INFLATION REDUCTION ACT, REBATES AND
CREDITS AVAILABLE UNDER THE EMPOWER MARYLAND PROGRAM, AND ANY
OTHER AVAILABLE FUNDS.

(C) (1) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY
THAT OWNS AND MANAGES A PILOT SYSTEM SHALL PAY FOR ANY COST NOT COVERED

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY THE FUNDS AND TAX CREDITS SPECIFIED IN SUBSECTIONS (A) AND (B) OF THIS
SECTION.

(2) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, ANY COSTS
INCURRED BY AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY
AFTER ALL FUNDS AND TAX CREDITS SPECIFIED UNDER SUBSECTIONS (A) AND (B)
OF THIS SECTION HAVE BEEN APPLIED MAY BE RECOVERED WITHIN 1 YEAR OF
INCURRING THE COSTS THROUGH RATE ADJUSTMENTS OR ANOTHER MECHANISM
APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION.

(D) IF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY IS
REQUIRED TO OWN BEHIND–THE–METER INFRASTRUCTURE FOR A SPECIFIED
PERIOD OF TIME TO QUALIFY FOR A FUNDING SOURCE SPECIFIED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(1)(I) OF THIS SECTION:

(1) THE COST ASSOCIATED WITH THE BEHIND–THE–METER
INFRASTRUCTURE SHALL BE RECOVERED WITHIN THE SPECIFIED OWNERSHIP
PERIOD REQUIRED FOR THE FUNDING;

(2) THE ELECTRIC COMPANY, GAS COMPANY, OR WATER COMPANY
SHALL MAINTAIN THE BEHIND–THE–METER INFRASTRUCTURE DURING THE
SPECIFIED OWNERSHIP PERIOD REQUIRED FOR THE FUNDING; AND

(3) OWNERSHIP OF THE BEHIND–THE–METER INFRASTRUCTURE
SHALL TRANSFER TO THE ELECTRIC, GAS, OR WATER CUSTOMER WHO THE
INFRASTRUCTURE WAS INSTALLED TO BENEFIT WHEN THE SPECIFIED OWNERSHIP
PERIOD REQUIRED FOR THE FUNDING LAPSES.

(E) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO AUTHORIZE OR
PROHIBIT AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY FROM
RECOVERING COSTS OF BEHIND–THE–METER INFRASTRUCTURE THAT DOES NOT
MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) SHALL PROVIDE A PROCUREMENT SUBMISSION WINDOW OF NOT
LESS THAN 90 DAYS;

(3) SHALL AWARD CONTRACTS IN A TIMELY MANNER; AND

(4) MAY ENTER INTO A CONTRACT OR CONTRACTS FOR THE
~~PROCUREMENT.~~

(C) THE ADMINISTRATION AND THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICE SHALL COORDINATE WITH GAS COMPANIES TO ENSURE THAT

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECTS CONNECT TO THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK
SYSTEMS THAT SERVE CUSTOMERS.

7–1004.

(A) FOR ANY FRONT–OF–METER OR BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECTS
RELATED TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF ANY THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER
COMPANY SHALL:

(1) WORK WITH EMPLOYEES ALREADY UNDER CONTRACT WITH THE
COMPANY; OR

(2) USE QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS THAT ABIDE BY A COMMUNITY
BENEFIT AGREEMENT.

(B) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY SHALL
GIVE ITS EMPLOYEE BARGAINING UNIT AN OPPORTUNITY TO WORK ON ANY
FRONT–OF–METER OR BEHIND–THE–METER PROJECTS RELATED TO THE
CONSTRUCTION OF ANY THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM.

(C) ANY RESIDENTIAL ELECTRIFICATION OR EFFICIENCY CONTRACTS
PROCURED BY THE MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A
COMMUNITY BENEFIT AGREEMENT.

(D) (1) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY
OPERATING A THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM SHALL PROVIDE ITS EMPLOYEE
BARGAINING UNIT AN OPPORTUNITY TO PROVIDE MAINTENANCE AND OPERATIONS
FOR ANY THERMAL ENERGY NETWORK SYSTEM.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, AN
ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY MAY CONTRACT ANY
WORK UNDER THIS SUBTITLE NOT CONDUCTED BY THE COMPANY’S EMPLOYEE
BARGAINING UNIT TO A QUALIFIED CONTRACTOR.

(II) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER
COMPANY SHALL REQUIRE A CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR ON A PROJECT
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE TO:

1. PAY THE AREA PREVAILING WAGE RATE DETERMINED
BY THE COMMISSIONER OF LABOR AND INDUSTRY, INCLUDING WAGES AND FRINGE
BENEFITS;

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. OFFER HEALTH CARE AND RETIREMENT BENEFITS TO
THE EMPLOYEES WORKING ON THE PROJECT;

3. PARTICIPATE IN AN APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM
REGISTERED WITH THE STATE OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR;

4. ESTABLISH AND EXECUTE A PLAN FOR OUTREACH,
RECRUITMENT, AND RETENTION OF STATE RESIDENTS TO PERFORM WORK ON THE
PROJECT, WITH AN ASPIRATIONAL GOAL OF 25% OF TOTAL WORK HOURS
PERFORMED BY MARYLAND RESIDENTS, INCLUDING RESIDENTS WHO ARE:

A. RETURNING CITIZENS;

B. WOMEN;

C. MINORITY INDIVIDUALS; OR

D. VETERANS;

5. HAVE BEEN IN COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE,
AND LOCAL WAGE AND HOUR LAWS FOR THE PREVIOUS 3 YEARS;

6. BE SUBJECT TO ALL STATE REPORTING AND
COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS; AND

7. MAINTAIN ALL APPROPRIATE LICENSES IN GOOD
STANDING; AND

8. ESTABLISH AND EXECUTE A PLAN TO MEET OR
EXCEED THE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION GOALS
ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(3) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) (D) (1) THE FINDINGS AND EVIDENCE RELIED ON BY THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY FOR THE CONTINUATION OF THE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
PROGRAM UNDER TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE ARE INCORPORATED IN THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE AND AUTHORIZED BY THE U. S.
CONSTITUTION, AN APPROVED PILOT SYSTEM APPLICANT AND THE MARYLAND
ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE SHALL COMPLY WITH THE STATE’S MINORITY BUSINESS
ENTERPRISE PROGRAM.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

(3) (I) WITHIN 6 MONTHS AFTER THE APPROVAL OF A PILOT
SYSTEM UNDER § 7–1002(C) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF
SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN BUSINESS AFFAIRS, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND THE GAS COMPANY OPERATING THE
APPROVED PILOT SYSTEM, SHALL ESTABLISH A CLEAR PLAN FOR SETTING
REASONABLE AND APPROPRIATE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION
GOALS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE PILOT SYSTEM.

(II) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE GOALS AND
PROCEDURES SPECIFIED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE
BASED ON THE REQUIREMENTS OF TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE STATE FINANCE
AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE AND THE REGULATIONS IMPLEMENTING THAT
SUBTITLE.

(4) (I) A GAS COMPANY OPERATING A PILOT SYSTEM AND THE
MARYLAND ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE SHALL SUBMIT AN ANNUAL REPORT ON
MINORITY ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION TO THE COMMISSION.

(II) THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE ANY REPORTS
RECEIVED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

7–1005.

(A) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY MAY
OWN, MANAGE, AND RECOVER COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH A THERMAL ENERGY
NETWORK SYSTEM SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL OF THE COMMISSION.

(B) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, A GAS COMPANY, OR A WATER COMPANY MAY
DRILL A GEOTHERMAL BOREHOLE IN A PUBLIC UTILITY RIGHT–OF–WAY WHERE
FEASIBLE TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–1006.

THE COMMISSION MAY RETAIN INDEPENDENT CONSULTANTS AND EXPERTS
TO:

(1) ASSIST THE COMMISSION WITH ITS EVALUATION OF PILOT
SYSTEM APPLICATIONS UNDER § 7–1002(C) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) SUPPORT THE COMMISSION IN THE COMPLETION OF ANY
REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

Article – Environment
– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 564 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1–701.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(7) “Overburdened community” means any census tract for which three or
more of the following environmental health indicators are above the 75th percentile
statewide:

(i) Particulate matter (PM) 2.5;

(ii) Ozone;

(iii) National Air Toxics Assessment (NATA) diesel PM;

(iv) NATA cancer risk;

(v) NATA respiratory hazard index;

(vi) Traffic proximity;

(vii) Lead paint indicator;

(viii) National Priorities List Superfund site proximity;

(ix) Risk Management Plan facility proximity;

(x) Hazardous waste proximity;

(xi) Wastewater discharge indicator;

(xii) Proximity to a Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO);

(xiii) Percent of the population lacking broadband coverage;

(xiv) Asthma emergency room discharges;

(xv) Myocardial infarction discharges;

(xvi) Low–birth–weight infants;

(xvii) Proximity to emitting power plants;

(xviii) Proximity to a Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) facility;

(xix) Proximity to a brownfields site;

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 564

(xx) Proximity to mining operations; and

(xxi) Proximity to a hazardous waste landfill.

(8) “Underserved community” means any census tract in which, according
to the most recent U.S. Census Bureau Survey:

(i) At least 25% of the residents qualify as low–income;

(ii) At least 50% of the residents identify as nonwhite; or

(iii) At least 15% of the residents have limited English proficiency.

Article – Housing and Community Development

4–1801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “Area median income” means the median household income for the area
adjusted for household size as published and annually updated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19