START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 343 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 343 
(Delegate Munoz) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Dredged Material - Containment, Redeposit, and Oversight 
 
 
This bill (1) authorizes the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and the  
Board of Public Works (BPW) to approve the redeposit of dredged material at the 
Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility under specified conditions; 
(2) authorizes MDE to approve contained areas for the redeposit of dredged material at a 
large redevelopment site, as specified; (3) expands the duties of the Hart-Miller-Pleasure 
Island Citizens Oversight Committee; and (4) modifies the duties and membership of the 
Cox Creek Citizens Oversight Committee. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State operations and finances may be significantly affected to the extent that 
the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility is reopened and the State is 
involved with the operations of the facility, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County revenues may increase significantly from payments 
resulting from any community benefits agreement entered into under the bill; county 
expenditures increase correspondingly to fund benefits to communities. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Approval of Contained Areas for the Deposit of Dredge Spoil and the Placement of 
Dredged Material at the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility 
 
Under current law, except for dredge spoil from local dredging projects initiated by 
Baltimore County in the waters of Baltimore County, MDE may not approve any contained 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 343/ Page 2 
area for the redeposit of spoil within five miles of the Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island chain in 
Baltimore County.  
 
Also under current law, dredge spoil may not be deposited in the Hart-Miller Island 
Dredged Material Containment Facility after the first of the following to occur:   
(1) the maximum height of dredge spoil deposited in the containment facility reaches 
specified heights; or (2) January 1, 2010. Current law further specifies that new dredge 
spoil dredged from a channel may not be deposited in the south cell.  
 
The bill modifies statutory provisions relating to the placement of dredged material in the 
vicinity of the Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island chain by:  
 
 
authorizing MDE to approve contained areas for the redeposit of dredged material 
at a large redevelopment site, and specifying that only dredged material from a 
location within one mile of the shoreline of such a site may be redeposited in such 
a contained area;  
 
authorizing MDE and BPW, notwithstanding any other law, and on or before  
December 31, 2027, to approve the redeposit of dredged material at the  
Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility if (1) the dredged 
material is from a location within one mile of a large redevelopment site and (2) the 
person undertaking the project has, after consultation with the Hart-Miller-Pleasure 
Island Citizens Oversight Committee, entered into an enforceable community 
benefits agreement with Baltimore County by December 1, 2024, that, among other 
things, requires the person to pay a sum of money to Baltimore County (and 
establishes a related payment schedule) for the purpose of funding benefits to 
communities in the vicinity of the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment 
Facility;  
 
specifying that the fee payable for each cubic yard of dredged material deposited at 
the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility in accordance with 
the bill may not exceed the State’s actual incremental costs of operating and 
maintaining the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facilility, to the 
extent such costs arise from the redeposit of dredged material authorized by the bill, 
as specified, and must be in addition to the payments required by the community 
benefits agreement; and 
 
specifying that nothing in the bill authorizes MDE to approve the redeposit of 
dredged material within five miles of the Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island chain in 
Baltimore County using confined aquatic disposal.  
 
Under current law, “large redevelopment site” means any real property (1) consisting of 
one or more contiguous parcels that are collectively more than 500 acres; (2) that is being 
used, or was formerly used, for industrial purposes and manufacturing; and (3) for which 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 343/ Page 3 
MDE has received one or more applications for participation in the Voluntary Cleanup 
Program or one or more plans for remedial action by a responsible party, the owner or 
operator of the site, or a prospective purchaser of the site in accordance with statutory 
provisions relating to the release of hazardous substances into the environment.  
 
Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island Citizens Oversight Committee Duties 
 
Under current law, the Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island Citizens Oversight Committee must 
monitor and provide oversight regarding the future development, use, and maintenance of 
the Hart-Miller-Pleasure Island chain and the water quality immediately surrounding the 
islands.  
 
The bill expands these responsibilities to include monitoring and providing oversight 
regarding (1) the redeposit of dredged material at the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material 
Containment Facility and (2) any community benefits agreements entered into under the 
bill.  
 
Cox Creek Citizens Oversight Committee Duties 
 
The Cox Creek Citizens Oversight Committee was established by Chapter 83 of 2001 to  
(1) monitor the redeposit of Anne Arundel County dredged material and other dredged 
material in the Cox Creek Area and (2) hear and dispose of complaints lodged by 
individuals affected by the redeposit of Anne Arundel County dredged material and other 
dredged material in the Cox Creek area. The bill modifies the statutory duties of the 
committee to instead require it to: 
 
 
monitor the management of dredged material at the Cox Creek Dredged Material 
Containment Facility; 
 
advise the Maryland Port Administration (MPA) of complaints lodged by 
individuals affected by the redeposit of Anne Arundel County dredged material and 
other dredged material in the Cox Creek area; 
 
provide input and feedback to MPA regarding the management of dredged material 
at the Cox Creek Dredged Material Containment Facility; and 
 
make recommendations to MPA on the potential impact that activities at the 
containment facility may have on nearby communities and natural resources. 
 
Under current law, the committee must also appoint a member from the committee to serve 
as a liaison to the Innovative Use Advisory Committee. The bill modifies this requirement 
to reflect the current name of the committee (the Innovative Reuse Committee). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 343/ Page 4 
Cox Creek Citizens Oversight Committee Membership 
 
Under current law, the Governor must appoint the Cox Creek Citizens Oversight 
Committee members, and the committee consists of 12 members that represent various 
entities and interests. The bill makes the following changes to the composition of the 
committee: 
 
 
instead of 2 members from the North County Land Trust, the committee must 
include 1 member of the land trust that holds the conservation easement of the Cox 
Creek Forest Conservation Easement Area; 
 
instead of 1 member of the Anne Arundel County Watermen’s Association, the 
committee must include 1 individual who represents recreational birding in 
Anne Arundel County; 
 
the committee no longer includes 1 member of the Maryland Saltwater Sport 
Fishermen’s Association;  
 
instead of 1 member of the South Baltimore Business Alliance, the committee must 
include 1 member of the Baltimore Industrial Group; and 
 
the committee must include 2 individuals who represent a waterfront community in 
the northern part of Anne Arundel County. 
 
Maryland Port Administration and the Dredged Material Management Program 
 
Pursuant to current law, MPA, through its efforts to increase waterborne commerce, 
promotes the economic well-being of the State and manages the State-owned facilities at 
the Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore. MPA is governed by its Executive Director 
and the Maryland Port Commission. MPA is expressly authorized to acquire, construct, 
reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, maintain, lease as lessor or as lessee, repair, and operate 
either directly or through State-created private operating companies port facilities within 
its territorial jurisdiction, including the dredging of ship channels and turning basins and 
the filling and grading of land. 
 
Through its Dredged Material Management Program, MPA maintains the shipping channel 
in the Chesapeake Bay, Baltimore Harbor, and the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal. MPA 
deposits the dredged material across its five active dredged material placement sites. 
 
Maryland Environmental Service  
 
The Maryland Environmental Service (MES) is an instrumentality of the State and a 
self-supporting, not-for-profit public corporation that serves State, local, and federal 
agencies and the private sector through designing, planning, financing, constructing, 
operating, and monitoring projects for water and wastewater treatment, solid waste 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 343/ Page 5 
management, composting, recycling, dredged material management, hazardous materials 
cleanup, stormwater services, and renewable energy. MES operates on a fee-for-service 
basis under contract. As part of its dredging-related operations, MES supports MPA and 
the Dredged Material Management Program.  
 
Wetlands Regulation  
 
Wetlands in the State are protected, and the Wetlands and Waterways Program within 
MDE administers a statewide program for the management, conservation, and protection 
of Maryland’s tidal wetlands and nontidal wetlands and waterways. Pursuant to current law 
and MDE regulations, and subject to certain exceptions, a person may not dredge, fill, or 
construct or reconstruct structures in:  
 
 
State wetlands, without a license issued by BPW (or MDE, as MDE is delegated 
authority to authorize certain activities in State wetlands); or  
 
private wetlands, without a permit issued by MDE. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility Operations  
 
Hart-Miller Island has not been an active dredged material placement site since 2009. The 
island is currently owned by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR); the southern 
section of the island is now a State park, and MPA advises that the northern section of the 
island is being converted into greenspace.  
 
According to MPA, the potential placement of dredged material at the Hart-Miller Island 
Dredged Material Containment Facility made possible by the bill relates to a proposed 
project by Tradepoint Atlantic to construct a new container terminal at its Sparrows Point 
property. The project is likely to produce a significant amount of dredged material that will 
need to be deposited at a permitted dredged material containment facility.   
 
The fiscal impact on the State associated with the possible reopening of the 
Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility is unknown at this time and will 
depend largely on which entity is ultimately responsible for reopening and/or operating the 
facility. MPA advises that not all dredged material placement facilities in Maryland are 
operated by MPA through the State’s Dredged Material Management Program; some 
facilities are operated by counties, and there is nothing that prevents a private entity from 
operating a dredged material placement facility if they secure the appropriate permits. MPA 
further advises that it will likely not be able to operate the Hart-Miller Island Dredged 
Material Containment Facility due to preexisting contractual obligations.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 343/ Page 6 
In any event, MPA advises that there will be initial costs to reopen the northern section of 
the island (estimated by MPA to be in the range of $7.0 million to $9.0 million); the extent 
to which the State will be responsible for such costs is unknown. In addition to those initial 
costs, there will be ongoing costs to administer, manage, and staff the reopened facility 
(estimated by MPA at approximately $6.5 million annually). Although the extent to which 
the State will be involved in the operation of the facility (if it is reopened) is unknown, to 
the extent the State incurs any costs related to the placement of dredged material at the 
facility, it is assumed that fees collected by the State from Tradepoint Atlantic would offset 
such costs. (As noted above, the bill specifies that the fee payable for each cubic yard of 
dredged material deposited at the facility may not exceed the State’s actual incremental 
costs of operating and maintaining the facility – to the extent such costs arise from the 
redeposit of dredged material authorized pursuant to the bill – expressed on a 
per-cubic-yard basis.)  
 
The Department of Legislative Services cannot independently verify the costs estimated 
by MPA at this time. 
 
Approval of Contained Areas at a Large Redevelopment Site 
 
In addition to authorizing MDE and BPW to approve the redeposit of dredged material at 
the Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility, the bill also authorizes 
MDE to approve contained areas for the redeposit of dredged material at a large 
redevelopment site. In December 2023, Tradepoint Atlantic applied to the  
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for a permit for the Sparrows Point container terminal 
project; according to the proposed action as cited in the Federal Register, the project plan 
includes the construction of an offshore dredged material containment facility in the 
Patapsco River on the west side of Coke Point (near Sparrows Point). MDE advises that, 
absent the bill, such a facility would be prohibited. If such an area is approved, the extent 
to which State finances may be affected is unknown.  
 
Department of Natural Resources – Hart-Miller Island Park Operations 
 
As noted above, the southern section of Hart-Miller Island is now a State park. DNR 
advises that it is unclear if the park will be able to remain open should the island be 
reopened to accept dredged materials. To the extent DNR must reduce or eliminate park 
operations, DNR finances are affected. Any such impact is speculative, however. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment and the Board of Public Works 
 
MDE advises that the review and approval of dredged material placement sites is a routine 
process for MDE and, therefore, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect MDE 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 343/ Page 7 
operations or finances. BPW also advises that the bill does not affect its operations or 
finances.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore County revenues increase to the extent that the  
Hart-Miller Island Dredged Material Containment Facility is reopened and the 
Tradepoint Atlantic container terminal project moves forward. Among other conditions, 
MDE and BPW may only approve the redeposit of dredged material at the facility if the 
person undertaking the dredging project has entered into an enforceable community 
benefits agreement that, among other things, requires payments to Baltimore County for 
the purpose of funding benefits to communities in the vicinity of the Hart-Miller Island 
Dredged Material Containment Facility. Although a reliable estimate of the payments 
cannot be made, the impact could be significant.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 20 (Senator Simonaire) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Natural 
Resources; Maryland Department of the Environment; Board of Public Works; Federal 
Register; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7