START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

Chapter 678

(House Bill 364)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – ~~Traffic~~ ~~Control~~ ~~Device~~ Stop Sign Monitoring Systems
– Authorization

PG 301–24

FOR the purpose of authorizing the use of ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ stop sign monitoring
systems in school zones ~~by~~ ~~State~~ ~~and~~ ~~local~~ ~~agencies~~ in Prince George’s County, if
authorized by local law; providing that the owner or driver of a motor vehicle
recorded failing to obey a ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ stop sign is subject to a citation and a
certain civil penalty under certain circumstances; establishing certain defenses to a
charge of an alleged violation recorded by a ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ stop sign monitoring
system; prohibiting a contractor administering a ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ stop sign
monitoring system from being compensated in a certain manner; and generally
relating to the use of ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ stop sign monitoring systems in Prince
George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 4–401(13), 7–302(e)(1) through (3) and (4)(i), and 10–311
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section ~~21–201(a)~~ 21–707
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section ~~21–201.1~~ 21–707.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

4–401.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 678 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Except as provided in § 4–402 of this subtitle, and subject to the venue provisions of
Title 6 of this article, the District Court has exclusive original civil jurisdiction in:

(13) A proceeding for a civil infraction under § 21–201.1, § 21–202.1, §
21–704.1, § 21–706.1, § 21–707.1, § 21–809, § 21–810, § 21–1134, or § 24–111.3 of the
Transportation Article or § 10–112 of the Criminal Law Article;

7–302.

(e) (1) (i) A citation issued pursuant to § 21–201.1, § 21–202.1, § 21–706.1,
§ 21–707.1, § 21–809, § 21–810, § 21–1134, or § 24–111.3 of the Transportation Article
shall provide that the person receiving the citation may elect to stand trial by notifying the
issuing agency of the person’s intention to stand trial at least 5 days prior to the date of
payment as set forth in the citation.

(ii) On receipt of the notice to stand trial, the agency shall forward
to the District Court having venue a copy of the citation and a copy of the notice from the
person who received the citation indicating the person’s intention to stand trial.

(iii) On receipt thereof, the District Court shall schedule the case for
trial and notify the defendant of the trial date under procedures adopted by the Chief Judge
of the District Court.

(2) (i) A citation issued as the result of a vehicle height monitoring
system, a traffic control signal monitoring system, [or] a speed monitoring system,
including a work zone speed control system, OR A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN
MONITORING SYSTEM controlled by a political subdivision, a school bus monitoring
camera, or a bus lane monitoring system shall provide that, in an uncontested case, the
penalty shall be paid directly to that political subdivision.

(ii) A citation issued as the result of a traffic control signal
monitoring system or a work zone speed control system controlled by a State agency, or as
a result of a vehicle height monitoring system, a traffic control signal monitoring system, a
speed monitoring system, A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING
SYSTEM, a school bus monitoring camera, or a bus lane monitoring system in a case
contested in District Court, shall provide that the penalty shall be paid directly to the
District Court.

(3) Civil penalties resulting from citations issued using a vehicle height
monitoring system, traffic control signal monitoring system, speed monitoring system,
work zone speed control system, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING
SYSTEM, school bus monitoring camera, or bus lane monitoring system that are collected
by the District Court shall be collected in accordance with subsection (a) of this section and
distributed in accordance with § 12–118 of the Transportation Article.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

(4) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (5) of this subsection, from the
fines collected by a political subdivision as a result of violations enforced by speed
monitoring systems, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEMS,
school bus monitoring cameras, or bus lane monitoring systems, a political subdivision:

1. May recover the costs of implementing and administering
the speed monitoring systems, school bus monitoring cameras, or bus lane monitoring
systems; and

2. Subject to subparagraphs (ii), (iii), and (iv) of this
paragraph, may spend any remaining balance solely for public safety purposes, including
pedestrian safety programs.

10–311.

(a) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a traffic control signal
monitoring system in accordance with § 21–202.1 of the Transportation Article is
admissible in a proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a
violation of § 21–202(h) of the Transportation Article without authentication.

(b) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a speed monitoring system
in accordance with § 21–809 or § 21–810 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a
proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of Title 21,
Subtitle 8 of the Transportation Article without authentication.

(c) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a school bus monitoring
camera in accordance with § 21–706.1 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a
proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of § 21–706
of the Transportation Article without authentication.

(d) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a vehicle height monitoring
system in accordance with § 24–111.3 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a
proceeding concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of a State or
local law restricting the presence of certain vehicles during certain times without
authentication.

(e) A recorded image of a motor vehicle produced by a bus lane monitoring system
in accordance with § 21–1134 of the Transportation Article is admissible in a proceeding
concerning a civil citation issued under that section for a violation of § 21–1133 of the
Transportation Article without authentication.

(f) A RECORDED IMAGE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE PRODUCED BY A TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
21– 201.1 § 21–707.1 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE IS ADMISSIBLE IN A
PROCEEDING CONCERNING A CIVIL CITATION ISSUED UNDER THAT SECTION FOR A

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 678 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

VIOLATION OF § 21–201 § 21–707 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE WITHOUT
AUTHENTICATION.

(G) In any other judicial proceeding, a recorded image produced by a vehicle
height monitoring system, traffic control signal monitoring system, speed monitoring
system, work zone speed control system, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN
MONITORING SYSTEM, school bus monitoring camera, or bus lane monitoring system is
admissible as otherwise provided by law.

Article – Transportation

~~21–201.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~Subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~exceptions~~ ~~granted~~ ~~in~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~driver~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~
~~emergency~~ ~~vehicle,~~ ~~the~~ ~~driver~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~vehicle,~~ ~~unless~~ ~~otherwise~~ ~~directed~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~police~~ ~~officer,~~
~~shall~~ ~~obey~~ ~~the~~ ~~instructions~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ ~~applicable~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~vehicle~~ ~~and~~ ~~placed~~
~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Vehicle~~ ~~Law.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~driver~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~vehicle~~ ~~approaching~~ ~~an~~ ~~intersection~~ ~~controlled~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~
~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~drive~~ ~~across~~ ~~private~~ ~~property~~ ~~or~~ ~~leave~~ ~~the~~ ~~roadway~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~purpose~~ ~~of~~ ~~avoiding~~ ~~the~~ ~~instructions~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~traffic~~ ~~control~~ ~~device.~~

21–707.

(a) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver
of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop at the near side of the
intersection at a clearly marked stop line.

(b) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver
of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop at the near side of the
intersection and, if there is no clearly marked stop line, before entering any crosswalk.

(c) Unless otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, the driver
of a vehicle approaching a stop sign at an intersection shall stop at the near side of an
intersection and, if there is no crosswalk, at the nearest point before entering the
intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic approaching on the intersecting roadway.

(d) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign at an intersection, if required
for safety to stop, shall stop at the near side of the intersection at a clearly marked stop
line.

(e) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign at an intersection, if required
for safety to stop, shall stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no clearly
marked stop line, before entering any crosswalk.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

(f) The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign at an intersection, if required
for safety to stop, shall stop at the near side of the intersection and, if there is no crosswalk,
at the nearest point before entering the intersection that gives the driver a view of traffic
approaching on the intersecting roadway.

~~21–201.1.~~ 21–707.1.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(B) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “AGENCY” MEANS:

(I) A A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT IS AUTHORIZED TO
ISSUE A CITATION FOR A VIOLATION OF THE MARYLAND VEHICLE LAW OR OF LOCAL
TRAFFIC LAWS OR REGULATIONS; OR

(II) FOR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION THAT DOES NOT
MAINTAIN A POLICE FORCE, AN AGENCY ESTABLISHED OR DESIGNATED BY THE
~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~IMPLEMENT~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~USING~~ ~~TRAFFIC~~
CONTROL DEVICE MONITORING SYSTEMS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(3) (I) “OWNER” MEANS THE REGISTERED OWNER OF A MOTOR
VEHICLE OR LESSEE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE UNDER A LEASE OF 6 MONTHS OR MORE.

(II) “OWNER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

1. A MOTOR VEHICLE LEASING COMPANY; OR

2. A HOLDER OF A SPECIAL REGISTRATION PLATE
ISSUED UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 9, PART III OF THIS ARTICLE.

(4) “RECORDED IMAGE” MEANS IMAGES RECORDED BY A TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM:

(I) ON:

1. TWO OR MORE PHOTOGRAPHS;

2. TWO OR MORE MICROPHOTOGRAPHS;

3. TWO OR MORE ELECTRONIC IMAGES;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 678 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. VIDEOTAPE; OR

5. ANY OTHER MEDIUM; AND

(II) SHOWING A MOTOR VEHICLE AND, ON AT LEAST ONE IMAGE
OR PORTION OF TAPE, CLEARLY IDENTIFYING THE REGISTRATION PLATE NUMBER
OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE.

(5) “TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM”
MEANS A DEVICE DESIGNED TO CAPTURE A RECORDED IMAGE OF A VIOLATION.

(6) (I) “VIOLATION” MEANS A VIOLATION OF § 21–201 OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE~~ A FAILURE TO COME TO A COMPLETE STOP AT A STOP SIGN IN VIOLATION
OF § 21–707 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(II) “VIOLATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE ANY ACTION A DRIVER IS
INSTRUCTED TO TAKE BY A POLICE OFFICER.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) THROUGH (5) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN AGENCY MAY USE TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN
MONITORING SYSTEMS:

(I) ON HIGHWAYS LOCATED IN A SCHOOL ZONE MAINTAINED BY
A LOCAL JURISDICTION, IF AUTHORIZED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION; OR

(II) ON STATE HIGHWAYS LOCATED IN A SCHOOL ZONE, IF
AUTHORIZED BY THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION.

(2) A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM
~~MAY:~~

(I) MAY NOT BE USED IN A LOCAL JURISDICTION UNDER THIS
SECTION UNLESS ITS USE IS AUTHORIZED BY THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION BY LOCAL LAW ENACTED AFTER REASONABLE NOTICE AND A PUBLIC
HEARING; AND

(II) MAY ONLY BE USED AT A LOCATION APPROVED BY THE
PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY COUNCIL.

(3) BEFORE A COUNTY MAY USE A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE
MONITORING SYSTEM ON STATE HIGHWAYS LOCATED WITHIN A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION, THE COUNTY SHALL:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

(I) OBTAIN THE APPROVAL OF THE STATE HIGHWAY
~~ADMINISTRATION;~~

(II) NOTIFY THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF THE STATE
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION’S APPROVAL OF THE USE OF THE TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICE MONITORING SYSTEM ON THE STATE HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION; AND

(III) GRANT THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION 60 DAYS AFTER THE
DATE OF THE COUNTY’S NOTICE TO THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION TO ENACT AN
~~ORDINANCE~~ ~~AUTHORIZING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~INSTEAD~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~
TO USE A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE MONITORING SYSTEM.

(3) (I) NOT MORE THAN A TOTAL OF 10 STOP SIGN MONITORING
SYSTEMS MAY BE PLACED IN THE COUNTY UNDER THIS SECTION.

(II) THE COUNTY SHALL PRIORITIZE THE PLACEMENT OF STOP
SIGN MONITORING SYSTEMS WITHIN MUNICIPALITIES THAT HAVE HIGH VIOLATION
RATES.

(4) BEFORE BEGINNING USE OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE STOP
SIGN MONITORING SYSTEMS, AN AGENCY SHALL PUBLISH NOTICE THAT THE AGENCY
HAS ADOPTED THE USE OF ~~TRAFFIC~~ ~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ STOP SIGN MONITORING
SYSTEMS ON ITS WEBSITE AND IN A NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL CIRCULATION IN THE
JURISDICTION IN WHICH THE ~~TRAFFIC~~ ~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ STOP SIGN MONITORING
SYSTEM WILL BE USED.

(5) (I) A LOCAL JURISDICTION THAT USES A TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICE MONITORING SYSTEM THE COUNTY SHALL PROMINENTLY PLACE SIGNS ON
HIGHWAYS WITHIN THE ~~LOCAL~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ COUNTY PROVIDING NOTICE THAT
~~TRAFFIC~~ ~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEMS ARE USED IN THE
JURISDICTION COUNTY.

(II) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL PLACE
SIGNS PROMINENTLY PROVIDING NOTICE THAT ~~TRAFFIC~~ ~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ STOP
SIGN MONITORING SYSTEMS ARE IN USE ON STATE HIGHWAYS.

(D) A RECORDED IMAGE UNDER THIS SECTION INDICATING THAT THE
DRIVER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE HAS COMMITTED A VIOLATION SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) THE TIME AND DATE OF THE VIOLATION; AND

(2) TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LOCATION OF THE VIOLATION.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 678 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) (1) UNLESS THE DRIVER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE RECEIVED A
CITATION FROM A POLICE OFFICER AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION, THE OWNER
OR, IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (F)(3) OR (H)(4) OR (5) OF THIS SECTION,
THE DRIVER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY IF THE MOTOR
VEHICLE IS RECORDED BY A ~~TRAFFIC~~ ~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ STOP SIGN MONITORING
SYSTEM DURING THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLATION.

(2) A CIVIL PENALTY UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT EXCEED $40.

(3) FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION, THE DISTRICT COURT SHALL
PRESCRIBE:

(I) A UNIFORM CITATION FORM CONSISTENT WITH
SUBSECTION (F)(1) OF THIS SECTION AND § 7–302 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE; AND

(II) A CIVIL PENALTY, WHICH SHALL BE INDICATED ON THE
CITATION, TO BE PAID BY PERSONS WHO CHOOSE TO PREPAY THE CIVIL PENALTY
WITHOUT APPEARING IN DISTRICT COURT.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF PARAGRAPHS (2) THROUGH (5)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN AGENCY SHALL MAIL TO THE OWNER LIABLE UNDER
SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION A CITATION THAT SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE REGISTERED OWNER OF
THE VEHICLE;

(II) THE REGISTRATION NUMBER OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE
INVOLVED IN THE VIOLATION;

(III) THE VIOLATION CHARGED;

(IV) TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LOCATION OF THE
VIOLATION;

(V) THE DATE AND TIME OF THE VIOLATION;

(VI) A COPY OF THE RECORDED IMAGE;

(VII) THE AMOUNT OF THE CIVIL PENALTY IMPOSED AND THE
DATE BY WHICH THE CIVIL PENALTY MUST BE PAID;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

(VIII) A SIGNED STATEMENT BY A TECHNICIAN EMPLOYED BY THE
AGENCY THAT, BASED ON THE INSPECTION OF THE RECORDED IMAGE, THE MOTOR
VEHICLE WAS BEING OPERATED DURING THE COMMISSION OF A VIOLATION;

(IX) A STATEMENT THAT THE RECORDED IMAGE IS EVIDENCE OF
A VIOLATION; AND

(X) INFORMATION ADVISING THE PERSON ALLEGED TO BE
LIABLE UNDER THIS SECTION:

1. OF THE MANNER AND TIME IN WHICH LIABILITY AS
ALLEGED IN THE CITATION MAY BE CONTESTED IN THE DISTRICT COURT; AND

2. THAT FAILURE TO PAY THE CIVIL PENALTY OR TO
CONTEST LIABILITY IN A TIMELY MANNER IS AN ADMISSION OF LIABILITY AND MAY
RESULT IN REFUSAL OR SUSPENSION OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE REGISTRATION.

(2) THE AGENCY MAY MAIL A WARNING NOTICE IN PLACE OF A
CITATION TO THE OWNER LIABLE UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) (I) BEFORE MAILING A CITATION TO A MOTOR VEHICLE
RENTAL COMPANY LIABLE UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION, AN AGENCY
SHALL MAIL A NOTICE TO THE MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL COMPANY STATING THAT A
CITATION WILL BE MAILED TO THE MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL COMPANY UNLESS,
WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE NOTICE, THE MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL
COMPANY PROVIDES THE AGENCY WITH:

1. A STATEMENT MADE UNDER OATH THAT STATES THE
NAME AND LAST KNOWN MAILING ADDRESS OF THE INDIVIDUAL DRIVING OR
RENTING THE MOTOR VEHICLE WHEN THE VIOLATION OCCURRED;

2. A. A STATEMENT MADE UNDER OATH THAT
STATES THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL COMPANY IS UNABLE TO DETERMINE
WHO WAS DRIVING THE VEHICLE AT THE TIME THE VIOLATION OCCURRED BECAUSE
THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS STOLEN AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION; AND

B. A COPY OF THE POLICE REPORT ASSOCIATED WITH
THE MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT CLAIMED UNDER ITEM A OF THIS ITEM; OR

3. PAYMENT FOR THE PENALTY ASSOCIATED WITH THE
VIOLATION.

(II) AN AGENCY MAY NOT MAIL A CITATION TO A MOTOR
VEHICLE RENTAL COMPANY LIABLE UNDER SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION IF
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 678 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL COMPANY COMPLIES WITH SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH.

(4) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION
AND SUBSECTION (H)(4) AND (5) OF THIS SECTION, A CITATION ISSUED UNDER THIS
SECTION SHALL BE MAILED NOT LATER THAN 2 WEEKS AFTER THE ALLEGED
VIOLATION.

(5) A PERSON WHO RECEIVES A CITATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION MAY:

(I) PAY THE CIVIL PENALTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH
INSTRUCTIONS ON THE CITATION; OR

(II) ELECT TO STAND TRIAL FOR THE ALLEGED VIOLATION.

(G) (1) A CERTIFICATE ALLEGING THAT A VIOLATION OCCURRED, SWORN
TO OR AFFIRMED BY A DULY AUTHORIZED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER EMPLOYED
BY OR UNDER CONTRACT WITH AN AGENCY, BASED ON THE INSPECTION OF A
RECORDED IMAGE, SHALL BE EVIDENCE OF THE FACTS CONTAINED IN THE
CERTIFICATE AND SHALL BE ADMISSIBLE IN ANY PROCEEDING CONCERNING THE
ALLEGED VIOLATION.

(2) ADJUDICATION OF LIABILITY SHALL BE BASED ON
PREPONDERANCE OF THE EVIDENCE.

(H) (1) THE DISTRICT COURT MAY CONSIDER IN DEFENSE OF A
VIOLATION:

(I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THAT
THE MOTOR VEHICLE OR REGISTRATION PLATES OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE WERE
STOLEN BEFORE THE VIOLATION OCCURRED AND WERE NOT UNDER THE CONTROL
OR POSSESSION OF THE OWNER AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION;

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
EVIDENCE THAT THE PERSON NAMED IN THE CITATION WAS NOT OPERATING THE
VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION; AND

(III) ANY OTHER ISSUES AND EVIDENCE THAT THE DISTRICT
COURT CONSIDERS PERTINENT.

(2) TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE OR THE
REGISTRATION PLATES WERE STOLEN BEFORE THE VIOLATION OCCURRED AND

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

WERE NOT UNDER THE CONTROL OR POSSESSION OF THE OWNER AT THE TIME OF
THE VIOLATION, THE OWNER MUST SUBMIT PROOF THAT A POLICE REPORT ABOUT
THE STOLEN MOTOR VEHICLE OR REGISTRATION PLATES WAS FILED IN A TIMELY
MANNER.

(3) TO SATISFY THE EVIDENTIARY BURDEN UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PERSON NAMED IN THE CITATION SHALL PROVIDE
TO THE DISTRICT COURT EVIDENCE TO THE SATISFACTION OF THE DISTRICT
COURT OF WHO WAS OPERATING THE VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION,
INCLUDING, AT A MINIMUM, THE OPERATOR’S NAME AND CURRENT ADDRESS.

(4) (I) THE PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH APPLY ONLY TO A
CITATION THAT INVOLVES A CLASS E (TRUCK) VEHICLE WITH A REGISTERED GROSS
WEIGHT OF 26,001 POUNDS OR MORE, CLASS F (TRACTOR) VEHICLE, CLASS G
(TRAILER) VEHICLE OPERATED IN COMBINATION WITH A CLASS F (TRACTOR)
VEHICLE, OR CLASS P (PASSENGER BUS) VEHICLE.

(II) TO SATISFY THE EVIDENTIARY BURDEN UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE PERSON NAMED IN A CITATION
DESCRIBED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY PROVIDE TO THE
DISTRICT COURT A LETTER, SWORN TO OR AFFIRMED BY THE PERSON AND MAILED
BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED, THAT:

1. STATES THAT THE PERSON NAMED IN THE CITATION
WAS NOT OPERATING THE VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION; AND

2. PROVIDES THE NAME, ADDRESS, AND DRIVER’S
LICENSE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER OF THE PERSON WHO WAS OPERATING THE
VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION.

(5) (I) IF THE DISTRICT COURT FINDS THAT THE PERSON NAMED
IN THE CITATION WAS NOT OPERATING THE VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE
VIOLATION OR RECEIVES EVIDENCE UNDER PARAGRAPH (4)(II)2 OF THIS
SUBSECTION IDENTIFYING THE PERSON DRIVING THE VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE
VIOLATION, THE CLERK OF COURT SHALL PROVIDE TO THE AGENCY ISSUING THE
CITATION A COPY OF ANY EVIDENCE SUBSTANTIATING WHO WAS OPERATING THE
VEHICLE AT THE TIME OF THE VIOLATION.

(II) ON RECEIPT OF SUBSTANTIATING EVIDENCE FROM THE
DISTRICT COURT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE AGENCY
MAY ISSUE A CITATION AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
PERSON WHO THE EVIDENCE INDICATES WAS OPERATING THE VEHICLE AT THE TIME
OF THE VIOLATION.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 678 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) A CITATION ISSUED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH SHALL BE MAILED NOT LATER THAN 2 WEEKS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE
EVIDENCE FROM THE DISTRICT COURT.

(I) IF THE CIVIL PENALTY IS NOT PAID AND THE VIOLATION IS NOT
CONTESTED, THE ADMINISTRATION MAY REFUSE TO REGISTER OR REREGISTER OR
MAY SUSPEND THE REGISTRATION OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE.

(J) A VIOLATION FOR WHICH A CIVIL PENALTY IS IMPOSED UNDER THIS
SECTION:

(1) IS NOT A MOVING VIOLATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF ASSESSING
POINTS UNDER § 16–402 OF THIS ARTICLE AND MAY NOT BE RECORDED BY THE
ADMINISTRATION ON THE DRIVING RECORD OF THE OWNER OR DRIVER OF THE
VEHICLE; AND

(2) MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED IN THE PROVISION OF MOTOR VEHICLE
INSURANCE COVERAGE.

(K) IN CONSULTATION WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, THE CHIEF
JUDGE OF THE DISTRICT COURT SHALL ADOPT PROCEDURES FOR THE ISSUANCE
OF CITATIONS, TRIALS FOR VIOLATIONS, AND THE COLLECTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES
IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(L) (1) AN AGENCY OR AN AGENT OR A CONTRACTOR DESIGNATED BY THE
AGENCY SHALL ADMINISTER AND PROCESS CIVIL CITATIONS ISSUED UNDER THIS
SECTION IN COORDINATION WITH THE DISTRICT COURT.

(2) IF A CONTRACTOR IN ANY MANNER OPERATES A TRAFFIC
~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ STOP SIGN MONITORING SYSTEM OR ADMINISTERS OR PROCESSES
CITATIONS GENERATED BY A ~~TRAFFIC~~ ~~CONTROL~~ ~~DEVICE~~ MONITORING SYSTEM ON
BEHALF OF A LOCAL JURISDICTION, THE CONTRACTOR’S FEE MAY NOT BE
CONTINGENT ON A PER–TICKET BASIS ON THE NUMBER OF CITATIONS ISSUED OR
PAID.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2025, the Prince George’s County Department of Public Works and Transportation shall
report to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
the General Assembly on:

(1) through October 1, 2025:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 678

(i) the time period during which stop sign monitoring systems were
in use in the county; and

(ii) the number of warnings and citations issued as a result of
violations recorded by a stop sign monitoring system in the county over the reported time
period, by location and date;

(2) (i) the costs associated with implementing and operating stop sign
monitoring systems; and

(ii) the revenue collected on a monthly basis as a result of violations
recorded by stop sign monitoring systems;

(3) appropriate locations for the deployment of stop sign monitoring
systems;

(4) the performance and reliability of stop sign monitoring systems used by
the county; and

(5) the effectiveness of stop sign monitoring systems in reducing violations,
crashes, and pedestrian injuries in the county and in areas where the stop sign monitoring
systems were implemented and used.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of ~~2~~ 5 years and, at the end of
June 30, ~~2026~~ 2029, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly,
shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13