START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 342 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 342 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement - Prompt Payment of Suppliers 
 
 
This bill requires contractors on State contracts to promptly pay “suppliers” any undisputed 
amount that is owed, and otherwise adds suppliers to the State’s statutory prompt payment 
requirements. A “supplier” is defined as a person that has supplied labor or materials to a 
contractor in the prosecution of work provided for in a State procurement contract. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. State agencies can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill applies only to State procurement contracts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, it is the policy of the State that, for work 
under a State procurement contract, a contractor must promptly pay a subcontractor any 
undisputed amount to which the subcontractor is entitled. Likewise, subcontractors must 
promptly pay any undisputed amounts to lower tier subcontractors. Generally, undisputed 
amounts must be paid by contractors (or subcontractors to lower tier subcontractors) within 
10 days of receiving a progress or final payment from the State. State law includes 
procedures for resolving disputes between subcontractors and contractors regarding a 
contractor’s or subcontractor’s failure to promptly pay undisputed amounts. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 342/ Page 2 
The bill adds “suppliers” to this payment and dispute resolution framework in the same 
manner as for contractor payments to subcontractors. The bill does not affect payments by 
subcontractors to suppliers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 183 (Senator Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Board of Contract Appeals; Department of Commerce; 
Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department 
of Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans Affairs; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2