START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 677

Chapter 677

(House Bill 306)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Economic Development – Workgroup on Independent
Innovation ~~Agency~~ ~~of~~ in Prince George’s County – Establishment

PG 402–24

FOR the purpose of establishing the Workgroup on Independent Innovation ~~Agency~~ ~~of~~ in
Prince George’s County to promote innovation and technology in Prince George’s
County; ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~Venture~~ ~~Capital~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~special,~~
~~nonlapsing~~ ~~fund;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~credited~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~Fund;~~ and generally relating to the Workgroup on Independent Innovation ~~Agency~~
~~of~~ in Prince George’s County.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Economic~~ ~~Development~~
~~Section~~ ~~12–1101~~ ~~through~~ ~~12–1113~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~11.~~
~~Independent~~ ~~Innovation~~ ~~Agency~~ ~~of~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County”~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2018~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(i)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)189.~~ ~~and~~ ~~190.~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)191.~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Economic~~ ~~Development~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 677 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) There is a Workgroup on Independent Innovation in Prince George’s County.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland who represents Prince George’s
County, appointed by the President of the Senate, in consultation with the chair of the
Prince George’s County Senate Delegation;

(2) one member of the House of Delegates who represents Prince George’s
County, appointed by the Speaker of the House, in consultation with the chair of the Prince
George’s County House Delegation; and

(3) the following members, appointed by the Prince George’s County
Executive:

(i) one representative of the Prince George’s County Chamber of
Commerce;

(ii) one representative of the Maryland State Conference of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People;

(iii) one representative of the Bowie Business Innovation Center;

(iv) one representative of INNOHUB at Prince George’s Community
College;

(v) one representative of Startup UMD;

(vi) one representative of Inncuvate Consulting; and

(vii) one representative of Employ Prince George’s, Inc.

(c) From among its members, the Workgroup shall elect a chair ~~every~~ ~~2~~ ~~years.~~

(d) The Urban Business Innovation Initiative within the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation shall provide staff for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 677

(1) ~~study~~ ~~and~~ ~~make~~ ~~recommendations~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~a~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~
~~Entrepreneurs–in–Residence~~ ~~program~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Technology~~ ~~Development~~
~~Corporation;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~study~~ discuss and make recommendations regarding strategies to
support investments in industry opportunities and potential areas of innovation; ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ (2) identify and collaborate with a group of angel investors based in Prince
George’s County in order to:

(i) encourage investment in Prince George’s County, including
investments at the preconceptual stage; and

(ii) strengthen an innovation–focused entrepreneurial system; and

(3) collaborate with the Maryland Technology Development Corporation
and other stakeholders in order to build partnerships and develop strategies to build Prince
George’s County’s potential to become a hub for entrepreneurs and technology start–up
companies.

(g) On or before January 15, 2026, the Workgroup shall report on ~~progress,~~
~~findings,~~ ~~and~~ ~~outcomes~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~pilot~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~Entrepreneurs–in–Residence~~
~~program~~ recommendations regarding strategies to support investments in industry
opportunities and potential areas of innovation to the Prince George’s County Delegation
and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of September
30, 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SUBTITLE 11. INDEPENDENT INNOVATION AGENCY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S
~~COUNTY.~~

~~12–1101.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “AGENCY” MEANS THE INDEPENDENT INNOVATION AGENCY OF PRINCE
~~GEORGE’S~~ ~~COUNTY.~~

(C) “BOARD” MEANS THE EXECUTIVE BOARD OF THE AGENCY.

(D) “COUNTY” MEANS PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 677 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) “FUND” MEANS THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY VENTURE CAPITAL
~~FUND.~~

~~12–1102.~~

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

~~12–1103.~~

(A) THERE IS AN INDEPENDENT INNOVATION AGENCY OF PRINCE
~~GEORGE’S~~ ~~COUNTY.~~

(B) (1) THE AGENCY IS A TAX–EXEMPT BODY POLITIC AND CORPORATE
AND IS AN INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE.

(2) THE AGENCY IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT THAT THE GOVERNOR
MAY NOT PLACE IN A PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE AGENCY IS TO PROMOTE INNOVATION AND
TECHNOLOGY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

~~12–1104.~~

(A) AN EXECUTIVE BOARD SHALL MANAGE THE AGENCY AND EXERCISE ITS
CORPORATE POWERS.

(B) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF:

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
CHAIR OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY HOUSE DELEGATION;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
CHAIR OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY SENATE DELEGATION; AND

(3) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE COUNTY
~~EXECUTIVE:~~

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE PRINCE GEORGE’S
COUNTY CHAMBER OF COMMERCE;

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MARYLAND STATE
CONFERENCE OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
~~COLORED~~ ~~PEOPLE;~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 677

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE BOWIE BUSINESS
~~INNOVATION~~ ~~CENTER;~~

(IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM INNOHUB AT PRINCE
~~GEORGE’S~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~COLLEGE;~~

(V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM STARTUP UMD;

(VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM INNCUVATE; AND

(VII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM EMPLOY PRINCE GEORGE’S,
~~INC.~~

(C) FROM AMONG ITS MEMBERS, THE BOARD SHALL ELECT A CHAIR EVERY
~~2~~ ~~YEARS.~~

(D) (1) THE TERM OF A MEMBER OF THE BOARD IS 2 YEARS.

(2) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(3) A MEMBER APPOINTED TO FILL A VACANCY IN AN UNEXPIRED
~~TERM~~ ~~SERVES~~ ~~ONLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REMAINDER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERM~~ ~~AND~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUCCESSOR~~ ~~IS~~
APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(E) (1) THE BOARD MAY ESTABLISH WORKGROUPS TO CONDUCT ITS
~~WORK.~~

(2) THE MEMBERSHIP OF A WORKGROUP MAY INCLUDE INDIVIDUALS
WHO ARE NOT MEMBERS OF THE BOARD.

~~12–1105.~~

(A) (1) THE BOARD SHALL APPOINT AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
~~BOARD.~~

(3) THE BOARD SHALL DETERMINE THE SALARY OF THE EXECUTIVE
~~DIRECTOR.~~

(B) THE BOARD MAY EMPLOY A STAFF AND RETAIN PROFESSIONAL AND
CONSULTANT SERVICES.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 677 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(C)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) DETERMINE THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE STAFF; AND

(2) SET THE COMPENSATION OF THE STAFF.

~~12–1106.~~

~~THE~~ ~~AGENCY~~ ~~MAY:~~

(1) ADOPT A SEAL;

(2) SUE OR BE SUED;

(3) ADOPT BYLAWS AND RULES FOR THE CONDUCT OF ITS BUSINESS;

(4) ENTER INTO CONTRACTS AND OTHER LEGAL INSTRUMENTS;

(5) ACCEPT GRANTS, CONTRIBUTIONS, OR OTHER ASSISTANCE OF
ANY KIND FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, THE STATE, A LOCAL GOVERNMENT,
A COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY, OR OTHER PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SOURCE;

(6) INCLUDE IN ANY CONTRACT FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE WITH
~~THE~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~GOVERNMENT~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~REASONABLE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~APPROPRIATE~~ ~~CONDITION~~
~~IMPOSED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~INCONSISTENT~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURPOSES~~
OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(7) MAKE INVESTMENTS FROM THE FUND TO FURTHER THE
PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(8) CREATE, OWN, CONTROL, OR BE A MEMBER OF A CORPORATION, A
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, A PARTNERSHIP, OR ANY OTHER ENTITY; AND

(9) DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO CARRY OUT THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

~~12–1107.~~

(A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, THE BOARD SHALL ISSUE A REQUEST
~~FOR~~ ~~PROPOSALS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~A~~ ~~NEEDS~~ ~~ASSESSMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ENTREPRENEURIAL~~
ENVIRONMENT IN THE COUNTY IN ORDER TO INFORM AND EDUCATE THE AGENCY’S
FUTURE ACTIONS.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 677

(B) A REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE THE
FOLLOWING ELEMENTS AND EXPECTATIONS:

(1) STUDYING TECHNOLOGY CLUSTERS IN THE COUNTY;

(2) REVIEWING THE CURRENT ENTREPRENEURIAL ENVIRONMENT OF
THE COUNTY; AND

(3) IDENTIFYING BARRIERS TO ENTRY FOR START–UP COMPANIES
AND ENTREPRENEURS IN THE COUNTY.

(C) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026, A PERSON AWARDED THE CONTRACT
~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PROPOSALS~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~SUBMIT~~ ~~A~~ ~~FINAL~~ ~~REPORT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
NEEDS ASSESSMENT REQUIRED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
~~BOARD.~~

(D) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 15, 2026, THE AGENCY SHALL SUBMIT A COPY
OF THE FINAL REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
COUNTY EXECUTIVE, THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY COUNCIL, AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE CHAIRS
OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY DELEGATION TO THE MARYLAND GENERAL
~~ASSEMBLY.~~

(E) THE AGENCY MAY NOT ESTABLISH A WORKGROUP OR PROGRAM
~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~THE~~ ~~NEEDS~~ ~~ASSESSMENT~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FINAL~~
REPORT REQUIRED IN THIS SECTION ARE COMPLETE.

~~12–1108.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “INNOVATION PLACE” MEANS AN AREA IN THE COUNTY THAT HAS
THE POTENTIAL TO BE A HUB FOR ENTREPRENEURS AND TECHNOLOGY START–UP
~~COMPANIES~~ ~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~LOCATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~PROXIMITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~ANCHOR~~
~~INSTITUTION.~~

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE INNOVATION PLACES PROGRAM.

(B) (1) THERE IS AN INNOVATION PLACES PROGRAM IN THE AGENCY.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO FOSTER INNOVATION AND
ENTREPRENEURSHIP BY IDENTIFYING INNOVATION PLACES IN THE COUNTY.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 677 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(C)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AGENCY~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) IDENTIFY AND DESIGNATE AREAS WITHIN THE COUNTY THAT
HAVE POTENTIAL TO BE INNOVATION PLACES THAT:

(I) ARE COMPACT; AND

(II) FALL WITHIN SPECIFIC MUNICIPALITIES OR WELL–DEFINED
UNINCORPORATED AREAS;

(2) IDENTIFY, DESIGNATE, AND FUND THE INITIAL COSTS OF
DEVELOPING AN INNOVATION PLACE; AND

(3) ENCOURAGE COLLABORATION BETWEEN LOCAL
ENTREPRENEURS AND START–UP COMPANIES AND THE FOLLOWING LOCAL ANCHOR
~~INSTITUTIONS:~~

(I) EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES;

(II) MEDICAL CENTERS;

(III) LARGE–SCALE BUSINESSES; AND

(IV) GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.

~~12–1109.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE
~~ENTREPRENEURS–IN–RESIDENCE~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

(B) (1) THERE IS AN ENTREPRENEURS–IN–RESIDENCE PROGRAM IN THE
~~AGENCY.~~

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO IDENTIFY HIGHLY
~~EXPERIENCED~~ ~~ENTREPRENEURS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~HAVE~~ ~~CREATED~~ ~~SUCCESSFUL~~
INNOVATION–BASED START–UP COMPANIES AND MATCH THEM WITH
ENTREPRENEURS AND START–UP COMPANIES IN THE COUNTY.

(C) THE AGENCY MAY DECIDE WHETHER A MENTOR IN THE PROGRAM
SHOULD BE COMPENSATED BASED ON THE MENTOR’S TIME COMMITMENT TO THE
~~PROGRAM.~~

~~12–1110.~~

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 677

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “WORKGROUP” MEANS THE INDUSTRY SECTOR
~~WORKGROUP.~~

(B) THE AGENCY SHALL CONVENE AN INDUSTRY SECTOR WORKGROUP OF
~~INTERESTED~~ ~~STAKEHOLDERS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~STUDY~~ ~~INDUSTRIES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~OPPORTUNITY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
~~COUNTY.~~

(C) THE WORKGROUP CONVENED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL INCLUDE REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE FOLLOWING INDUSTRIES:

(1) QUANTUM COMPUTING;

(2) LIFE SCIENCES OR HEALTH CARE;

(3) CONSTRUCTION; AND

(4) ANY OTHER INDUSTRY NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSE
OF THE WORKGROUP.

(D) THE WORKGROUP SHALL SET GOALS AND DEVELOP PLANS ON HOW THE
AGENCY SHOULD INVEST IN AND SUPPORT INDUSTRIES OF OPPORTUNITY WITHIN
THE COUNTY.

(E) (1) THE WORKGROUP SHALL BE AVAILABLE TO ADVISE THE AGENCY
ON ITS FINDINGS ON REQUEST.

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE WORKGROUP
SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE AGENCY ON THE FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE WORKGROUP FROM THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
~~YEAR.~~

~~12–1111.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “WORKGROUP” MEANS THE HIGHER EDUCATION
~~TALENT~~ ~~PIPELINE~~ ~~WORKGROUP.~~

(B) THE AGENCY SHALL CONVENE A HIGHER EDUCATION TALENT
PIPELINE WORKGROUP OF INTERESTED STAKEHOLDERS TO FOCUS ON PROMOTING
~~HOW~~ ~~INSTITUTIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~HIGHER~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~CAN~~ ~~PARTNER~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~LOCAL~~
ENTREPRENEURS AND START–UP COMPANIES TO FOSTER INNOVATION WITHIN THE
~~COUNTY.~~

(C) THE WORKGROUP CONVENED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL INCLUDE:
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 677 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) REPRESENTATIVES FROM:

(I) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK;

(II) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND GLOBAL CAMPUS;

~~(III)~~ ~~PRINCE~~ ~~GEORGE’S~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~COLLEGE;~~

(IV) BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY; AND

(V) CAPITOL COLLEGE; AND

(2) FOUR INDIVIDUALS WITH SIGNIFICANT EXPERIENCE IN
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT.

~~(D)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~WORKGROUP~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) IN CONSULTATION WITH LOCAL ENTREPRENEURS, BUSINESSES,
AND OTHER ENTITIES, MAKE PLANS FOR THE RESEARCH AND POTENTIAL
COMMERCIALIZATION OF TECHNOLOGIES WITHIN HIGHER EDUCATION; AND

(2) DEVELOP GOALS AND PLANS TO HELP STUDENTS BECOME
INNOVATORS AND ENTREPRENEURS IN THE COUNTY.

(E) (1) THE WORKGROUP SHALL BE AVAILABLE TO ADVISE THE AGENCY
ON ITS FINDINGS ON REQUEST.

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE WORKGROUP
SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE AGENCY ON THE FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE WORKGROUP FROM THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
~~YEAR.~~

~~12–1112.~~

(A) THE STATE AND THE COUNTY JOINTLY SHALL FINANCE THE AGENCY
AND ITS ACTIVITIES.

(B) THE AGENCY MAY ACCEPT ADDITIONAL MONEY FROM ANY OTHER
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SOURCE.

~~12–1113.~~

(A) THERE IS A PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY VENTURE CAPITAL FUND.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 677

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO, WITHIN THE COUNTY:

(1) INVEST IN TECHNOLOGY START–UP COMPANIES AND SMALL
BUSINESSES; AND

(2) PROMOTE INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY.

(C) THE AGENCY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS;

(3) INVESTMENT RETURNS AND EARNINGS; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY:

(1) TO PROVIDE INVESTMENTS FOR PROJECTS THAT FURTHER THE
PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES OF THE AGENCY.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~

~~6–226.~~

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 677 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(a)~~ ~~(2)~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~Notwithstanding~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~law,~~ ~~and~~ ~~unless~~
~~inconsistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~federal~~ ~~law,~~ ~~grant~~ ~~agreement,~~ ~~or~~ ~~other~~ ~~federal~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~or~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~
~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~gift~~ ~~or~~ ~~settlement~~ ~~agreement,~~ ~~net~~ ~~interest~~ ~~on~~ ~~all~~ ~~State~~ ~~money~~ ~~allocated~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~to~~ ~~special~~ ~~funds~~ ~~or~~ ~~accounts,~~ ~~and~~ ~~otherwise~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~
~~receive~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings,~~ ~~as~~ ~~accounted~~ ~~for~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~accrue~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~
~~Fund~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~subparagraph~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~do~~ ~~not~~ ~~apply~~
~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~funds:~~

189. the Teacher Retention and Development Fund; [and]

190. the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund; AND

191. THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY VENTURE CAPITAL
~~FUND.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024.~~

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12