START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 380 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 380 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Emergency Medical Services Board - Licenses and Certificates - 
Application Requirements 
 
 
This bill prohibits the State Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Board from requiring as 
a condition for licensure or certification that an applicant (1) provide proof of lawful 
presence in the United States or (2) have a Social Security number or individual taxpayer 
identification number. The bill authorizes the use of an individual taxpayer identification 
number or alternative documentation (as permitted by the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services under the federal Social Security Act) for licensing purposes. It does so 
by specifying that the EMS Board must require each applicant for a license to either 
disclose the applicant’s Social Security number (as generally required under statute) or 
individual taxpayer identification number or provide alternative documentation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Special fund revenues for the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems 
(MIEMMS) may increase minimally beginning in FY 2025 if additional licenses are issued 
that otherwise could not be. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MIEMSS is the administrative agency responsible for the oversight and 
coordination of the statewide EMS system and is governed by the EMS Board. With 
specified exceptions, an individual may not provide EMS in the State unless issued a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 380/ Page 2 
license or certificate by the EMS Board. In Maryland, emergency health care clinicians 
include cardiac rescue technicians, emergency medical dispatchers, emergency medical 
responders, emergency medical technicians, and paramedics. 
 
To apply for a license or certificate from the EMS Board, an individual must submit an 
application and pay any applicable application fee. The EMS Board may not charge a 
licensing, certifying, testing, or retesting fee to any individual who is a member or 
employee of any governmental or volunteer fire, rescue, or EMS company at the date of 
the application. 
 
Child Support Administration 
 
The Child Support Administration (CSA) within the Department of Human Services has 
various enforcement methods against an obligor who is in arrears in paying child support, 
including the potential suspension or denial of occupational licenses. To facilitate these 
efforts, provisions under the Family Law Article generally require a licensing authority to 
obtain the Social Security number of the applicant and record the number on the 
application, subject to limited exceptions as discussed below. 
 
The federal Social Security Act prescribes procedures that must be contained in state law 
to improve the effectiveness of child support enforcement. Under § 466(A)(13) of the 
Social Security Act, a Social Security number must be recorded on the application for any 
applicant for a professional license, driver’s license, occupational license, recreational 
license, or marriage license. Guidance issued by the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office of Child Support Enforcement has indicated that the provisions are not 
interpreted as requiring an individual to have a Social Security number as a condition of 
receiving a license, but requiring the states to have procedures in place that require an 
individual to furnish any Social Security number that the individual may have. 
 
The federal Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 
generally denies eligibility for many state or local public benefits to an alien (any person 
not a citizen or national of the United States). Certain exceptions apply, both to eligible 
individuals and to eligible public benefits. However, federal law expressly denies eligibility 
to nonexempt aliens for a professional license or commercial license provided by an agency 
of a state or local government or by appropriated funds of a state or local government. 
 
A state may establish that an individual who is not lawfully present in the United States is 
eligible for any state or local public benefit for which such an individual would otherwise 
be ineligible only through the enactment of a state law after August 22, 1996, which 
affirmatively makes such individuals eligible for specified benefits. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 380/ Page 3 
Health Occupations Boards 
 
Chapters 375 and 376 of 2023 prohibit State health occupations boards from requiring as 
a condition for licensure, certification, or registration that an applicant (1) provide proof of 
lawful presence in the United States or (2) have a Social Security number or individual 
taxpayer identification number. Instead, each health occupations board must require each 
applicant for a license to either disclose the applicant’s Social Security number or 
individual taxpayer identification number or provide alternative documentation as 
permitted by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under the federal 
Social Security Act. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MIEMMS advises that implementation of the bill can be handled 
using existing budgeted resources. To the extent the bill’s provisions increase the number 
of licenses or certificates issued by the EMS Board, special fund revenues may increase 
minimally beginning in fiscal 2025. MIEMMS advises, however, that the majority of 
emergency health care clinicians are affiliated with a jurisdictional EMS operation at the 
date of their licensure or certification application and are, therefore, not charged a fee. 
However, applicants not affiliated with a jurisdictional EMS operation at the date of their 
licensure or certification application must pay required fees. In fiscal 2023, the EMS Board 
collected approximately $4,200 in special fund revenues from license and certification fees. 
In fiscal 2023, there were approximately 20,000 emergency health care clinicians licensed 
or certified in the State. 
 
MIEMMS further advises that, since 2021, the EMS Board does not require an applicant 
to provide a Social Security number and has instead accepted valid proof of lawful presence 
in the United States. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances related to the 
work of CSA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 374 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 380/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4