START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 362 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 362 
(Delegate Ghrist, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Caroline County - Alcoholic Beverages - Barbershop and Beauty Salon License 
 
 
This bill establishes a barbershop and beauty salon beer and wine alcoholic beverages 
license in Caroline County. The bill authorizes the Caroline County Board of License 
Commissioners to issue the license to the holders of specified barbershop and beauty salon 
permits. A license holder may provide up to 12 ounces of beer or 5 ounces of wine by the 
glass for on-premises consumption only while performing activities generally related to 
barbershops and beauty salons. A license holder may provide beer and wine during normal 
business hours, and the license holder is prohibited from transferring the license to another 
location. An establishment for which the license is issued is subject to alcohol awareness 
training, as specified under current law. The annual license fee is $100. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Caroline County can monitor additional licenses with existing resources. 
Caroline County license revenues increase minimally due to the additional license fees 
under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potentially meaningful for barbershops and 
beauty salons that obtain a license under the bill. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Barbershops and Beauty Salons – Generally 
 
Under the Business Occupations and Professions Article, a “barbershop” means any 
commercial establishment, except a beauty salon, in which an individual practices 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 362/ Page 2 
barbering or provides barber-stylist services. Further, the Business Occupations and 
Professions Article defines “practice barbering” to include (1) cutting, razor cutting, 
styling, relaxing, body waving, shampooing, or coloring the hair; (2) shaving or trimming 
the beard; (3) massaging the face; (4) designing, fitting, or cutting a hairpiece; or 
(5) performing any other similar procedure on the hair, beard, face, or hairpiece of the 
individual. Barbering does not include the mere sale of wigs or hairpieces, or specified 
services performed by an employee under the supervision of a master barber. 
 
The Business Occupation and Professions Article defines “beauty salon” to mean any 
commercial establishment, except a barbershop, in which an individual practices 
cosmetology. “Practice cosmetology” includes (1) providing hair services; (2) arching or 
dyeing eyebrows; (3) dyeing eyelashes; (4) providing esthetic services; or (5) providing 
nail technician services. Cosmetology does not include merely shampooing hair or fitting, 
styling, and selling wigs or hairpieces, and services generally relating to hair braiding 
without the use of dyes and chemicals, as specified. 
 
Alcohol Awareness Training 
 
Alcoholic beverages license holders are generally subject to alcohol awareness training 
requirements under State law. The program includes instruction on how alcohol affects an 
individual’s behavior and body; provides education on the dangers of drinking and driving 
and defines effective methods to (1) determine whether a customer is under the legal 
drinking age; (2) serve customers to minimize the chance of intoxication; and (3) stop 
service before a customer becomes intoxicated. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Caroline County revenues increase by $100 annually for each 
barbershop and beauty salon beer and wine license issued under the bill. As the number of 
individuals that will seek to obtain a license under the bill is unknown, any corresponding 
revenue increase cannot be reliably estimated at this time. Any increase in inspections and 
enforcement activity can likely be absorbed with existing resources. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 531 (Caroline County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline County; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 362/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3