START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 203

Chapter 203

(House Bill 387)

AN ACT concerning

Public Information Act – Surveillance Images – Illegal Dumping in Baltimore
City

FOR the purpose of ~~repealing~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~law~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~custodian~~ ~~to~~ ~~deny~~
~~inspection~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~surveillance~~ ~~images~~ ~~of~~ ~~illegal~~ ~~dumping~~ ~~in~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City~~ ~~except~~
~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ altering a requirement that a custodian deny
inspection of certain surveillance images of illegal dumping in Baltimore City to
allow inspection by certain employees or agents of Baltimore City; authorizing the
Baltimore City Department of Housing and Community Development to publicly
disseminate a surveillance image under certain circumstances; and generally
relating to ~~the~~ ~~inspection~~ ~~of~~ surveillance images of illegal dumping in Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 4–322
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – General Provisions

~~[4–322.~~

(a) In this section, “surveillance image” has the meaning stated in § 10–112 of the
Criminal Law Article.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a custodian of a
surveillance image shall deny inspection of the surveillance image.

(c) A custodian shall allow inspection of a surveillance image:

~~(1)~~ ~~as~~ ~~required~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~ ~~10–112~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Criminal~~ ~~Law~~ ~~Article;~~

(2) (1) by any person issued a citation under § 10–112 of the Criminal Law
Article, or by an attorney of record for the person; or

(3) (2) by an employee or agent of the Baltimore City Department of Public
Works HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT in an investigation or a proceeding

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 203 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

relating to the imposition of or indemnification from civil liability under § 10–112 of the
Criminal Law Article.]

(D) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
BALTIMORE CITY DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
MAY PUBLICLY DISSEMINATE A SURVEILLANCE IMAGE AS PART OF AN
INVESTIGATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2