START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 327 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 327 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Anne Arundel County - Board of Community College Trustees - Membership 
Alterations and Appointment Requirements 
 
 
This bill adds two new members to the Board of Community College Trustees for 
Anne Arundel County. Additionally, the bill requires that, to the extent practicable, the 
Governor must take into consideration the geographic and ethnic representation of 
Anne Arundel County when appointing members to the board so that all segments of the 
population of the county are represented on the board. Notwithstanding the date of 
appointment of the initial additional members, the terms of the initial additional members 
must begin on July 1, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is directed at Anne Arundel Community College (AACC). 
  
Local Effect:  AACC expenditures to onboard and provide reimbursement to new board 
members are minimal and likely absorbable with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Board of Community College Trustees for Anne Arundel County 
consists of eight members, appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the 
Senate. Except the student member, members of the Board of Community College Trustees 
for Anne Arundel County serve four-year terms. A member may not serve more than 
three consecutive full terms. The student member serves a one-year term beginning 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 327/ Page 2 
July 1 and ending June 30. A member appointed to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term 
serves only for the remainder of that term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
 
State law generally establishes that community college boards have seven members serving 
staggered six-year terms, with several specified exceptions. Therefore, there are variations 
in the number and terms of board members. Appendix 1 shows characteristics of the 
various boards. With one exception, the boards are appointed by the Governor with the 
advice and consent of the Maryland Senate. For Chesapeake College, the board is 
appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the Maryland House of 
Delegates. 
 
Local Expenditures:  AACC advises that the college’s expenditures increase beginning 
in fiscal 2025 for (1) onboarding of new board members (a one-time cost of $1,500); 
(2) annual travel reimbursements (up to $3,000 per trustee annually); and (3) access to 
board software ($400 per trustee annually). However, it is assumed that these costs are 
likely absorbable. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 69 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Anne Arundel Community College; 
Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 327/ Page 3 
Appendix 1 - Selected Requirements for Board Members of Community Colleges 
Community College Number of Members 
Term Length 
(in Years) 
Term Limits 
Residency 
Requirements 
Allegany 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Anne Arundel 
81 
4 
32 
Yes3 
Baltimore City 
91 
6 
24 
Some5 
Baltimore 
15 
5 
24 
See Note6 
Carroll 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Cecil 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Chesapeake 
10 
5 
3 
Yes7 
Frederick 
7 
5 
3 
Yes8 
Garrett 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Hagerstown 
7 
6 
No Limit 
Yes9 
Harford 
9 
5 
24 
Yes10 
Howard 
7 
6 
No Limit 
Some11 
Montgomery 
101,12 
6 
No Limit 
Some13 
Prince George’s 
91 
5 
24 
Yes14 
Southern Maryland 
9 
5 
24 
Yes15 
Wor-Wic 
7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
1The board includes a student member serving a one-year term. The student body elects the student board 
member in Prince George’s County. 
2Consecutive full terms. 
3All members must be a resident of Anne Arundel County. 
4Consecutive terms. 
5All members must be a resident of the State. The majority must be residents of Baltimore City. 
6Of the members, one serves at large and the other 14 serve from the seven councilmanic districts in 
Baltimore County, two from each district. 
7Two members from each county that supports Chesapeake College (Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, and Talbot). 
8All seven members must be a resident of Frederick County. 
9All members must be a resident of Washington County at the time of appointment and maintain residency 
in Washington County throughout their term of appointment. 
10All members must be a resident of Harford County. The Harford County board includes three at-large 
members and one from each of the six council districts. 
11Of the seven members, at least six must be residents of Howard County at the time of appointment and 
maintain residency in Howard County throughout the term of appointment. 
12A local nominating committee must submit to the Governor the names of two to four candidates per 
vacancy, from which the Governor must appoint a new member. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 327/ Page 4 
13The student member must be a resident of the county. 
14All members must be a resident of Prince George’s County. 
15Members must be a resident of the State. Each of the southern Maryland counties must be represented by 
at least three members who are residents of the county. 
Source:  Annotated Code of Maryland 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4