START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 382 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 382 
(Delegate Schmidt, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal and Civil Trespass - Professional Land Surveyors - Exception 
 
 
This bill creates exceptions to criminal prohibitions against trespass on property under 
Title 6, Subtitle 4 of the Criminal Law Article and the common law tort of trespass for a 
“professional land surveyor” or an agent or employee of a professional land surveyor who 
enters the property of another to “practice land surveying.” 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s exception to the common law tort of trespass does not affect 
any immunities from civil liability or defenses established by any other provision of the 
Maryland Code or available at common law or equity to which a professional land 
surveyor, or an agent or employee of a land surveyor, may be entitled. This exception also 
does not impair the right of a person to seek redress under any other provision of the 
Maryland Code or at common law or equity for conduct by a professional land surveyor, 
or an agent or employee of a professional land surveyor, that is otherwise actionable. 
 
The bill defines a “professional land surveyor” as a land surveyor who is licensed by the 
State Board for Professional Land Surveyors to practice land surveying. “Practice land 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 382/ Page 2 
surveying,” as defined under the bill and § 15-101 of the Business Occupations and 
Professions Article, means providing or offering to provide professional services that 
require the application of special knowledge of the principles of mathematics, the related 
physical and applied sciences, and the requirements of the relevant law to authoritatively 
determine, regardless of the technology or method used, the accurate and precise location 
of a feature, object, or boundary of real property with reference to the surface of the earth, 
space above the surface of the earth, or underground. This definition includes a variety of 
specified practices. 
 
“Practice land surveying” does not include the design, preparation, or specifications for 
(1) community water or wastewater treatment collection or distribution systems; 
(2) community pumping or lift stations; or (3) geotechnical or structural design 
components of sediment control or stormwater management ponds or basins. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Criminal Trespass on Real Property 
 
A person may not enter or trespass on property that is posted conspicuously against trespass 
by (1) signs placed where they reasonably may be seen, or (2) paint marks that conform 
with the regulations of the Department of Natural Resources and are made on trees or posts 
that are located at each road entrance to the property and adjacent to public roadways, 
waterways, and other adjoining land. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by 
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a $500 maximum fine. For a second violation 
occurring within two years of the first violation, violators are subject to imprisonment for 
up to six months and/or a fine up to $1,000. For each subsequent violation occurring within 
two years after the preceding violation, violators are subject to imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a fine up to $2,500. 
 
A person may not wantonly enter or cross over private property after having been notified 
by the owner or the owner’s agent not to do so, unless entering under a good faith claim of 
right or ownership. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for 
up to 90 days and/or a fine up to $500. For a second violation occurring within two years 
of the first violation, violators are subject to imprisonment for up to six months and/or a 
fine up to $1,000. For each subsequent violation occurring within two years of the 
preceding violation, violators are subject to imprisonment for up to one year and/or a fine 
up to $2,500. 
 
A person may not wantonly enter on the cultivated land of another without permission. A 
person who violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or a fine up to $500. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 382/ Page 3 
Title 6, Subtitle 4 of the Criminal Law Article contains additional provisions pertaining to 
trespass, including use of a vehicle on private property, use of an off-road vehicle on private 
property, and refusal to leave a public building or grounds. 
 
Civil Trespass on Real Property 
 
A trespass is “an intentional or negligent intrusion upon or to the possessory interest in 
property of another.” Ford v. Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office, 149 Md. App. 107, 129 
(2002) A prevailing plaintiff must establish that (1) the defendant committed a physical act 
or force against the plaintiff’s property without the plaintiff’s consent and (2) the 
defendant’s actions interfered with the plaintiff’s possessory interest in that property. Id. 
Consent to enter land or property can be restricted or conditional and creates a privilege of 
entry so long as the scope of the consent is not exceeded. United Food & Com. Workers 
Int’l Union, et al. v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., et al., 228 Md. App. 203, 234 (2016), citing 
Restatement (Second) of Torts, 31 § 168 (1965). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1230 and SB 288 of 2023.- 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 344 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Charles, and Howard counties; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3