START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 994

Chapter 994

(House Bill 307)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Nonprofit
Organizations

PG 304–24

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
County to issue a Class C (fraternal/sororal/service organization) alcoholic beverages
license for use by an independent and nonprofit fraternal or sororal organization that
meets certain ~~membership~~ requirements; and generally relating to alcoholic
beverages licenses in Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 26–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 26–1011
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

26–102.

This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

26–1011.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “INDEPENDENT AND NONPROFIT NATIONWIDE
FRATERNAL OR SORORAL ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ORGANIZATION WHOSE
MEMBERSHIP IS COMPOSED SOLELY OF GRADUATE MEMBERS OF AN INDEPENDENT
AND NONPROFIT NATIONWIDE FRATERNAL OR SORORAL ORGANIZATION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 994 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “INDEPENDENT AND NONPROFIT NATIONWIDE FRATERNAL OR
SORORAL ORGANIZATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) A COLLEGE OR HIGH SCHOOL FRATERNITY OR SORORITY;
OR

(II) ANY OTHER FRATERNITY OR SORORITY, THE MEMBERSHIP
OF WHICH IS RESTRICTED IN WHOLE OR IN PART TO STUDENTS OF AN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION OR A PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL.

(B) There is a Class C (fraternal/sororal/service organization) beer, wine, and
liquor license.

(b) (C) The Board may issue the license for use by:

(1) a local unit of a lodge or chapter of a nonprofit and nationwide fraternal,
sororal, or service organization OR AN INDEPENDENT AND NONPROFIT NATIONWIDE
FRATERNAL OR SORORAL ORGANIZATION that:

[(1)] (I) is composed solely of inducted members;

[(2)] (II) was operating in the county before the license application was
made;

[(3)] (III) has at least 100 members paying dues of at least $5 per year per
member; and

[(4)] (IV) owns or operates a home or clubhouse that is principally for the
use of its members and guests when accompanied by members; OR

(2) AN INDEPENDENT NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION WHOSE
~~MEMBERSHIP~~ ~~IS~~ ~~COMPOSED~~ ~~SOLELY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MEMBERS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~NATIONWIDE~~ ~~FRATERNAL~~ ~~OR~~
SORORAL ORGANIZATION.

(c) (D)(1) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
by the glass or by the bottle for on–premises consumption by a member or guest
accompanied by a member.

(2) The license holder may allow a person that has leased a private room
or other area of the licensed premises for a private social gathering to bring beer, wine, and
liquor onto the licensed premises for on–premises consumption.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 994

(d) (E) The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor during the hours and
days as set out for a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license under § 26–2004 of this title,
except that restrictions on the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday do not apply.

(e) (F) DURING A 1–YEAR PERIOD, IF A LICENSE HOLDER IS FOUND
GUILTY OF TWO UNDERAGE VIOLATIONS OR TWO VIOLATIONS OF PURCHASING BEER,
WINE, OR LIQUOR, FROM A PERSON OTHER THAN A LICENSED WHOLESALER, OR ANY
COMBINATION OF THE TWO, THE BOARD MAY SUSPEND OR REVOKE THE LICENSE.

(G) The annual license fee is $910.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3