START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 371 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 371 
(Delegate Grossman) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Recounts - Procedures 
 
 
This emergency bill requires a petitioner for a recount to select the method for conducting 
the recount, from among specified methods. The bill also requires a local board of elections 
to (1) preserve and store certain voter-verifiable paper records together with their 
corresponding duplicate ballots and (2) in a recount, follow specified requirements relating 
to duplicate ballots. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires a petitioner for a recount to select the method for 
conducting the recount. The petitioner may select only one of the following methods:  
(1) rescanning the ballots using the same vote tabulating equipment that was used in the 
election or alternative vote tabulating equipment, if alternative equipment is available and 
its use is feasible, as determined by the State Board of Elections (SBE); (2) a manual 
recount of voter-verifiable paper records; or (3) any other recount method approved by the 
State Administrator of Elections. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 371/ Page 2 
The bill requires a local board of elections to (1) preserve the voter-verifiable paper record 
corresponding to each duplicate ballot that is created and (2) store each duplicate ballot 
that is created together with the corresponding voter-verifiable paper record. 
 
In a recount, a local board of elections must examine the voter-verifiable paper record and 
duplicate ballot and (1) if the voter-verifiable paper record and duplicate ballot do not 
match, the local board must create a new duplicate ballot that accurately reflects the voter’s 
intent and count that duplicate ballot or (2) if the voter-verifiable paper record and duplicate 
ballot match, the local board must count the duplicate ballot. 
 
“Duplicate ballot” means a paper ballot that:   
 
 
is created by a local board for purposes of vote tabulation by an optical scanner 
because the voter-verifiable paper record submitted by the voter is not acceptable 
for vote tabulation by an optical scanner; and 
 
is a copy of a voter-verifiable paper record that (1) for an absentee ballot returned 
by mail, reflects the intent of the voter, or (2) for a provisional ballot, includes only 
the votes for contests for which the voter is eligible to vote. 
 
“Voter-verifiable paper record” has the meaning stated in § 9-102 of the Election Law 
Article, and means (1) a paper ballot prepared by the voter for the purpose of being read 
by a precinct-based optical scanner; (2) a paper ballot prepared by the voter to be mailed 
to the applicable local board, whether mailed from a domestic or an overseas location; and 
(3) a paper ballot created through the use of a ballot marking device. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Recount Provisions under the Election Law Article 
 
A candidate for public or party office who has been defeated based on the certified results 
of any election conducted under the Election Law Article may petition for a recount of the 
votes cast for the office sought. However, a candidate may not petition for a recount if the 
margin of difference between the number of votes received by an apparent winner and the 
losing candidate with the highest number of votes for the office is greater than 5% of the 
total votes cast for those candidates. The petition must be filed within three days after the 
results of the election have been certified, with the board with which the candidate’s 
certificate of candidacy was filed, and must specify that the recount be conducted in all of 
the precincts in which the office was on the ballot or only in the precincts designated in the 
petition. 
 
A registered voter eligible to vote for a question on the ballot in an election conducted 
under the Election Law Article may file a petition for a recount based on the certified results 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 371/ Page 3 
of the question. However, a registered voter may not file a petition for a recount if the 
margin of difference between the number of votes cast for and the number of votes cast 
against the question is greater than 5%. The petition must be filed within three days after 
the results of the election are certified and must specify that the recount be conducted in all 
of the precincts in which the question was on the ballot or only in precincts designated in 
the petition. If the question was on the ballot in one county, the petition must be filed in 
that county. If the question was on the ballot in more than one county, the petition must be 
filed with SBE. 
 
SBE must promptly notify each appropriate local board of elections of a petition that is 
filed with SBE, and a local board must promptly notify SBE of a petition that is filed with 
the local board. 
 
State Board of Elections Regulations 
 
SBE regulations governing recounts require the petitioner to specify whether the recount 
must be conducted by (1) manually retabulating the printed election totals reports; 
(2) rescanning all ballots using the same vote tabulating equipment that was used in the 
election or alternative vote tabulating equipment, if alternative equipment is available and 
its use is feasible; (3) manually retabulating all ballots; or (4) any other recount option 
approved by the State Administrator. 
 
During absentee and provisional ballot canvassing, if a ballot is determined to be 
unacceptable for machine tabulation, the ballot must be duplicated. Following duplication, 
the original ballot must be replaced by the duplicate ballot, and the duplicate ballot must 
be counted with the ballots for that precinct. Both ballots must be given a unique identifying 
number and be securely attached to each other. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 339 and HB 642 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 115 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties; 
Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 371/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - April 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 9, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4