START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 307 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 307 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Nonprofit 
Organizations  
PG 304-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to issue 
a Class C (fraternal/sororal/service organization) beer, wine, and liquor license (BWL) for 
use by an independent and nonprofit nationwide fraternal or sororal organization, as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase by approximately $5,460 
annually beginning in FY 2025 from the issuance of Class C (fraternal/sororal/service 
organization) BWL licenses. Prince George’s County can handle any additional 
enforcement activity using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board may suspend or revoke the Class C (fraternal/sororal/service 
organization) BWL license if, during a one-year period, the license holder is found guilty 
of two underage violations or two violations of purchasing beer, wine, or liquor from a 
person other than a licensed wholesaler, or any combination of the two. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 307/ Page 2 
“Independent and nonprofit nationwide fraternal or sororal organization” means an 
organization whose membership is composed solely of graduate members of an 
independent and nonprofit nationwide fraternal or sororal organization but does not include 
(1) a college or high school fraternity or sorority or (2) any other fraternity or sorority, the 
membership of which is restricted in whole or in part to students of an educational 
institution or a professional school. 
 
Current Law:  In Prince George’s County, the board may issue Class C 
(fraternal/sororal/service organization) BWL licenses to a local unit of a lodge or chapter 
of a nonprofit and nationwide fraternal, sororal, or service organization that (1) is 
composed solely of inducted members; (2) was operating in the county before the license 
application was made; (3) has at least 100 members paying dues of at least $5 per year 
per member; and (4) owns or operates a home or clubhouse that is principally for the use 
of its members and guests when accompanied by members. 
 
The Class C (fraternal/sororal/service organization) BWL license authorizes the holder to 
sell beer, wine, and liquor by the glass or by the bottle for on-premises consumption by a 
member or guest accompanied by a member. The license holder may sell beer, wine, and 
liquor from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day, in a similar manner as certain existing 
Class C licenses; however, limitations related to the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sunday 
do not apply. The annual license fee is $910. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County estimates issuing six Class C 
(fraternal/sororal/service organization) BWL licenses under the bill. The annual license fee 
is $910; therefore, Prince George’s County revenues increase by approximately $5,460 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 9 (Senator Watson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 307/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 24, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3