START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 338 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 338 
(Delegate Moon, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure – Facial Recognition Technology – Requirements, 
Procedures, and Prohibitions 
 
 
This bill establishes numerous requirements, procedures, and prohibitions to govern the 
use of facial recognition technology (FRT) by law enforcement agencies. It requires 
specified training, audits, and reports related to the use of FRT and, with specified 
exceptions, prohibits the introduction of results generated by FRT in a criminal proceeding 
or a juvenile delinquency proceeding. Regarding the use of FRT, the Department of State 
Police (DSP), in consultation with any other relevant State agency, must adopt and publish 
a model statewide policy. By June 30, 2026, the Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services (DPSCS) must develop and administer a training program regarding 
the use of FRT in the course of criminal investigations, as specified. A police officer or 
other employee or agent of a law enforcement agency authorized to use FRT in the course 
of a criminal investigation must annually complete training administered by DPSCS. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $474,100 in FY 2025; future 
years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
474,100 
508,800 
531,500 
554,800 
579,200 
Net Effect 
($474,100) 
($508,800) 
($531,500) 
($554,800) 
($579,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill has an operational impact on affected local law enforcement 
agencies; some may incur additional costs. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 338/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Use in Court 
 
The State must disclose, in accordance with the Maryland Rules regarding discovery, 
whether FRT has been used in an investigation relevant to a criminal court proceeding or 
juvenile court proceeding. The name of each facial recognition system used, a description 
and the names of the databases searched, and all results generated from the use of FRT that 
led to further investigative action for each facial recognition system and for each database 
searched must also be disclosed. Generally, results generated by FRT are prohibited from 
being introduced as evidence in a criminal proceeding or juvenile court delinquency 
proceeding. Results generated by FRT (1) may be considered or introduced as evidence in 
connection with a criminal proceeding only for the purpose of establishing probable cause 
or positive identification in connection with the issuance of a warrant or at a preliminary 
hearing and (2) may not serve as the sole basis to establish probable cause or the positive 
identification of an individual in a criminal investigation or proceeding unless supported 
by additional, independently obtained evidence. 
 
A result generated by FRT in violation of the bill’s provisions, and all other evidence 
derived from that result, may not be introduced by the State for any purpose in a criminal 
court proceeding or in specified juvenile court proceedings. Such evidence may be 
introduced for a purpose as described above if the court finds that the evidence would 
otherwise be subject to a legally valid exception to the exclusionary rule. However, this 
provision does not allow the use of a result generated using FRT to be introduced as 
evidence in a criminal trial or in an adjudicatory hearing held by the juvenile court. 
 
Use by Law Enforcement 
 
Generally, a police officer or other employee or agent of a law enforcement agency, in the 
furtherance of a criminal investigation, may only use FRT in limited circumstances, 
including to investigate specified crimes of violence, specified human trafficking offenses, 
specified child abuse offenses, a specified child pornography offense, specified hate crime 
offenses, specified weapon crimes, specified animal cruelty offenses, specified drug 
offenses, a specified stalking offense, a criminal act that presents a substantial and ongoing 
threat to public safety or national security, or a crime under the laws of another state 
substantially equivalent to one of the crimes listed that involves a fugitive from justice 
charged with a crime in that state and sought for extradition under Title 9 of the 
Criminal Procedure Article. Numerous specific prohibitions regarding the use of FRT are 
included in the bill. However, the bill’s provisions may not be construed to restrict the use 
of FRT for the purpose of (1) identifying a missing, deceased, or incapacitated person; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 338/ Page 3 
(2) redacting the image of an individual from an image or video for release to protect the 
individual’s privacy; (3) forensic analysis of electronic media seized by law enforcement 
if the person identified in the seized media is not the subject of the criminal charges 
resulting from the analysis; (4) enhancing security systems to prevent unauthorized access 
to information, goods, materials, areas, or other properties under the custody or care of a 
law enforcement agency; or (5) conducting other legitimate activity unrelated to a criminal 
investigation. 
 
Use of FRT must be in accordance with the model policy adopted by DSP, and law 
enforcement agencies that use FRT must adopt and maintain a use and data management 
policy and post the policy on the agency’s public website. In addition, a law enforcement 
agency that contracts for use of a nongovernment facial recognition system must disclose 
on its public website the name of the system and a description of the databases searched. 
 
A law enforcement agency that uses or contracts for the use of FRT must designate an 
agency employee to oversee and administer the use of FRT in compliance with the bill as 
well as applicable local laws, regulations, and policies. Before use, a result generated by 
FRT must be independently verified by an individual who has completed required training 
by DPSCS. 
 
Audits 
 
By October 1 each year, law enforcement agencies that use (or contract for the use of) FRT 
must complete an annual audit regarding compliance with the bill’s provisions as well as 
applicable local laws, regulations, and policies. The results of the audit must be maintained 
for at least three years after completion and, unless destroyed after such time, disclosed upon 
request to the Attorney General, the Public Defender, a State’s Attorney, a U.S. Attorney, or 
a designee of any of the individuals. 
 
Reports 
 
By February 1 each year, a law enforcement agency using or contracting for the use of FRT 
must prepare and publish an annual report that discloses specified data about the use of 
FRT. By May 1 each year, the reports must be submitted to the Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy (GOCPP). By October 1 each year, GOCPP must submit to the 
Governor and the General Assembly a report consisting of the information reported by law 
enforcement agencies, disaggregated by agency. 
 
Civil Action 
 
A person may bring a civil action against a law enforcement agency to compel compliance 
with the requirements of the bill. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 338/ Page 4 
Current Law:  The Maryland Image Repository System (MIRS) is facial recognition 
software within DPSCS that allows law enforcement to compare images of unidentified 
individuals to images from Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) records, inmate case 
records, and mugshots. People in public places are never scanned by MIRS. MIRS only 
gives a probable list of potential suspects to be followed up on by law enforcement, not a 
positive identification. Currently, local law enforcement agencies in the State are 
responsible for establishing a policy regarding the use of MIRS and decide when, where, 
and how it is used. 
 
Chapter 18 of the 2021 special session requires, notwithstanding any other provision of the 
Public Information Act (PIA), an officer, employee, agent, or contractor of the State or a 
political subdivision to deny inspection of a part of a public record that contains personal 
information or a photograph of an individual by any federal agency seeking access for the 
purpose of enforcing federal immigration law unless provided with a valid warrant. In 
addition, an officer, employee, agent, or contractor of the State or a political subdivision 
must deny inspection using a facial recognition search of a digital photographic image or 
actual stored data of a digital photographic image by any federal agency seeking access for 
the purposes of enforcing federal immigration law unless provided with a valid warrant. 
“Facial recognition,” as defined under Chapter 18, means a biometric software application 
that identifies or verifies a person by comparing and analyzing patterns based on a person’s 
facial contours. 
 
By June 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, MVA, DSP, and DPSCS must submit a report to 
the General Assembly on PIA requests from federal agencies seeking access to personal 
information, a photograph of an individual, or a facial recognition search for the purpose 
of federal immigration enforcement, whether the request was initiated through a State or 
local law enforcement agency. The report must include specified information relating to 
the number of requests received, the number of facial recognition searches completed, and 
the number of individuals whose personal information or photograph was provided to a 
federal agency. According to the report submitted for 2023, no requests have been made. 
 
Chapter 446 of 2020 prohibits an employer from using a facial recognition service for the 
purpose of creating a facial template during an applicant’s interview for employment unless 
an applicant consents by signing a specified waiver. “Facial recognition service” is defined 
as technology that analyzes facial features and is used for recognition or persistent tracking 
of individuals in still or video images. The Act does not apply to State or local governments 
as employers. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $474,149 in 
fiscal 2025, as discussed below. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 338/ Page 5 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
The bill requires DPSCS to develop and administer a training program regarding the use 
of FRT in the course of criminal investigations by June 30, 2026. However, effective 
October 1, 2024, the bill also requires (1) annual training of employees authorized to use 
FRT and (2) that a result generated by FRT, before being used for any purpose in relation 
to a criminal investigation, is independently verified by an individual who has completed 
the training. Thus, this analysis assumes that DPSCS creates the training program in 
fiscal 2025. Accordingly, general fund expenditures for DPSCS increase by $442,966 in 
fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring two information technology programmers, one program manager, 
one business analyst, and one instructor to develop and administer the required FRT 
training program. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, additional 
training certification and equipment, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$351,186 
Training Certification and Equipment 
55,500 
Operating Expenses 
36,280 
FY 2025 DPSCS Expenditures 
$442,966 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Although DPSCS anticipates 
the need for infrastructure improvements and two additional information technology 
programmers, without experience under the bill, the Department of Legislative Services is 
unable to verify the precise need for infrastructure improvements and additional staffing of 
that magnitude at this time. However, to the extent that additional staff or infrastructure 
improvements are required, DPSCS may request additional resources through the annual 
budget process. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
 
GOCPP is not able to absorb, with existing resources, the additional duties of preparing the 
required report with information regarding the use of FRT by law enforcement agencies, 
disaggregated by agency. Accordingly, general fund expenditures for GOCPP increase by 
$31,183 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay after the bill’s 
October 1, 2024 effective date to align with reporting requirements and GOCPP 
responsibilities under the bill. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time 
administrative officer to handle preparation and submission of the required report. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 338/ Page 6 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$24,467 
Operating Expenses 
6,716 
FY 2025 GOCPP Expenditures 
$31,183 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Department of State Police 
 
DSP can adopt and publish the model FRT policy with existing budgeted resources; 
however, operations are likely affected, as the bill requires training for DSP employees that 
is conducted by DPSCS and requires annual audits and reports. 
 
Judiciary 
 
The bill may result in a reduction in the number of criminal cases brought to court; 
however, any such reduction and the bill’s authorization for civil actions to compel 
compliance with the bill’s provisions are not expected to materially affect State finances. 
 
Other Law Enforcement Agencies 
 
Other State law enforcement agencies are also likely affected, as the bill requires training 
for law enforcement agency employees that is conducted by DPSCS and requires annual 
audits and reports. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The impact on local law enforcement agencies depends on a variety 
of factors, including whether and how frequently the agencies rely on the use of FRT. 
Although it is generally assumed that any local law enforcement agencies using FRT can 
alter and report on their usage with existing resources, there may be operational impacts to 
do so, and there are likely costs associated with the training requirements of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 192 and HB 223 of 2023 and SB 762 and HB 1046 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 182 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 338/ Page 7 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Governor’s 
Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of 
General Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7