START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 236

Chapter 236

(House Bill 327)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Board of Community College Trustees – Membership
Alterations and Appointment Requirements

FOR the purpose of increasing the membership of the Board of Community College
Trustees for Anne Arundel County; requiring the Governor to consider certain
factors when appointing members to the Board; and generally relating to the
membership of the Board of Community College Trustees for Anne Arundel County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 16–401
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

16–401.

(a) (1) The Board of Community College Trustees for Anne Arundel County
consists of [eight] 10 members appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of
the Senate.

(2) Each member shall be a resident of Anne Arundel County.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) of this section:

(i) The term of a member is 4 years; and

(ii) A member may not serve for more than three consecutive full
terms.

(b) (1) One of the members shall be a regularly enrolled student in good
standing at Anne Arundel Community College.

(2) The student member shall:

(i) Be nominated in the manner determined by the student body of
Anne Arundel Community College;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 236 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Have the qualifications required to be student body president of
Anne Arundel Community College; and

(iii) Serve for a term of 1 year, beginning July 1 and ending on June
30.

(C) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, WHEN APPOINTING THE MEMBERS OF
THE BOARD, THE GOVERNOR SHALL TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION THE GEOGRAPHIC
AND ETHNIC REPRESENTATION OF ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY SO THAT ALL
SEGMENTS OF THE POPULATION OF THE COUNTY ARE REPRESENTED ON THE
BOARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding the date of
appointment of the initial additional members of the Board of Community College Trustees
for Anne Arundel County as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, the terms of the initial
additional members shall begin on July 1, 2024.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2