START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 333 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 333 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Election Disinformation and Improper Influence Related to 
Voting 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE) to (1) maintain a portal on its website 
that the public may use to report election misinformation (incorrect or misleading 
information regarding the time, place, or manner of an election, election results, or voting 
rights in the State) and election disinformation (incorrect or misleading information 
regarding the time, place, or manner of an election, election results, or voting rights in the 
State that is knowingly and deliberately disseminated) and (2) conduct a periodic review 
of material submitted by the public through the portal and, to the extent necessary, issue 
corrective information or refer submissions to the State Prosecutor. The bill also – under 
existing provisions that prohibit willfully and knowingly influencing or attempting to 
influence, through specified means, a voter’s voting decision or decision whether to vote – 
establishes that “influence” includes the use of pressure, deception, trickery, or direct or 
indirect authority to induce action or to change the decision or act of another, regardless of 
the medium used. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $50,000 in FY 2024 only. 
Special fund revenues may increase annually beginning in FY 2025. 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 333/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A person may not willfully and knowingly influence or attempt to influence 
(1) a voter’s voting decision through the use of force, threat, menace, intimidation, bribery, 
reward, or offer of reward or (2) a voter’s decision whether to go to the polls to cast a vote 
or vote by other lawful means, through the use of force, fraud, threat, menace, intimidation, 
bribery, reward, or offer of reward. 
 
A person who violates those prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine 
of up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to five years. A person who violates the 
prohibition against influencing or attempting to influence, through specified means, a 
voter’s decision whether to vote, without knowing that the act is illegal, is subject to a civil 
penalty of up to $5,000. Monetary penalties for these violations are distributed to the Fair 
Campaign Financing Fund, which holds funds for public campaign financing of 
gubernatorial tickets under the Public Financing Act. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures are expected to increase by at least 
$50,000 in fiscal 2024 only, to establish a portal on SBE’s website that the public may use 
to report election misinformation and election disinformation. The costs of establishing a 
portal are assumed to be incurred in fiscal 2024, accounting for the bill’s June 1, 2024, 
effective date, but may instead be incurred in fiscal 2025 depending on the timing of the 
development of the portal. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (Fair Campaign Financing Fund) revenues may increase 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to the extent the bill results in increased collection of 
penalties. The extent of any increase cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Prosecutor’s Office; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 333/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3