START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 328 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 328 
(Delegate Lopez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals - Financial Assistance Policies - Revisions 
 
   
This bill modifies the required components of acute care and chronic care hospital financial 
assistance policies by (1) authorizing hospitals to consider only household monetary assets 
in excess of $100,000 and excluding specified retirement assets in determining eligibility 
for free and reduced-cost care and (2) removing the requirement that the provision of 
reduced-cost care or payment plans be in accordance with the mission and service area of 
the hospital.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload for the Health Services Cost Review Commission 
(HSCRC) can be handled with existing budgeted resources. Any impact on Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) hospitals is indeterminate but likely minimal, as discussed 
below. Any impact on uncompensated care is indeterminate but anticipated to be minimal 
overall. To the extent hospital rates increase from additional uncompensated care, 
Medicaid expenditures (61% federal funds, 39% general funds) and federal matching 
revenues increase beginning as early as FY 2025, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Hospital Financial Assistance Policies 
 
Each hospital, or related institution, under the jurisdiction of HSCRC must develop a 
financial assistance policy for providing free and reduced-cost care to patients who lack 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 328/ Page 2 
health care coverage or whose health care coverage does not pay the full cost of the hospital 
bill. A patient’s family income must be calculated at the time of service or updated, as 
appropriate, to account for any change in financial circumstances of the patient that occurs 
within 240 days after the initial hospital bill is provided.  
 
The financial assistance policy must provide, at a minimum (1) free medically necessary 
care to patients with family income at or below 200% of the federal poverty level (FPL); 
(2) reduced-cost medically necessary care to patients with family income above 200% FPL, 
in accordance with the mission and service area of the hospital; (3) a payment plan that is 
available to uninsured patients with family income between 200% and 500% FPL, in 
accordance with the mission and service area of the hospital; and (4) a mechanism for a 
patient to request the hospital reconsider the denial of free or reduced-cost care that 
includes specified information regarding the Health Education and Advocacy Unit.  
 
In addition to income-based criteria, a hospital may consider household monetary assets in 
determining eligibility for free and reduced-cost care. Excluded monetary assets must be 
adjusted annually for inflation in accordance with the Consumer Price Index. Monetary 
assets that are convertible to cash must be excluded, including:   
 
 
at a minimum, the first $10,000 of monetary assets;  
 
a safe harbor equity of $15,000 in primary residence;  
 
retirement assets that the Internal Revenue Service has granted preferential tax 
treatment as a retirement account, including qualified or nonqualified deferred 
compensation plans;  
 
one motor vehicle used for the transportation needs of the patient or any family 
member of the patient;  
 
any resources excluded in determining financial eligibility under Medicaid; and 
 
prepaid higher education funds in a Maryland 529 account.  
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission  
 
HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH charged with constraining hospital 
growth and establishing hospital rates to promote cost containment, access to care, equity, 
financial stability, and hospital accountability. HSCRC oversees acute and chronic care 
hospitals.  
 
Uncompensated Care  
 
Uncompensated care is care provided for which no compensation is received, typically a 
combination of charity care, financial assistance, and bad debt. The uncompensated care 
fund (UCF) maintains access to care in communities with higher uncompensated care by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 328/ Page 3 
limiting the financial strain on hospitals. HSCRC must factor the cost of uncompensated 
care into the State’s hospital rate setting structure. Each year, HSCRC determines the total 
amount of uncompensated care that will be placed in hospital rates for the year, and the 
amount of funding available for the uncompensated care pool. Regulated hospitals draw 
funds from the pool if they experience greater-than-average levels of uncompensated care 
and pay into the pool if they experience a below average level of uncompensated care, 
ensuring the total cost of uncompensated care is shared equally across all hospitals.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill specifies that a hospital may only consider household 
monetary assets in excess of $100,000 when determining a patient’s eligibility for free and 
reduced-cost care and clarifies that specified retirement assets must be excluded. The bill 
also removes the requirement that the provision of reduced-cost care or payment plans be 
in accordance with the mission and service area of the hospital.  
 
HSCRC advises that 27 of 45 (60%) hospitals under HSCRC jurisdiction currently use 
asset tests or otherwise consider assets in determining a patient’s eligibility for free or 
reduced-cost care. The actual number of patients who may additionally qualify under the 
bill – either due to the alteration of asset tests or removal of the geographic service area 
requirement – cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
The bill’s changes regarding the use of specified asset tests impacts MDH’s chronic care 
hospitals, including Western Maryland Hospital Center and Deer’s Head Hospital Center. 
However, any impact on these facilities cannot be reliably estimated and is likely minimal.  
 
The bill’s changes may also increase uncompensated care by an indeterminate but likely 
minimal amount overall. Under the bill, the potential increase to the overall UCF depends 
on the relative differences between hospitals, not the overall amount of uncompensated 
care statewide. Additionally, the bill may decrease the total balance of medical debt owed, 
as more patients may qualify for free and reduced-cost care rather than being unable to pay 
their bill, resulting in bad debt. A smaller balance of medical debt owed by patients 
decreases the uncompensated care pool. Therefore, by potentially increasing the number 
of patients eligible to receive free and reduced-cost care, the bill may decrease the balance 
of medical debt owed by patients, thus having a substitutive effect on the UCF.  
 
Hospital rates are paid by all payers in the State. As such, should hospital rates increase to 
account for additional uncompensated care, expenditures for health insurers, Medicaid, and 
self-pay patients may increase. To the extent hospital rates increase, Medicaid expenditures 
(61% federal funds, 39% general funds) increase and federal matching revenues increase 
accordingly.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 328/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4