START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 332 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 332 
(Delegate Addison, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Out-of-State Motor Vehicles - Improper Registration - Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), in consultation with 
Baltimore City and other interested jurisdictions, to prepare a report, as specified, on motor 
vehicles owned by Maryland residents that are improperly registered in another state. MVA 
must submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by December 1, 2024. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and 
terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can prepare and submit the report required by the bill with existing 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City and interested local governments can likely assist MVA with 
the report with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  More specifically, the report on motor vehicles owned by Maryland 
residents that are improperly registered in another state must include:   
 
 
an analysis of the legal basis, both statutory and regulatory, that, among other things, 
enables or allows for titling and registration in another state; 
 
a listing of other states that allow this practice; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 332/ Page 2 
 
an analysis of incentives that Maryland residents may have to do so; 
 
current statistics and recent trends on the number of motor vehicles owned by 
Maryland residents, in total and by county, that are improperly titled or registered 
in another state; 
 
an analysis of motor vehicle insurance issues, including the effect on driving and 
insurance rates in Maryland, as specified, and the effect of recent changes to 
Virginia laws; 
 
a description of (1) any recent and planned enforcement actions taken or to be taken 
(and whether effective) by MVA; (2) the number and nature of any misdemeanors 
charged for failure to obtain a Maryland motor vehicle title or registration initiated 
through an MVA investigation; and (3) the harms caused, including decreased State 
revenues associated with vehicle titling and registration as well as circumvention of 
the Vehicle Emissions Inspection Program; and 
 
a comparison with neighboring states of Maryland’s laws, enforcement actions, and 
relevant fee structures. 
 
By December 1, 2024, MVA must submit the report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly, of its findings on, and recommendations, for addressing issues related 
to motor vehicles improperly titled or registered to Maryland residents by other states, 
including recommendations for any additional penalties or other enforcement mechanisms; 
any possible interstate agreements, or any other proposals, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  Unless otherwise exempt, each motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and 
pole trailer driven on a highway in the State must be registered with MVA. Registration is 
not required for a vehicle owned by a new resident of the State during the first 60 days of 
residency if the vehicle displays a valid out-of-state registration. If a motor vehicle required 
to be registered is not registered, a person may not park the unregistered motor vehicle on 
any public alley, street, or highway or on private property used by the public in general, 
including parking lots of shopping centers, condominiums, apartments, or town house 
developments. Also, a person may not drive or attempt to drive a vehicle on any highway 
in the State without a valid registration as required from MVA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 357 (Senator McCray) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 332/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of State Police; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - April 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 6, 2024 
 
md/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3