START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 809

Chapter 809

(House Bill 338)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Facial Recognition Technology – Requirements,
Procedures, and Prohibitions

FOR the purpose of establishing requirements, procedures, and prohibitions relating to the
use of facial recognition technology by a law enforcement agency under certain
circumstances; ~~providing~~ ~~that~~ ~~certain~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~preempt~~ ~~any~~ ~~local~~ ~~law~~
~~governing~~ ~~facial~~ ~~recognition~~ ~~technology;~~ and generally relating to facial recognition
technology.

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 2–501 through ~~2–510~~ ~~2–511~~ 2–510 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 5.
Facial Recognition Technology”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

SUBTITLE 5. FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY.

2–501.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) (1) “FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY” MEANS A COMPUTER
PROGRAM, A SERVICE, OR ANY OTHER TECHNOLOGY THAT ANALYZES FACIAL
FEATURES AND IS USED BY OR AT THE DIRECTION OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
FOR THE IDENTIFICATION, VERIFICATION, OR PERSISTENT TRACKING OF
INDIVIDUALS IN STILL OR VIDEO IMAGES FOR USE IN CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS.

(2) “FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY” DOES NOT INCLUDE
TECHNOLOGY:

(I) USED ONLY FOR THE ANALYSIS OF FACIAL FEATURES TO
GRANT OR DENY ACCESS TO AN ELECTRONIC DEVICE; OR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 809 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THAT USES AN AUTOMATED OR SEMIAUTOMATED PROCESS
ONLY FOR THE PURPOSE OF REDACTING A RECORDING OR AN IMAGE FOR RELEASE
OR DISCLOSURE OUTSIDE A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY
OF A SUBJECT DEPICTED IN THE RECORDING OR IMAGE IF THE PROCESS DOES NOT
GENERATE OR RESULT IN THE RETENTION OF ANY BIOMETRIC DATA OR
SURVEILLANCE INFORMATION.

(C) “LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–101
OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

2–502.

THIS SUBTITLE SUPERSEDES ANY RESTRICTION THAT A LOCAL JURISDICTION
IN THE STATE IMPOSES ON THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY BY A
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, AND THE STATE PREEMPTS THE RIGHT OF ANY LOCAL
~~JURISDICTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~REGULATE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~USE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FACIAL~~ ~~RECOGNITION~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~BY~~ ~~A~~
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

~~2–503.~~

(A) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, RESULTS
GENERATED BY FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY MAY NOT BE INTRODUCED IN A
CRIMINAL PROCEEDING OR IN A DELINQUENCY PROCEEDING UNDER TITLE 3,
SUBTITLE 8A OF THE COURTS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, RESULTS
GENERATED BY FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY MAY BE CONSIDERED OR
INTRODUCED AS EVIDENCE IN CONNECTION WITH A CRIMINAL PROCEEDING ONLY
FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING PROBABLE CAUSE OR POSITIVE
IDENTIFICATION:

(I) IN CONNECTION WITH THE ISSUANCE OF A WARRANT; OR

(II) AT A PRELIMINARY HEARING.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
RESULTS GENERATED BY FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY MAY NOT SERVE AS
THE SOLE BASIS TO ESTABLISH PROBABLE CAUSE OR THE POSITIVE
IDENTIFICATION OF AN INDIVIDUAL IN A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION OR
PROCEEDING.

(II) PROBABLE CAUSE OR POSITIVE IDENTIFICATION MAY BE
ESTABLISHED USING FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY ONLY IF THE RESULTS

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 809

ARE SUPPORTED BY ADDITIONAL, INDEPENDENTLY OBTAINED EVIDENCE
ESTABLISHING PROBABLE CAUSE OR A POSITIVE IDENTIFICATION.

~~2–503.~~ ~~2–504.~~ 2–503.

(A) (1) A POLICE OFFICER OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY NOT, IN THE FURTHERANCE OF A CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION:

(I) USE FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY TO INVESTIGATE A
CRIME OTHER THAN THE COMMISSION OF OR THE ATTEMPT TO COMMIT:

1. A CRIME OF VIOLENCE AS DEFINED IN § 14–101 OF
THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

2. A HUMAN TRAFFICKING OFFENSE UNDER TITLE 3,
SUBTITLE 11 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

3. FIRST– OR SECOND–DEGREE CHILD ABUSE UNDER §
3–601 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

4. A CHILD PORNOGRAPHY OFFENSE UNDER § 11–207 OF
THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

5. A HATE CRIME UNDER § 10–304 OF THE CRIMINAL
LAW ARTICLE;

6. A WEAPON CRIME UNDER § 4–102, § 4–103, §
4–203(A)(1)(III) OR (IV), § 4–204, OR § 4–303(A)(2) OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

7. A WEAPON CRIME UNDER § 5–138, § 5–140, § 5–141, §
5–207(C)(16), § 5–406(A)(3), OR § 5–703(A) OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE;

8. AGGRAVATED CRUELTY TO ANIMALS UNDER § 10–606
OR § 10–607 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

9. IMPORTATION OF FENTANYL OR A FENTANYL
ANALOGUE UNDER § 5–614(A)(1)(XII) OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

10. STALKING UNDER § 3–802 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
ARTICLE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 809 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

11. A CRIMINAL ACT INVOLVING CIRCUMSTANCES
PRESENTING A SUBSTANTIAL AND ONGOING THREAT TO PUBLIC SAFETY OR
NATIONAL SECURITY; OR

12. A CRIME UNDER THE LAWS OF ANOTHER STATE
SUBSTANTIALLY EQUIVALENT TO A CRIME LISTED IN ITEMS 1 THROUGH 10 OF THIS
ITEM INVOLVING A FUGITIVE FROM JUSTICE CHARGED WITH A CRIME IN THAT STATE
AND SOUGHT UNDER TITLE 9 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(II) ANALYZE AN IMAGE OR A RECORDING OF AN INDIVIDUAL:

1. ENGAGED IN ACTIVITY PROTECTED UNDER THE
UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION, THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION, OR THE
MARYLAND DECLARATION OF RIGHTS, UNLESS THERE IS REASONABLE SUSPICION
TO BELIEVE THAT THE INDIVIDUAL HAS COMMITTED, IS IN THE PROCESS OF
COMMITTING, OR IS ABOUT TO COMMIT A CRIME; OR

2. WHO IS NOT INTENDED TO BE IDENTIFIED;

(III) USE FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY TO ANALYZE A
SKETCH OR MANUALLY PRODUCED IMAGE;

(IV) DISCLOSE TO A WITNESS IN THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION,
PRIOR TO THE WITNESS PARTICIPATING IN A LIVE IDENTIFICATION OR PHOTO
ARRAY IDENTIFICATION, THAT A PARTICULAR SUSPECT OR IMAGE OF A SUSPECT
WAS IDENTIFIED USING FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY; OR

(V) USE FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY FOR THE PURPOSE
OF LIVE OR REAL–TIME IDENTIFICATION OF AN IMAGE OR A RECORDING.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, AN IMAGE BEING EVALUATED USING FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY MAY BE COMPARED ONLY TO IMAGES CONTAINED IN:

1. THE DATABASE OF IMAGES OF DRIVER’S LICENSE AND
IDENTIFICATION CARD PHOTOS MAINTAINED BY THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION OR THE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES OF ANOTHER STATE;
OR

2. A DATABASE OF MUGSHOT PHOTOS MAINTAINED BY A
LOCAL, STATE, OR FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR A LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY OF ANOTHER COUNTRY.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 809

(II) AN IMAGE BEING EVALUATED USING FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY MAY BE COMPARED TO AN IMAGE CONTAINED IN A DATABASE OTHER
THAN A DATABASE DESCRIBED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IF:

1. THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY CONDUCTING THE
INVESTIGATION HAS ENTERED INTO AN AGREEMENT WITH THE ENTITY THAT
MAINTAINS THE DATABASE GOVERNING THE METHODS BY WHICH IMAGES IN THE
DATABASE ARE COLLECTED; AND

2. THE AGREEMENT PROVIDES THAT THE AGREEMENT
WILL BE TERMINATED IN THE EVENT THAT THE ENTITY MAINTAINING THE
DATABASE COMMITS A MATERIAL BREACH OF THE PROVISIONS GOVERNING THE
METHODS BY WHICH IMAGES IN THE DATABASE ARE COLLECTED.

(3) BEFORE BEING USED FOR ANY PURPOSE IN RELATION TO A
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION, A RESULT GENERATED BY FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY SHALL BE INDEPENDENTLY VERIFIED BY AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS
COMPLETED TRAINING IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–505 § 2–506 2–505 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(B) A POLICE OFFICER OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY NOT USE FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY TO
IDENTIFY AN INDIVIDUAL SOLELY BASED ON:

(1) THE POLICE OFFICER’S, EMPLOYEE’S, OR AGENT’S PERSONAL
INTEREST NOT RELATED TO LEGITIMATE DUTIES OR OBJECTIVES OF THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;

(2) THE INDIVIDUAL’S POLITICAL OR SOCIAL BELIEFS OR ACTIVITIES;

(3) THE INDIVIDUAL’S PARTICIPATION IN LAWFUL ACTIVITIES; OR

(4) THE INDIVIDUAL’S RACE, COLOR, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, GENDER, DISABILITY, NATIONAL ORIGIN, OR STATUS AS BEING
HOMELESS.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION
AND SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A RESULT GENERATED BY
FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION AND ALL
OTHER EVIDENCE SUBSEQUENTLY DERIVED FROM THE RESULT MAY NOT BE
INTRODUCED BY THE STATE FOR ANY PURPOSE IN A CRIMINAL COURT PROCEEDING
OR IN A JUVENILE COURT PROCEEDING UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 8A OF THE
COURTS ARTICLE.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 809 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) EVIDENCE DERIVED FROM A RESULT GENERATED IN VIOLATION
OF SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION MAY BE INTRODUCED FOR A PURPOSE
DESCRIBED IN § 2–502 § 2–503 2–502 OF THIS SUBTITLE IF THE COURT FINDS THAT
THE EVIDENCE WOULD OTHERWISE BE SUBJECT TO A LEGALLY VALID EXCEPTION
TO THE EXCLUSIONARY RULE.

(3) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO ALLOW THE USE
OF A RESULT GENERATED USING FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY TO BE
INTRODUCED AS EVIDENCE IN A CRIMINAL TRIAL OR IN AN ADJUDICATORY HEARING
HELD UNDER § 3–8A–18 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE.

~~2–504.~~ ~~2–505.~~ 2–504.

THE STATE SHALL DISCLOSE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MARYLAND RULES
REGARDING DISCOVERY, WHETHER FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY HAS BEEN
USED IN AN INVESTIGATION RELEVANT TO A CRIMINAL COURT PROCEEDING OR
JUVENILE COURT PROCEEDING UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 8A OF THE COURTS
ARTICLE, THE NAME OF EACH FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM USED, A DESCRIPTION
AND THE NAMES OF THE DATABASES SEARCHED, AND ALL RESULTS GENERATED
FROM THE USE OF THE FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY THAT LED TO FURTHER
INVESTIGATIVE ACTION FOR EACH FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM AND FOR EACH
DATABASE SEARCHED.

~~2–505.~~ ~~2–506.~~ 2–505.

(A) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT USES OR CONTRACTS FOR THE USE
OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY SHALL DESIGNATE AN EMPLOYEE OF THE
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR OVERSEEING AND
ADMINISTERING THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY IN COMPLIANCE
WITH THIS SUBTITLE AS WELL AS APPLICABLE LOCAL LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND
POLICIES.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, A LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY THAT USES OR CONTRACTS FOR THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY SHALL COMPLETE AN AUDIT TO DETERMINE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
SUBTITLE AS WELL AS APPLICABLE LOCAL LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND POLICIES.

(2) THE RESULTS OF THE AUDIT CONDUCTED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, INCLUDING ANY RECORDS, DATA, PAPERS, OR MATERIALS EVALUATED
AS PART OF THE AUDIT, SHALL BE:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 809

(I) MAINTAINED BY THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY FOR AT
LEAST 3 YEARS AFTER COMPLETION OF THE AUDIT, AFTER WHICH THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY DESTROY ALL AUDIT MATERIALS; AND

(II) UNLESS ALL AUDIT MATERIALS HAVE BEEN DESTROYED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, DISCLOSED IF REQUESTED BY:

1. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL;

2. THE PUBLIC DEFENDER;

3. A STATE’S ATTORNEY;

4. A UNITED STATES ATTORNEY; OR

5. A DESIGNEE OF AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN ITEMS
1 THROUGH 4 OF THIS ITEM.

(C) A POLICE OFFICER OR OTHER EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY AUTHORIZED TO USE FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY
IN THE COURSE OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS SHALL ANNUALLY COMPLETE
TRAINING ADMINISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES UNDER § 2–506 § 2–507 2–506 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~2–506.~~ ~~2–507.~~ 2–506.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE, IN CONSULTATION WITH ANY
OTHER RELEVANT STATE AGENCY, SHALL ADOPT AND PUBLISH A MODEL
STATEWIDE POLICY REGARDING THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY.

(B) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY NOT USE OR CONTRACT FOR THE
USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY FOR USE IN CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
UNLESS THE USE IS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE MODEL STATEWIDE POLICY
REGARDING THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY ADOPTED AND
PUBLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30, 2026, THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC
SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES SHALL DEVELOP AND ADMINISTER A
TRAINING PROGRAM REGARDING THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY
IN THE COURSE OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS, INCLUDING TRAINING ON
CULTURAL DIVERSITY AND IMPLICIT BIAS.

(2) IN DEVELOPING THE TRAINING PROGRAM REQUIRED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL EVALUATE THE
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 809 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

AVAILABILITY AND RELEVANCE OF ANY PROFICIENCY TESTING REGARDING THE USE
OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY IN THE COURSE OF CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS.

~~2–507.~~ ~~2–508.~~ 2–507.

THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO RESTRICT THE USE OF FACIAL
RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY FOR THE PURPOSE OF:

(1) IDENTIFYING A MISSING OR DECEASED PERSON OR A PERSON WHO
IS INCAPACITATED AND UNABLE TO OTHERWISE PROVIDE THE PERSON’S OWN
IDENTITY;

(2) REDACTING A RECORDING OR AN IMAGE FOR RELEASE OR
DISCLOSURE TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY OF AN INDIVIDUAL DEPICTED IN A
RECORDING OR AN IMAGE;

(3) FORENSIC ANALYSIS OF ELECTRONIC MEDIA SEIZED BY LAW
ENFORCEMENT IN RELATION TO A SPECIFIC INVESTIGATION IF THE PERSON
IDENTIFIED IN THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA IS NOT THE SUBJECT OF CRIMINAL
CHARGES RESULTING FROM THE FORENSIC ANALYSIS;

(4) ENHANCING SECURITY SYSTEMS FOR PREVENTING
UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS TO INFORMATION, GOODS, MATERIALS, AREAS, OR OTHER
PROPERTIES UNDER THE CUSTODY OR CARE OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; OR

(5) CONDUCTING OTHERWISE LEGITIMATE ACTIVITY UNRELATED TO
A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION.

~~2–508.~~ ~~2–509.~~ 2–508.

(A) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT USES FACIAL RECOGNITION
TECHNOLOGY SHALL ADOPT AND MAINTAIN A USE AND DATA MANAGEMENT POLICY.

(B) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT DEVELOPS A POLICY UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL POST A COPY OF THE POLICY ON THE
AGENCY’S PUBLIC WEBSITE.

(C) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY THAT CONTRACTS FOR USE OF A
NONGOVERNMENT FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM SHALL DISCLOSE ON ITS PUBLIC
WEBSITE THE NAME OF THE SYSTEM AND THE NAMES AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE
DATABASES SEARCHED.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 809

~~2–509.~~ ~~2–510.~~ 2–509.

A PERSON MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION AGAINST A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
TO COMPEL COMPLIANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

~~2–510.~~ ~~2–511.~~ 2–510.

(A) ON OR BEFORE FEBRUARY 1 EACH YEAR, A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
USING OR CONTRACTING FOR THE USE OF FACIAL RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY
SHALL PREPARE AND PUBLISH AN ANNUAL REPORT THAT DISCLOSES INFORMATION
FOR THE PRIOR CALENDAR YEAR, INCLUDING:

(1) THE NAME OF EACH FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM AND THE
NAMES AND A DESCRIPTION OF THE DATABASES SEARCHED;

(2) FOR EACH FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM, THE TOTAL NUMBER OF
FACIAL RECOGNITION SEARCHES PERFORMED BY THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
AND THE TYPE OF CRIME OR INCIDENT ASSOCIATED WITH EACH USE;

(3) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF POSSIBLE MATCHES RETURNED THAT LED
TO FURTHER INVESTIGATIVE ACTION FOR EACH FACIAL RECOGNITION SYSTEM AND
FOR EACH DATABASE SEARCHED INCLUDING THE AGE, RACE, AND GENDER OF
INDIVIDUALS CONNECTED TO THE POSSIBLE MATCHES RETURNED IF THE
INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE FROM THE GOVERNMENT RECORDS SEARCHED; AND

(4) ANY DATA BREACHES OR UNAUTHORIZED USES OF FACIAL
RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY UNDER THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY’S CONTROL.

(B) ON OR BEFORE MAY 1 EACH YEAR, A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
REQUIRED TO PREPARE A REPORT UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL
SUBMIT THE REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION,
YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES.

(C) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF
CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES SHALL SUBMIT TO THE
GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A REPORT CONSISTING OF THE INFORMATION
REPORTED BY LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION, DISAGGREGATED BY AGENCY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9