START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 324 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 324 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland Uniform Transfers to Minors Act - Transfers as Custodian for the 
Benefit of a Minor - Authorization of Court 
 
 
This bill increases the threshold monetary amount – from $10,000 to $25,000 – above 
which specified transfers by a personal representative, trustee, or conservator to a custodian 
under the Maryland Uniform Transfers to Minors Act require court authorization.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Requirements for Certain Transfers under the Maryland Uniform Transfers to Minors Act 
 
The Maryland Uniform Transfers to Minors Act authorizes a personal representative or 
trustee to make an irrevocable transfer to another adult or trust company as custodian for 
the benefit of a minor pursuant to the Act, in the absence of a will or under a will or trust 
that does not contain an authorization to do so. A conservator may also make an irrevocable 
transfer to another adult or trust company as custodian for the benefit of a minor pursuant 
to the Act. However, under those circumstances a transfer may only be made if: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 324/ Page 2 
 
the personal representative, trustee, or conservator considers the transfer to be in the 
best interest of the minor; 
 
the transfer is not prohibited by or inconsistent with provisions of the applicable 
will, trust agreement, or other governing instrument; and 
 
the transfer is authorized by the court if it exceeds $10,000 in value. (The bill 
increases this amount to $25,000.) 
 
Maryland Uniform Transfers to Minors Act, Generally 
 
Generally, the Maryland Uniform Transfers to Minors Act allows property to be 
irrevocably transferred to a custodian for the benefit of a minor (defined under the Act as 
an individual under age 21), for the custodian to manage and control. When the minor 
reaches age 21 (or, for certain property, age 18), the property is transferred to the minor. 
(Property transferred to a custodian under the provisions affected by the bill is transferred 
to the minor at age 21.) 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 75 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2