START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 325 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 325 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Estates and Trusts - Interested Person - Definition 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of an “interested person” in the Estates and Trusts Article by 
(1) establishing that a legatee ceases to be an interested person if the legatee’s interest has 
been fully adeemed; (2) adding as interested persons a surviving spouse who has timely 
filed an election to take an elective share and a person who timely files a petition to caveat 
a will; and (3) establishing that an assignee of a legatee or an heir is not an interested 
person. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Interested Person – In General  
 
Under current law, an “interested person” is (1) a person named as executor in a will; (2) a 
person serving as personal representative after judicial or administrative probate; (3) a 
legatee in being, not fully paid, whether the legatee’s interest is vested or contingent; (4) an 
heir even if the decedent dies testate, except that an heir of a testate decedent ceases to be 
an interested person when the register has given specified notice; or (5) an heir or legatee 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 325/ Page 2 
whose interest is contingent solely on whether some other heir or legatee survives the 
decedent by a stated period if the other heir or legatee has died within that period.  
 
Pursuant to the Estates and Trusts Article, an interested person is entitled to file, and receive 
notice about, various petitions and filings with the register of wills and orphans’ court of 
the county where the estate is being administered. An interested person may file a petition 
for administrative probate, judicial probate, and for the orphan’s court to resolve any 
question concerning an estate or its administration. Also, an interested person must receive 
notice about, among other things, the filing of administrative probate and appointment of 
the personal representative, judicial probate, and administration accounts, and proposed 
payment of compensation to the personal representative or attorney handling the estate. 
 
Bill’s Changes to the Definition of an Interested Person 
 
 
Legatee Ceases to Be an Interested Person If Interest Has Been Fully Adeemed 
 
The bill establishes that a legatee whose interest has been fully adeemed ceases to be an 
interested person on receipt of notice of the ademption. Under current law, “legatee” means 
a person, including a trustee, who under the terms of a will would receive any property. 
 
Ademption has been defined by the Maryland Supreme Court as a revocation, recalling, or 
cancellation of a legacy (property transferred by a will) by the acts of a testator during the 
testator’s life. See YIVO Inst. for Jewish Research v. Zaleski, 386 Md. 654 (2005). 
Ademption can occur when (1) the legacy consisted of unique property that was sold, given 
away, or destroyed, or was not otherwise in existence at the time of the testator’s death or 
(2) the testator gave something of value to the legatee, while the testator was alive, that 
was intended to be in lieu of the legacy in the will. 
 
 
Surviving Spouse Who Elects to Take an Elective Share 
 
The bill adds to the definition of an “interested person” a surviving spouse who timely files 
an election to take an elective share, except that a surviving spouse ceases to be an 
interested person on the election being withdrawn or ruled ineffective by a court. 
 
Under current law, instead of property left to a surviving spouse by will, a spouse may elect 
to take (1) a one-third share of the value of the estate subject to election, reduced by the 
value of all spousal benefits, if there is surviving issue (living lineal descendants) or (2) a 
one-half share, reduced by the value of all spousal benefits, if there is no surviving issue. 
An election to take an elective share is filed in court and must be made within the later of 
nine months after the date of the decedent’s death or six months after the first appointment 
of a personal representative under a will, though an extension may be sought. If the election 
is filed prior to the appointment of the personal representative, the spouse may file with the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 325/ Page 3 
register in the county in which the decedent was domiciled or in any county in which the 
decedent resided on the date of the decedent’s death or in which real property or a leasehold 
interest in real property of the decedent is located. The surviving spouse may withdraw the 
election at any time before the expiration of the time for making the election. 
 
On the election of the surviving spouse to take an elective share, all property or other 
benefits that would have passed to the surviving spouse under the will, other than any 
portion of the spousal benefits, must be treated as if the surviving spouse had died before 
the execution of the will.  
 
 
Petitioner in a Caveat Proceeding  
 
Under the bill, a person who timely files a petition to caveat a will (challenge a will’s 
validity), as specified, is added to the definition of an “interested person,” but ceases to be 
an interested person once the caveat proceeding has been determined by the orphans’ court.   
 
Currently, a petition to caveat a will may be filed by an heir of the decedent or a legatee in 
any instrument purporting to be a will or codicil of the decedent. A petition to caveat a will 
may be filed at any time before the expiration of six months following the first appointment 
of a personal representative under a will (whether or not a petition for probate has been 
filed), even if there is a subsequent judicial probate or appointment of a personal 
representative. A petition to caveat filed before the filing of a petition for probate, or after 
administrative probate, has the effect of a request for judicial probate. A determination 
made by the court in a proceeding for judicial probate is final and binding on all persons, 
as specified. 
 
 
Assignee of a Legatee or Heir 
 
Under the bill, an assignee of a legatee or an heir is not an interested person.  
 
Under current law, “legatee” means a person, including a trustee, who under the terms of 
a will would receive any property, and “heir” means a person entitled to property of an 
intestate decedent (a person who died without a will), as specified. “Assignee” is not 
defined in the Estates and Trusts Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 164 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 325/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Orphans’ Court 
of Baltimore County; Register of Wills; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4