START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 464

Chapter 464

(House Bill 337)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Bike Lanes and Shoulders – Yielding Right–of–Way
(Sarah Debbink Langenkamp Memorial Act)

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from committing a violation ~~that~~ ~~contributes~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~
~~crash~~ of a certain provision of law governing the right–of–way of a bicycle, a motor
scooter, or an electronic personal assistive mobility device lawfully in a designated
bike lane or shoulder that contributes to the serious physical injury or death of a
person riding a bicycle, EPAMD, or motor scooter; and generally relating to yielding
the right–of–way in a bike lane or shoulder.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–1209
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–1209.

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the driver of a vehicle shall:

(1) Exercise due care to avoid colliding with any bicycle, EPAMD, or motor
scooter being ridden by a person; and

(2) When overtaking a bicycle, an EPAMD, or a motor scooter, pass safely
at a distance of not less than 3 feet, unless, at the time:

(i) The bicycle, EPAMD, or motor scooter rider fails to operate the
vehicle in conformance with § 21–1205(a) of this subtitle (“Riding to right side of roadway”)
or § 21–1205.1(b) of this subtitle (“Roadway with bike lane or shoulder paved to smooth
surface”);

(ii) A passing clearance of less than 3 feet is caused solely by the
bicycle, EPAMD, or motor scooter rider failing to maintain a steady course; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 464 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) The highway on which the vehicle is being driven is not wide
enough to lawfully pass the bicycle, EPAMD, or motor scooter at a distance of at least 3
feet.

(b) A person may not throw any object at or in the direction of any person riding
a bicycle, an EPAMD, or a motor scooter.

(c) A person may not open the door of any motor vehicle with intent to strike,
injure, or interfere with any person riding a bicycle, an EPAMD, or a motor scooter.

(d) (1) Unless otherwise specified in this title, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right–of–way to a person who is lawfully riding a bicycle, an EPAMD, or a motor scooter
in a designated bike lane or shoulder if the driver of the vehicle is about to enter or cross
the designated bike lane or shoulder.

(2) (I) A PERSON MAY NOT COMMIT A VIOLATION OF PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION THAT CONTRIBUTES TO A CRASH THE SERIOUS PHYSICAL
INJURY OR DEATH OF A PERSON RIDING A BICYCLE, EPAMD, OR MOTOR SCOOTER.

(II) A PERSON CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF SUBPARAGRAPH
(I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 2 MONTHS
OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $2,000 OR BOTH.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2