START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 211

Chapter 211

(House Bill 428)

AN ACT concerning

Community Schools – Rental Assistance for Community School Families
Program and Fund – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Rental Assistance for Community School Families
Program to provide rental assistance to eligible student households; requiring ~~the~~
~~State~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education,~~ ~~in~~ ~~consultation~~ ~~with~~ the Department of Housing and
Community Development, in consultation with the State Department of Education,
to administer the Program; establishing the Rental Assistance for Community
School Families Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; requiring interest earnings of
the Fund to be credited to the Fund; and generally relating to the Rental Assistance
for Community School Families Program and Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.9–103 and 9.9–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 9.9–104.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)189. and 190.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)191.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 211 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

9.9–103.

(a) There are community schools in the State.

(b) A community school shall:

(1) Promote active family and community engagement, including
educational opportunities for adults and family members of students at the school who live
in the neighborhood of the school;

(2) Have a community school coordinator, as described under § 9.9–104 of
this title;

(3) Promote expanded and enriched learning time and opportunities
provided after school, during weekends, and in the summer that emphasize mastering
21st–century skills through practical learning opportunities and community
problem–solving;

(4) Promote collaborative leadership and practices that empower parents,
students, teachers, principals, and community partners to build a culture of professional
learning, collective trust, and shared responsibility using strategies such as site–based
leadership teams and teacher learning communities;

(5) Have a parent teacher organization or a school family council; and

(6) Have a community school leadership team.

(c) (1) There shall be a Director of Community Schools in the Department.

(2) The Director of Community Schools in the Department shall coordinate
professional development for community school coordinators at each community school.

(3) THE DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY SCHOOLS SHALL ADMINISTER
THE RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY SCHOOL FAMILIES PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9.9–104.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IN COORDINATION WITH THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR CHILDREN, SHALL SUPPORT THE OUTREACH AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF STATE PROGRAMS FOR CHILDREN IN COMMUNITY SCHOOLS.

(4) In addition to the funding provided for the Director of Community
Schools position in the Department, the Governor may include in the annual budget bill an

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 211

appropriation of at least $100,000 to the Department for the Director of Community Schools
to provide training and technical assistance to community schools and for additional staff.

9.9–104.

(a) (1) A community school shall have an experienced and qualified
community school coordinator who:

(i) Is hired at the appropriate administrative level;

(ii) Understands, respects, and demonstrates a high degree of
cultural awareness of and competency in the diversity in the community and in
cross–cultural practice with stakeholders; and

(iii) May be employed by the school district.

(2) A community school coordinator may be a social worker.

(b) (1) A community school coordinator shall be responsible for:

(i) Establishing a community school;

(ii) Completing an assessment of the needs of the students in the
school for appropriate wraparound services to enhance the success of all students in the
school;

(iii) Developing an implementation plan based on the assessment of
needs for the community school, in cooperation with other interested stakeholders; [and]

(IV) IDENTIFYING STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS ELIGIBLE FOR THE
RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY SCHOOL FAMILIES PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9.9–104.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND AIDING IN THE
ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM AT THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL; AND

[(iv)] (V) Coordinating support programs that address
out–of–school learning barriers for students and families, including:

1. Wraparound services; and

2. As appropriate:

A. Tutoring;

B. English language learner courses;

C. Early childhood development and parenting classes;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 211 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

D. College and career advising;

E. Employment opportunities;

F. Citizenship education;

G. Food pantries; [and]

H. RENTAL ASSISTANCE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
9.9–104.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

[H.] I. School–based behavioral and physical health
services.

(2) The needs assessment completed under this subsection shall:

(i) Be completed in collaboration with:

1. The principal;

2. A school health care practitioner; and

3. A parent teacher organization or a school council;

(ii) Include an assessment of the physical, behavioral, and mental
health needs and wraparound service needs of students, their families, and their
communities; and

(iii) Be submitted to the Department and the local school system
within 1 year of receiving a personnel grant under § 5–223 of this article or within 1 year
of becoming a community school.

(3) The implementation plan completed under this subsection shall
include:

(i) A strategy for providing wraparound services to address the
needs of the students, their families, and their communities, building on and strengthening
community resources near the school;

(ii) Inclusion, if possible and practicable, of community partners in
geographic proximity to the school that can assist in meeting the needs identified in the
assessment;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 211

(iii) Ensure that time is made available to train staff on the supports
available, the need for the supports, and how to engage with the community schools
coordinator to access these supports; and

(iv) Develop strategies to maximize external non–State or non–local
education funding.

(4) (i) The implementation plan shall be submitted to the local school
system for approval within 1 year of completion of the needs assessment.

(ii) After the implementation plan is approved by the local school
system it shall be submitted to the Department.

9.9–104.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY
SCHOOL FAMILIES FUND.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY
SCHOOL FAMILIES PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY SCHOOL FAMILIES
PROGRAM.

(C) (1) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE RENTAL
ASSISTANCE TO ELIGIBLE STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS AT COMMUNITY SCHOOLS.

(2) THE PROGRAM SHALL BE ADMINISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT,
IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT.

(D) TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR RENTAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM, A
COMMUNITY SCHOOL STUDENT MUST BE:

(1) ENROLLED IN A COMMUNITY SCHOOL THAT RECEIVES FUNDING
UNDER § 5–223 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(2) COUNTED UNDER COMPENSATORY EDUCATION ENROLLMENT AS
DEFINED UNDER § 5–222 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(3) (2) FROM A HOUSEHOLD THAT:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 211 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THAT IS HOUSED IN A RENTAL PROPERTY, WHERE AT LEAST
ONE HOUSEHOLD MEMBER IS AT RISK OF HOMELESSNESS OR HOUSING INSTABILITY,
AS EVIDENCED BY PAST DUE RENT OR UTILITY NOTICES, UNSAFE LIVING
CONDITIONS, OR OTHER EVIDENCE DETERMINED BY THE COMMUNITY SCHOOLS
COORDINATOR DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT; AND
OR

(II) WHERE AT LEAST ONE MEMBER QUALIFIES FOR
ASSISTANCE UNDER THE FEDERAL MCKINNEY–VENTO HOMELESS ASSISTANCE
ACT.

(4) FROM A HOUSEHOLD WHERE AT LEAST ONE MEMBER IS
EXPERIENCING FINANCIAL HARDSHIP, AS EVIDENCED BY RECEIPT OF
~~UNEMPLOYMENT~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~EVIDENCE~~ ~~DETERMINED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~
SCHOOLS COORDINATOR.

(E) (1) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE RENTAL AND UTILITY PAYMENTS
~~ON~~ ~~BEHALF~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~STUDENT~~ ~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~DIRECTLY~~
TO A HOUSEHOLD’S LANDLORD OR UTILITY COMPANY TO ASSIST WITH ELIGIBLE
USES FOR PAYMENTS UNDER THE PROGRAM INCLUDE:

(I) RENTAL PAYMENTS;

(II) RENTAL ARREARS;

(III) FINES OR FEES ASSOCIATED WITH RENTAL PAYMENTS,
INCLUDING A LATE FINE OR FEE;

(IV) UTILITY PAYMENTS;

(V) UTILITY ARREARS; OR

(VI) FINES OR FEES ASSOCIATED WITH UTILITY PAYMENTS,
INCLUDING A LATE FINE OR FEE; OR

(VII) RELOCATION EXPENSES.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
AN ELIGIBLE STUDENT’S HOUSEHOLD MAY RECEIVE SUPPORT FROM THE PROGRAM
FOR UP TO 12 MONTHS.

(3) SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING, AN ELIGIBLE
STUDENT’S HOUSEHOLD MAY RECEIVE ONE 3–MONTH EXTENSION OF SUPPORT IF

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 211

THE COMMUNITY SCHOOL STUDENT REMAINS ELIGIBLE UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF
THIS SECTION FOLLOWING 12 MONTHS OF SUPPORT.

(F) THE COMMUNITY SCHOOLS COORDINATOR, A LOCAL SCHOOL, OR A
~~LOCAL~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~IDENTIFY~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~STUDENT~~ ~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~AND~~
FACILITATE DIRECT PAYMENTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS
~~SECTION.~~

(G) (F) (1) THERE IS A RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY
SCHOOL FAMILIES FUND.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(3) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(4) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND;

(II) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(III) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY TO:

(I) PROVIDE RENTAL ASSISTANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PROGRAM; AND

(II) COVER THE COSTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TO ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(6) IN DETERMINING WHICH ELIGIBLE STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS TO
SUPPORT UNDER THE PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL GIVE PREFERENCE TO
~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~STUDENT~~ ~~HOUSEHOLDS~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~SCHOOLS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LOWEST~~
PROPORTION OF ELIGIBLE STUDENT HOUSEHOLDS.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 211 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE THE GOVERNOR SHALL MAY
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $10,000,000 OF
$10,000,000 FOR THE FUND.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

189. the Teacher Retention and Development Fund; [and]

190. the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund; AND

191. THE RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY SCHOOL
FAMILIES FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8