START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 490 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 490 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification for Donations to Diaper Banks and Other 
Charitable Entities - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This bill extends through tax year 2026 the State income tax subtraction modification for 
donations of disposable diapers, other hygiene products for infants or children, feminine 
personal hygiene products, or cash specifically designated for the purchase of such items 
to diaper banks and other qualified charitable entities. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $250,000 annually in 
FY 2025 through 2027, as discussed below. To the extent subtraction modifications are 
claimed against the corporate income tax, Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) 
revenues and Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures also decrease 
(not shown below). Expenditures are not otherwise affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
$0 
$0 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by an estimated $165,000 annually in FY 2025 
through 2027, as discussed below. Local highway user revenues also decrease to the extent 
subtraction modifications are claimed against the corporate income tax. Local expenditures 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 490/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 221 and 222 of 2021 established a subtraction modification 
against the State income tax for up to $1,000 of eligible donations made by a taxpayer 
during the tax year to a diaper bank or other qualified charitable entity. “Donation,” for 
purposes of the subtraction modification, means an irrevocable gift of disposable diapers, 
other hygiene products for infants or children, feminine personal hygiene products, or cash 
that is specifically designated for the purchase of these items. “Qualified charitable entity” 
means a diaper bank, homeless shelter, domestic violence shelter, religious organization, 
or other charitable organization that has registered with the Comptroller as a distributor of 
disposable diapers, other hygiene products for infants or children, or feminine personal 
hygiene products. To qualify for the subtraction modification, a taxpayer must file with the 
taxpayer’s income tax return the name of each qualified charitable entity to which a 
donation was made, proof of the value of the donation, and any other information required 
by the Comptroller. 
 
The Acts apply to tax years 2021 through 2023 only and terminate June 30, 2024. Pursuant 
to the Acts, in January 2024, the Comptroller’s Office submitted a report to the 
General Assembly on the impact of the subtraction modification. According to the report, 
in tax year 2022, 8,403 individual taxpayers and 4 businesses claimed subtraction 
modifications totaling $5.2 million and $110,910, respectively, and 2 nonprofit 
organizations registered as qualified donation distributors. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Based on tax year 2022 claims for the subtraction modification for 
donations to diaper banks and other charitable entities, and assuming a similar magnitude 
of claims in tax years 2024 through 2026, general fund revenues decrease by an estimated 
$250,000 annually in fiscal 2025 through 2027. To the extent subtraction modifications are 
claimed against the corporate income tax, HEIF and TTF revenues also decrease, as do 
TTF expenditures for capital transportation grants to local governments (local highway 
user revenues). Based on the information contained in the Comptroller’s report, subtraction 
modifications claimed by businesses in tax year 2022 represented a relatively minimal 
portion of overall claims under the program, as noted above. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $165,000 annually 
in fiscal 2025 through 2027 due to subtraction modifications claimed against the personal 
income tax. To the extent subtraction modifications are claimed against the corporate 
income tax, local highway user revenues also decrease. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 490/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1115 (Senator Zucker) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3