START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 878

Chapter 878

(House Bill 458)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Protection of Identity of Minor Victim

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring,~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~exception,~~ ~~a~~ ~~party~~ ~~or~~ ~~nonparty~~ ~~making~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~filing~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~criminal~~ ~~or~~ ~~juvenile~~ ~~delinquency~~ ~~case~~ ~~to~~ ~~redact~~ ~~certain~~ ~~identifying~~
~~information~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~minor~~ ~~victim~~ ~~that~~ ~~appears~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~filing;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~
~~Supreme~~ ~~Court~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~to~~ ~~adopt~~ ~~rules~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~or~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~a~~ ~~person~~ ~~making~~
~~a~~ ~~redacted~~ ~~filing~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~to~~ ~~also~~ ~~file~~ ~~an~~ ~~unredacted~~ ~~copy~~ ~~under~~ ~~seal~~ providing
that a court or a party in a criminal or juvenile delinquency case may not disclose or
allow inspection of a certain court filing to a nonparty unless the court or the party
redacts certain identifying information relating to a minor victim that appears in the
filing, subject to a certain exception; and generally relating to protection of victims.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–301
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–301.

(A) On motion of the State or on request of a victim or witness, during a criminal
trial or a juvenile delinquency adjudicatory hearing, a court may prohibit the release of the
address or telephone number of the victim or witness unless the court determines that good
cause is shown for the release of the information.

(B) (1) (I) IN THIS SUBSECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
MEANINGS INDICATED.

(II) “IDENTIFYING INFORMATION” MEANS THE NAME OF, AND
ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT COULD REASONABLY BE EXPECTED TO IDENTIFY, A
MINOR VICTIM.

(III) “MINOR VICTIM” MEANS A VICTIM OF A CRIME OR
DELINQUENT ACT WHO WAS A MINOR AT THE TIME THAT THE CRIME OR DELINQUENT
ACT OCCURRED.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 878 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, ON NOTICE THAT AN
ELECTRONIC OR PAPER FILING INCLUDES IDENTIFYING INFORMATION OF A MINOR
VICTIM, UNLESS THE COURT FINDS BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT
THERE IS GOOD CAUSE TO ORDER OTHERWISE, A PARTY OR NONPARTY MAKING AN
ELECTRONIC OR PAPER COURT FILING, INCLUDING THE FILING OF A CHARGING
DOCUMENT, IN A CRIMINAL OR JUVENILE DELINQUENCY CASE SHALL REDACT ANY
~~IDENTIFYING~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~APPEARS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FILING~~ THE COURT OR A PARTY
IN A CRIMINAL OR JUVENILE DELINQUENCY CASE MAY NOT DISCLOSE OR ALLOW
INSPECTION OF AN ELECTRONIC OR PAPER COURT FILING, INCLUDING A CHARGING
DOCUMENT, TO A NONPARTY TO THE CRIMINAL OR JUVENILE DELINQUENCY CASE
UNLESS THE COURT OR THE PARTY DISCLOSING OR ALLOWING INSPECTION OF THE
FILING REDACTS ALL IDENTIFYING INFORMATION THAT APPEARS IN THE FILING.

(3) THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND MAY ADOPT RULES
~~REQUIRING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~AUTHORIZING~~ ~~A~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~MAKING~~ ~~A~~ ~~REDACTED~~ ~~FILING~~ ~~UNDER~~
PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO ALSO FILE AN UNREDACTED COPY UNDER
~~SEAL.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2