START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 723

Chapter 723

(House Bill 453)

AN ACT concerning

Income Tax – Technical Corrections

FOR the purpose of repealing certain obsolete provisions of law concerning the distribution
of income tax revenue; correcting a certain erroneous cross–reference; and generally
relating to technical corrections of provisions of law concerning income taxation.

BY repealing
Article – Tax – General
Section 2–608.1 and 2–610(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 2–609 and 10–753(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

[2–608.1.

(a) In this section, “municipality” means:

(1) a special taxing district that received an income tax revenue
distribution in fiscal year 1977; or

(2) a municipal corporation.

(b) For fiscal year 1990, after making the distributions required under § 2–604
through § 2–608 of this subtitle, the Comptroller shall distribute to each municipality the
amount, if any, by which:

(1) a $2 per capita increase over the amount distributed to the municipality
under § 2–607 of this subtitle for the 1986 taxable year, based on the most recent census
data available from the Department of Planning; exceeds

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 723 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) the amount distributed to the municipality under § 2–607 of this
subtitle for the 1988 taxable year.]

2–609.

After making the distributions required under §§ 2–604 through [2–608.1] 2–608 of
this subtitle, and after making the distributions required under §§ 7–329 and 7–330 of the
State Finance and Procurement Article, the Comptroller shall distribute the remaining
income tax revenue from individuals to the General Fund of the State.

2–610.

[(d) The Comptroller shall make a payment of the additional amounts provided
under § 2–608.1 of this subtitle on or about December 31 of the fiscal year for which the
payment is made.]

10–753.

(b) An individual, a nonprofit organization, or a business entity may claim a
credit against the State income tax in accordance with Title 6, Subtitle [8] 9 of the Housing
and Community Development Article for new construction costs and rehabilitation costs
for catalytic revitalization projects.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2