START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 447 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 447 
(Delegate Ziegler, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax Credit - Venison Donation 
 
 
This bill reestablishes, with modifications, the nonrefundable venison donation income tax 
credit. An individual who hunts and harvests an antlerless deer for donation to a charitable 
venison donation program may claim a credit of up to $75 of expenses incurred to butcher 
and process an antlerless deer for human consumption if the hunting and harvesting of the 
deer complies with State hunting laws and regulations. An individual may not claim more 
than $300 in tax credits in any tax year unless the individual harvested each deer for which 
the credits are claimed in accordance with a deer management permit. Any amount of 
unused credit may not be carried over to any other tax year. By January 31 each year, each 
venison donation program that accepts a donation must report specified information to the 
Comptroller. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and applies to tax years 2024 through 
2028. The bill terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $175,000 annually in FY 
2025 through 2029. The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s provisions with 
existing budgeted resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
($175,000) 
($175,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 447/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Venison Donation Tax Credit 
 
Chapters 172 and 173 of 2018 (as modified by Chapters 297, 298, and 446 of 2021) 
authorized, for tax years 2018 through 2022 only, a nonrefundable credit against the State 
income tax for up to $50 of qualifying expenses incurred by an individual who hunts and 
harvests an antlerless deer for donation to a charitable venison donation program. The tax 
credit program terminated June 30, 2023. An individual could not claim more than $200 in 
tax credits in any tax year unless the individual harvested each deer for which the credits 
were claimed in accordance with a deer management permit. Any unused amount of credit 
could not be carried over to any other tax year. Pursuant to Chapters 172 and 173, in 2022, 
the Comptroller’s Office submitted a report to the General Assembly on utilization of the 
credit in tax years 2018 through 2020. 
 
Venison Donation Grant Program 
 
In addition to expanding eligible expenses for the venison donation tax credit to include 
certain expenses incurred to donate a deer carcass or processed deer meat to the 
Montgomery County Deer Donation Program, Chapter 446 established the Venison 
Donation Grant Program within the Department of Natural Resources to provide grants to 
defray the cost of butchering and processing deer that are donated to venison donation 
programs. Subject to the availability of funds, a county, a municipal corporation, or a 
charitable organization may apply for a grant from the program for the costs of butchering 
and processing deer that are (1) hunted in compliance with State hunting laws and 
regulations; (2) donated to a program administered by the applicant that provides 
nutritional support of food for low-income individuals or the homeless; and (3) have a 
dressed weight of at least 50 pounds. The grant program is not subject to termination. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $175,000 annually in 
fiscal 2025 through 2029. This estimate is based on an analysis of credits claimed under 
the previous venison donation tax credit in tax years 2018 through 2020 and assumes a 
similar number of tax credit claims under the bill at the increased amounts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 769 and HB 1017 of 2021, as introduced.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 447/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 440 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland 
Food Center Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - April 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 9, 2024 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3