START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 444

Chapter 444

(House Bill 432)

AN ACT concerning

Courts and Judicial Proceedings and Criminal Procedure – Technical
Corrections – References to Intellectual Disability

FOR the purpose of replacing references to mental retardation with references to an
intellectual disability in certain provisions of law; and generally relating to
references to intellectual disability.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–801(q)(3), 3–8A–01(s) and (u), 3–8A–17.3(b)(2), and 3–8A–19(i) and (j)(3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–8A–01(s)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–8A–01(t)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 3–101(g)(3), 3–105(c)(2)(i) and (d)(3), 3–106(b), (c)(1), (e)(2), and (g),
3–108(a)(1) and (2), 3–109(a), 3–110(a) and (c), 3–112(d) and (g), and 3–114(b)
and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

3–801.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 444 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(q) (3) “Mental disorder” does not include [mental retardation] AN
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY.

3–8A–01.

(S) “INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY” MEANS A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY
THAT IS EVIDENCED BY INTELLECTUAL FUNCTIONING THAT IS SIGNIFICANTLY
BELOW AVERAGE AND IMPAIRMENT IN THE ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR OF A CHILD.

[(s)] (T) (1) “Mental disorder” means a behavioral or emotional illness that
results from a psychiatric or neurological disorder.

(2) “Mental disorder” includes a mental illness that so substantially
impairs the mental or emotional functioning of a child as to make care or treatment
necessary or advisable for the welfare of the child or for the safety of the child or property
of another.

(3) “Mental disorder” does not include [mental retardation] AN
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY.

[(t) “Mental retardation” means a developmental disability that is evidenced by
intellectual functioning that is significantly below average and impairment in the adaptive
behavior of a child.]

(u) “Mentally handicapped child” means a child who [is] HAS or may [be mentally
retarded or mentally ill] HAVE AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY OR A MENTAL
DISORDER.

3–8A–17.3.

(b) (2) In determining the treatment that is necessary for the child to attain
competency to proceed, the qualified expert shall consider and report on the following:

(i) The mental illness, [mental retardation] INTELLECTUAL
DISABILITY, developmental immaturity, or other developmental disability causing the
child to be incompetent to proceed;

(ii) The treatment or education appropriate for the mental illness,
[mental retardation] INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, developmental immaturity, or other
developmental disability of the child, and an explanation of each of the possible treatment
or education alternatives, in order of recommendation;

(iii) The likelihood of the child attaining competency to proceed under
the treatment or education recommended, an assessment of the probable duration of the

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 444

treatment required to attain competency, and the probability that the child will attain
competency to proceed in the foreseeable future; and

(iv) Whether the child meets the criteria for involuntary admission
under Title 10, Subtitle 6, Part III of the Health – General Article.

3–8A–19.

(i) The court may not commit a child to the custody of the Maryland Department
of Health under this section for inpatient care and treatment in a State [mental
retardation] facility FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY unless the
court finds on the record based upon clear and convincing evidence that:

(1) The child [is mentally retarded] HAS AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY;

(2) The condition is of such a nature that for the adequate care or protection
of the child or others, the child needs in–residence care or treatment; and

(3) There is no less restrictive form of care and treatment available which
is consistent with the child’s welfare and safety.

(j) (3) If, at any time after the commitment of the child to a State [mental
retardation] facility FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY under this
section, the individualized plan of habilitation developed under § 7–1006 of the Health –
General Article recommends that a child no longer meets the standards specified in
subsection (i) of this section, then the court shall grant a hearing to review the commitment
order. The court may grant a hearing at any other time for the purpose of determining if
the standards specified in subsection (i) of this section continue to be met.

Article – Criminal Procedure

3–101.

(g) (3) “Mental disorder” does not include [mental retardation] AN
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY.

3–105.

(c) (2) (i) If the court finds that, because of the apparent severity of the
mental disorder or [mental retardation] INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, a defendant in
custody would be endangered by confinement in a correctional facility, the court may order
that the Health Department, in the Health Department’s discretion:

1. confine the defendant, pending examination, in a medical
facility that the Health Department designates as appropriate; or

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 444 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. immediately conduct a competency examination of the
defendant by a community forensic screening program or other agency that the Health
Department finds appropriate.

(d) (3) If the Health Department reports that, in its opinion, the defendant is
incompetent to stand trial, the report shall state, in a complete supplementary opinion,
whether, because of [mental retardation or] A mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL
DISABILITY, the defendant would be a danger to self or the person or property of another,
if released.

3–106.

(b) If, after a hearing, the court finds that the defendant is incompetent to stand
trial but is not dangerous, as a result of a mental disorder or [mental retardation] AN
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, to self or the person or property of others, the court may set
bail for the defendant or authorize release of the defendant on recognizance.

(c) (1) (i) If, after a hearing, the court finds that the defendant is
incompetent to stand trial and, because of [mental retardation or] a mental disorder OR
AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, is a danger to self or the person or property of another,
the court shall order the defendant committed to the facility that the Health Department
designates until the court finds that:

1. the defendant no longer is incompetent to stand trial;

2. the defendant no longer is, because of [mental retardation
or] a mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, a danger to self or the person
or property of others; or

3. there is not a substantial likelihood that the defendant
will become competent to stand trial in the foreseeable future.

(ii) If a court commits the defendant because of [mental retardation]
AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, the Health Department shall require the Developmental
Disabilities Administration to provide the care or treatment that the defendant needs.

(e) At a competency hearing under subsection (d) of this section, if the court finds
that the defendant is incompetent and is not likely to become competent in the foreseeable
future, the court shall:

(2) order the confinement of the defendant for 21 days as a resident in a
Developmental Disabilities Administration facility for the initiation of admission
proceedings under § 7–503 of the Health – General Article provided the court finds that the
defendant, because of [mental retardation] AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, is a danger
to self or others.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 444

(g) (1) For a defendant who has been found incompetent to stand trial but not
dangerous, as a result of a mental disorder or [mental retardation] AN INTELLECTUAL
DISABILITY, to self or the person or property of others, and released on bail or on
recognizance, the court:

(i) shall hold a hearing annually from the date of release;

(ii) may hold a hearing, at any time, on its own initiative; or

(iii) shall hold a hearing, at any time, upon motion of the State’s
Attorney or the counsel for the defendant.

(2) At a hearing under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the court shall
reconsider whether the defendant remains incompetent to stand trial or a danger to self or
the person or property of another because of [mental retardation or] a mental disorder OR
AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY.

(3) At a hearing under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the court may
modify or impose additional conditions of release on the defendant.

(4) If the court finds, at a hearing under paragraph (1) of this subsection,
that the defendant is incompetent and is not likely to become competent in the foreseeable
future and is a danger to self or the person or property of another because of [mental
retardation or] a mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, the court shall
revoke the pretrial release of the defendant and:

(i) civilly commit the defendant in accordance with subsection (e)(1)
of this section; or

(ii) order confinement of the defendant in accordance with
subsection (e)(2) of this section.

3–108.

(a) (1) In addition to any other report required under this title, the Health
Department shall report to the court that has ordered commitment of a defendant under §
3–106 of this title:

(i) every 6 months from the date of commitment of the defendant;
and

(ii) whenever the Health Department determines that:

1. the defendant no longer is incompetent to stand trial;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 444 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. the defendant no longer is, because of [mental retardation
or] a mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, a danger to self or the person
or property of others; or

3. there is not a substantial likelihood that the defendant
will become competent to stand trial in the foreseeable future.

(2) The Department shall include a supplemental report that provides a
plan for services to facilitate the defendant remaining competent to stand trial or not
dangerous, as a result of [mental retardation or] a mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL
DISABILITY, to self or the person or property of others, if:

(i) a report required under this title states an opinion that the
defendant is competent to stand trial or is not dangerous, as a result of [mental retardation
or] a mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, to self or the person or property
of others; and

(ii) services are necessary to maintain the defendant safely in the
community, to maintain competency, or to restore competency.

3–109.

(a) A defendant is not criminally responsible for criminal conduct if, at the time
of that conduct, the defendant, because of a mental disorder or [mental retardation] AN
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, lacks substantial capacity to:

(1) appreciate the criminality of that conduct; or

(2) conform that conduct to the requirements of law.

3–110.

(a) (1) If a defendant intends to rely on a plea of not criminally responsible,
the defendant or defense counsel shall file a written plea alleging, in substance, that when
the alleged crime was committed, the defendant was not criminally responsible by reason
of [insanity] A MENTAL DISORDER OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY under the test for
criminal responsibility in § 3–109 of this title.

(2) A written plea of not criminally responsible by reason of [insanity] A
MENTAL DISORDER OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY shall be filed at the time
provided for initial pleading, unless, for good cause shown, the court allows the plea to be
filed later.

(c) If the trier of fact finds that the State has proved beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant committed the criminal act charged, then, if the defendant has pleaded

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 444

not criminally responsible, the trier of fact separately shall find whether the defendant has
established, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the defendant was at the time
criminally responsible or not criminally responsible by reason of [insanity] A MENTAL
DISORDER OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY under the test for criminal responsibility
in § 3–109 of this title.

3–112.

(d) If the court commits a defendant who was found not criminally responsible
primarily because of [mental retardation] AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, the Health
Department shall designate a facility for [mentally retarded persons] INDIVIDUALS WITH
AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY for care and treatment of the committed person.

(g) After a verdict of not criminally responsible, a court may order that a person
be released, with or without conditions, instead of committed to the Health Department,
but only if:

(1) the court has available an evaluation report within 90 days preceding
the verdict made by an evaluating facility designated by the Health Department;

(2) the report indicates that the person would not be a danger, as a result
of [mental retardation or] A mental disorder OR AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, to self
or to the person or property of others if released, with or without conditions; and

(3) the person and the State’s Attorney agree to the release and to any
conditions for release that the court imposes.

3–114.

(b) A committed person is eligible for discharge from commitment only if that
person would not be a danger, as a result of A mental disorder or [mental retardation] AN
INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, to self or to the person or property of others if discharged.

(c) A committed person is eligible for conditional release from commitment only
if that person would not be a danger, as a result of A mental disorder or [mental
retardation] AN INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY, to self or to the person or property of others
if released from confinement with conditions imposed by the court.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the provisions of this Act are
intended solely to correct technical errors in the law and there is no intent to supplant or
otherwise disturb the decisional law interpreting “mental retardation” or “insanity”.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7