START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 830

Chapter 830

(House Bill 476)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Forensic Genetic Genealogical DNA Analysis and Search –
Applicability for Deceased and Missing ~~Children~~ Individuals

FOR the purpose of providing that certain provisions of law regarding the use of a certain
forensic genetic genealogical DNA analysis and search (FGGS) do not apply when
the FGGS is conducted solely for the purpose of identifying an individual ~~under~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~age~~ who is deceased or the subject of a certain missing person report and
whose whereabouts are unknown; and generally relating to the use of FGGS.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 17–101(a) and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 17–101.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

17–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Forensic genetic genealogical DNA analysis and search” or “FGGS” means:

(1) the forensic genetic genealogical DNA analysis of biological material
using SNP or other sequencing techniques to develop an FGG profile;

(2) a subsequent search using the FGG profile in a publicly available
open–data personal genomics database or a direct–to–consumer genetic genealogy service
to find individuals related to the source of the FGG profile; and

(3) a genealogical search using public records and other lawful means to
obtain information in accordance with this title.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 830 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

17–101.1.

THIS TITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO FGGS CONDUCTED SOLELY FOR THE
PURPOSE OF IDENTIFYING AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS WHO IS:

(1) DECEASED; OR

(2) THE SUBJECT OF A MISSING PERSON REPORT FILED WITH A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY IN THE STATE AND WHOSE WHEREABOUTS ARE UNKNOWN.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2