START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 339

Chapter 339

(House Bill 424)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County – Housing Opportunities Commission – Alterations

MC 3–24

FOR the purpose of repealing the requirement that the Housing Opportunities Commission
of Montgomery County hold public hearings on assisted family housing proposals;
repealing the requirement that the Montgomery Commission publish a summary of
the Montgomery Commission’s annual financial report in certain newspapers; and
generally relating to the Housing Opportunities Commission of Montgomery County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–101(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–110
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–112
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–111, 16–113, and 16–114
to be Section 16–110, 16–112, and 16–113, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

16–101.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 339 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) “Montgomery Commission” means the Housing Opportunities Commission of
Montgomery County.

[16–110.

(a) In this section, the terms “assisted family housing” and “moderate priced
dwelling units” have the meanings stated in Montgomery County law.

(b) This section does not apply to proposed scattered sites and moderate priced
dwelling units:

(1) that are acquired for assisted family housing;

(2) that are proposed by the Montgomery Commission; and

(3) for which a public hearing is not required under Montgomery County
law.

(c) (1) The Montgomery Commission shall hold a public hearing on any
assisted family housing it proposes and report in writing the findings and conclusions from
the hearing.

(2) At least 15 days before the hearing, the Montgomery Commission shall
give notice of the hearing by a display advertisement in two newspapers of general
circulation in the county.]

[16–112.] 16–111.

(a) On or before November 30 each year, the Montgomery Commission shall issue
a financial report for the previous fiscal year based on a certified audit.

(b) [The Montgomery Commission shall publish a summary of the financial report
in at least two newspapers of general circulation in the county.

(c)] (1) On or before December 15 each year, the Montgomery Commission shall
publish on its website:

(i) the financial report issued under subsection (a) of this section;
and

(ii) a full and complete copy of the certified audit report for the
previous fiscal year.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 339

(2) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, in performing the duties
required under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Montgomery Commission shall publish
all information in a public record that relates to a financial report or a certified audit report
of which the Montgomery Commission is not specifically required to deny an inspection
under the Public Information Act.

(3) Paragraph (2) of this subsection may not be construed as a waiver of
information that is protected by privilege.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 16–111, 16–113,
and 16–114 of Article – Housing and Community Development of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 16–110, 16–112, and 16–113, respectively.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3