START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 541

Chapter 541

(House Bill 481)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Antlerless Deer Hunting Programs – Authorization

FOR the purpose of authorizing a person to receive a raffle ticket for each antlerless deer
hunted by the person during a certain raffle program that has as its objective the
hunting of antlerless deer; and generally relating to antlerless deer hunting.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 10–404(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

10–404.

(e) (1) Except as provided in [paragraph] PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) of this
subsection or § 10–512(a)(2)(ii) of this title, a person may not sell, offer for sale, barter, or
exchange, at any time within the State any game bird or game mammal taken from the
wild, in the State or in another state, territory, or country.

(2) The prohibitions of paragraph (1) of this subsection do not apply to the:

(i) Meat, pelt, carcass, or mounted specimen of any beaver, coyote,
fisher, fox, mink, muskrat, nutria, opossum, otter, raccoon, skunk, or long–tailed weasel
legally taken by the person;

(ii) Hide, hair, tail, or feet, excluding a mounted specimen of deer,
squirrel, or rabbit legally acquired;

(iii) Feathers, skin, or feet, excluding a mounted specimen of upland
and forest game birds legally acquired;

(iv) Except as prohibited by federal law, feathers of wetland game
birds legally acquired; or

(v) Antlers of deer legally acquired in another state and
manufactured into an article of commerce in another state.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 541 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) NOTWITHSTANDING PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
PERSON MAY RECEIVE A RAFFLE TICKET FOR EACH ANTLERLESS DEER HUNTED BY
THE PERSON DURING A RAFFLE PROGRAM THAT:

(I) IS HELD DURING JANUARY;

(II) HAS AS ITS OBJECTIVE THE HUNTING OF ANTLERLESS
DEER; AND

(III) WAS PREVIOUSLY HELD AT LEAST ONCE FROM JANUARY 1,
2020, THROUGH JANUARY 30, 2024, INCLUSIVE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2