START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 498 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 498 
(Delegate Cardin) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Access to Counsel in Evictions Program - Mandated Reports 
 
 
This bill alters the annual reporting requirements for the Access to Counsel in Evictions 
(ACE) Program that is administered by the Maryland Legal Services Corporation (MLSC). 
The bill takes effect October 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2027.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Access to Counsel in Evictions – Overview 
 
Chapter 746 of 2021 established the ACE Program that is administered by MLSC. The 
ACE Program was created to organize and direct services and resources in order to provide 
individuals meeting certain criteria with access to legal representation in specified judicial 
or administrative proceedings to evict or terminate a tenancy or housing subsidy. 
Chapter 746 also required that access to legal representation be phased in over time as 
MLSC deems appropriate, with the goal of full implementation before October 1, 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 498/ Page 2 
Access to Counsel in Evictions – Reporting 
 
Under current law, annually by August 31, MLSC must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on (1) the number of covered individuals provided legal representation 
during the previous fiscal year; (2) information on and metrics evaluating case outcomes; 
and (3) a summary of the engagement and education of tenants. 
 
The bill alters these reporting requirements to instead require reporting of the following 
information (for the immediately preceding fiscal year):   
 
 
the number of cases in which a covered individual was provided legal 
representation, disaggregated by case type, including (1) failure to pay rent; 
(2) tenant holding over; and (3) breach of lease; 
 
the amount paid to attorneys for each case managed; 
 
the geographic distribution of cases; 
 
data on the disposition of cases decided; 
 
the amount of State and federal funds allocated to each designated organization 
(nonprofit entities designated by MLSC to provide legal representation); and 
 
the number of covered individuals provided legal representation for multiple cases. 
 
Additional Comments:  As noted above, the ACE Program is administered by MLSC (a 
nonprofit organization established by statute). Chapter 746 also created the ACE Special 
Fund for the purpose of providing funding to fully implement the ACE Program; the fund 
may be used for administrative expenses of MLSC. MLSC advises that it can handle the 
bill’s requirements using existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 147 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Legal Services Corporation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 498/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3