START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 411 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 411 
(Delegate Kipke, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Reports on Standing Orders and Opioid 
Overdose Reversal Drugs 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to submit a report to the 
Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee 
by December 1 each year from 2024 through 2026 on (1) current opioid overdose reversal 
drugs approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and (2) whether MDH 
has added each current FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to a standing order 
and, if not, the reason why any such drug has not been added.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can complete and submit the required reports using existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Overdose Response Program 
 
MDH’s Overdose Response Program (ORP) allows for FDA-approved opioid overdose 
reversal drugs to be offered to specified individuals – free of charge – by multiple 
providers, programs, and entities. Subject to the limitations of the State budget, MDH must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 411/ Page 2 
purchase and provide FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs, at no cost, to the 
entities who may provide the reversal drugs only if MDH provides them. MDH may 
authorize private or public entities to conduct education and training on opioid overdose 
recognition and response that includes (1) education on recognizing the signs and 
symptoms of an opioid overdose; (2) training on responding to an opioid overdose, 
including the administration of FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs; and 
(3) access to opioid overdose reversal drugs and the necessary supplies for the 
administration of the opioid overdose reversal drug. Individuals are not required to obtain 
the specified training and education on opioid overdose recognition and response from a 
private or public entity before a pharmacist may dispense an FDA-approved opioid 
overdose reversal drug. 
 
Standing Orders for Opioid Overdose Reversal Drugs 
 
A licensed health care provider with prescribing authority may prescribe and dispense an 
FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to an individual who is believed to be at risk 
of experiencing an opioid overdose or is in a position to assist the individual at risk of 
experiencing an opioid overdose. A health care provider may also prescribe and dispense 
an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug by issuing a standing order if the licensed 
health care provider (1) is employed by MDH or a local health department or (2) has a 
written agreement with an authorized private or public entity. 
 
A licensed health care provider who issues a standing order may delegate the dispensing 
of an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to an employee or volunteer of an 
authorized private or public entity in accordance with a written agreement between the 
delegating licensed health care provider and the authorized private or public entity that 
employs the employee or volunteer. A licensed health care provider with dispensing 
authority may also dispense an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to any 
individual in accordance with a standing order that is issued by a licensed health care 
provider with prescribing authority as described above. A pharmacist may also dispense an 
FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug in accordance with a therapy management 
contract under the Health Occupations Article. 
 
Maryland has a statewide standing order for opioid overdose reversal drugs that authorizes 
any Maryland-licensed pharmacist to dispense unlimited prescriptions and refills of 
naloxone and devices for its administration to any individual, as specified. A pharmacist 
must provide consultation with the individual regarding the naloxone dosage that is most 
appropriate, select and dispense two doses of naloxone, and provide directions for use. The 
standing order is set to expire June 30, 2024, at which time a new order will be issued. If a 
patient cannot afford naloxone or related copayments, or does not wish to use insurance 
coverage, pharmacists are instructed to refer them to ORP where they can obtain a naloxone 
kit free of charge. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 411/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 408 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3