START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 907

Chapter 907

(House Bill 408)

AN ACT concerning

Mental Health Law – County Mental Health Advisory Committees – Membership

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of a county’s mental health advisory
committee by including an individual with experience with mental health care for
veterans or individuals serving in the military on the list of groups from which
individuals may be appointed to the committee by the governing body of the county;
and generally relating to county mental health advisory committees.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 10–309
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

10–309.

(a) (1) The mental health advisory committee of each county shall consist of:

(i) As nonvoting ex officio members, the following individuals or
their designees:

1. The health officer for the county;

2. A representative of a State inpatient facility that serves
that county, appointed as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection;

3. The county mental health director;

4. The director of the core service agency or local behavioral
health authority, if any; and

5. In jurisdictions with designated State inpatient beds
located in local general hospitals, a representative from that facility; and

(ii) As voting members, appointed by the governing body of the
county and representative of the county’s major socio–economic and ethnic groups:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 907 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. At least 5, but not more than 7, representatives selected
from among the following groups or agencies:

A. The governing body;

B. The county department of education;

C. The local department of social services;

D. The practicing physicians;

E. Mental health professionals who are not physicians;

F. The clergy;

G. The legal profession;

H. A local law enforcement agency;

I. A local general hospital that contains an inpatient
psychiatric unit;

J. The Department of Aging;

K. The Department of Juvenile Services;

L. The local alcohol and drug abuse agency; and

M. A local community rehabilitation or housing program; and

2. At least 5 individuals selected from among the following
groups or organizations and appointed as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection:

A. At least 2 individuals who are currently receiving or who
have in the past received mental health services;

B. Parents or other relatives of adults with mental disorders;

C. Parents or other relatives of children or adolescents with
emotional, behavioral, or mental disorders the onset of which occurred during childhood or
adolescence;

D. The local mental health association, if any; [and]

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 907

E. AN INDIVIDUAL WITH EXPERIENCE WITH MENTAL
HEALTH CARE FOR VETERANS OR INDIVIDUALS SERVING IN THE MILITARY; AND

F. A member of the general public.

(2) If more than one State inpatient facility serves a county, a
representative from at least 1 of the facilities shall be appointed by the Director.

(3) At least one–half of the voting members shall be appointed from among
the individuals listed in paragraph (1)(ii)2A through C of this subsection.

(4) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (3) of this subsection, if the
governing body of Baltimore City or Anne Arundel County designates a core service agency
or local behavioral health authority as the mental health advisory committee, the mental
health advisory committee shall consist of the governing body of the core service agency or
local behavioral health authority.

(b) If an intercounty advisory committee is established, the governing body of
each participating county shall appoint at least 4 members of the committee.

(c) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(1)(ii) of this section, if the governing body of a
county establishes a joint mental health and addictions advisory committee, the governing
body may appoint any additional members as necessary to advise and advocate about
addictions issues.

(d) (1) The term of an appointed member is 3 years and begins on July 1.

(2) The terms of one–third of the appointed members of each county
advisory committee or intercounty advisory committee end each year.

(3) At the end of a term, a member may continue to serve until a successor
is appointed and qualifies.

(4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(5) A member who serves 2 consecutive full 3–year terms may not be
reappointed for 2 years after completion of those terms.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3