START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 418 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 418 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Grant Applications and Reporting - Maryland Efficient Grant Application 
Council - Alterations 
 
 
This bill (1) extends the termination date and most related reporting deadlines for the 
Maryland Efficient Grant Application Council by four years; (2) adds the Comptroller or 
designee to the council; (3) makes the Secretary of Budget and Management or designee 
the chair of the council; (4) removes all references to the Governor’s Grants Office from 
the council’s authorizing statute; and (5) requires the council to study and make 
recommendations regarding the creation of a State Grants Ombudsperson to provide 
specified technical assistance to applicants for State grants. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Extending the council’s term has no material effect on governmental 
finances. Members of the council can continue to carry out their staffing responsibilities 
and conduct the required study with existing budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill extends the council’s termination date from June 30, 2025, to 
June 30, 2029, and extends the deadline for its report on its full recommendations from 
July 1, 2024, to July 1, 2027. Mandated annual reports to the General Assembly on the 
council’s progress are also extended through calendar 2028. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 418/ Page 2 
The council must study the feasibility, cost, and impacts of designating a State Grants 
Ombudsperson and, by July 1, 2025, make recommendations regarding the designation of 
an ombudsperson, including recommended timelines and deadlines, to the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM). DBM must then report to the General Assembly on the 
council’s recommendations by December 31, 2025. 
 
Consistent with the Governor’s Grants Office no longer having a role with the council, 
DBM assumes responsibility for providing technical assistance under the bill. Also, each 
State grant-making agency’s chief accountability officer must serve as a liaison to DBM 
as well as the council. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 484 and 485 of 2020 established the Maryland Efficient Grant 
Application Council to study and make recommendations to the Governor’s Grants Office 
and DBM regarding the entire grants life cycle. Staffing responsibilities for the council are 
shared by its member agencies. 
 
By July 1, 2024, the council must submit a report on its full recommendations to DBM and 
the General Assembly. DBM must submit reports to the General Assembly on the council’s 
progress (annually from calendar 2021 through 2026). The Acts also required, by 
October 1, 2020, that each State grant-making agency appoint a chief accountability officer 
to serve as liaison to the council and perform other related responsibilities. The council is 
scheduled to terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
Additional Comments:  Under the bill, the council is extended by four years, through 
June 30, 2029, but the deadline for submitting its full recommendations is extended by only 
three years, to July 1, 2027. 
 
The Governor’s Office advises that the Grants Office’s priorities are being realigned and 
that DBM is assuming responsibility for its prior functions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 459 (Senator Kagan) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Governor’s Office; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 418/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3