START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 568

Chapter 568

(House Bill 420)

AN ACT concerning

State and Local Parks – Play Area Accessibility – ~~Communication~~ ~~Boards~~
Recreation Communication Boards Pilot Program

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Natural Resources and local governing
bodies to construct communication boards in certain newly constructed public play
areas under certain circumstances; authorizing the Department and local governing
bodies to construct communication boards when making alterations to certain
existing public play areas; ~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~funding~~ ~~of~~ ~~communication~~ ~~board~~
~~construction~~ establishing the Maryland Recreation Communication Boards Pilot
Program, subject to the availability of funding; altering the purpose and use of the
Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund; and generally relating to
play area communication boards.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 5–221(a), (c), (g), and (n)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 5–221(b) and 5–901(a) and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
Section ~~5–2101~~ ~~through~~ ~~5–2103~~ 5–2B–01 through 5–2B–03 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle ~~21.~~ 2B. Play Area Accessibility”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

5–221.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 568 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) In this section[,] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “Fund” means the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition
Fund.

(3) “MARYLAND RECREATION COMMUNICATION BOARDS PILOT
PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND RECREATION COMMUNICATION BOARDS PILOT
PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–2B–03 OF THIS TITLE.

(b) There is a Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund.

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funding for:

(1) Completing State park projects related to capital improvements on
lands managed by the Department for public purposes; [and]

(2) Acquiring land to be managed by the Department for public purposes
as a State park; AND

(3) THE MARYLAND RECREATION COMMUNICATION BOARDS PILOT
PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (N)(4) OF THIS SECTION.

(g) The Fund may be used only for:

(1) Completing State park projects related to capital improvements on
lands managed by the Department for public purposes; [and]

(2) Acquiring land to be managed by the Department for public purposes
as a State park; AND

(3) COVERING THE COSTS OF PURCHASING AND INSTALLING A
COMMUNICATION BOARD UNDER THE MARYLAND RECREATION COMMUNICATION
BOARDS PILOT PROGRAM.

(n) If the Fund receives more than $70,000,000, the Department may use up to
$10,000,000 for any of the purposes identified under subsection (l) of this section, including:

(1) Land activation;

(2) New structures; [and]

(3) Any capital improvements necessary to make State parks accessible to
people with disabilities, including providing adult changing tables; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 568

(4) UP TO $100,000 FOR THE MARYLAND RECREATION
COMMUNICATION BOARDS PILOT PROGRAM.

~~5–901.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~terms~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(g)~~ ~~“Local~~ ~~governing~~ ~~body”~~ ~~means~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland–National~~ ~~Capital~~ ~~Park~~ ~~and~~
~~Planning~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~governing~~ ~~body~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~county~~ ~~or~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~City.~~

SUBTITLE ~~21.~~ 2B. PLAY AREA ACCESSIBILITY.

~~5–2101.~~ 5–2B–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) (1) “ALTERATION” MEANS A CHANGE TO AN EXISTING PLAY AREA
THAT AFFECTS THE USABILITY OF THE PLAY AREA.

(2) “ALTERATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE NORMAL MAINTENANCE TO
AN EXISTING PLAY AREA THAT DOES NOT AFFECT THE USABILITY OF THE PLAY AREA.

(C) “COMMUNICATION BOARD” MEANS A DEVICE THAT DISPLAYS PHOTOS,
SYMBOLS, OR ILLUSTRATIONS TO ENABLE INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED LANGUAGE
~~SKILLS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~EXPRESS~~ ~~THEMSELVES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~COMMUNICATE~~ WITH WORDS AND BRAILLE
TO SUPPLEMENT OR REPLACE SPOKEN LANGUAGE AS A MEANS OF EXPRESSION AND
COMMUNICATION.

(D) “LOCAL GOVERNING BODY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 5–901 OF
THIS TITLE.

(E) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND RECREATION
COMMUNICATION BOARDS PILOT PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 5–2B–03 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(F) “PLAY AREA” MEANS A PORTION OF A SITE CONTAINING PLAY
COMPONENTS DESIGNED AND CONSTRUCTED FOR CHILDREN.

~~(F)~~ (G) “SITE” MEANS:

(1) A PARCEL OF LAND WITH BOUNDARIES MARKED BY A PROPERTY
LINE; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 568 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A DESIGNATED PORTION OF A PUBLIC RIGHT–OF–WAY.

~~5–2102.~~ 5–2B–02.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO PLAY AREAS LOCATED WITHIN A
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF THE
DEPARTMENT OR A LOCAL GOVERNING BODY.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT AND EACH LOCAL GOVERNING BODY
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF PLAY AREAS SUBJECT TO THE
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
CONSTRUCT A COMMUNICATION BOARD IN EACH NEWLY CONSTRUCTED PLAY AREA
UNDER ITS JURISDICTION.

(2) EACH LOCAL GOVERNING BODY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
CONSTRUCTION OF PLAY AREAS THAT RECEIVES A GRANT FROM THE PILOT
PROGRAM SHALL CONSTRUCT AT LEAST ONE COMMUNICATION BOARD IN EACH
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED PLAY AREA UNDER ITS JURISDICTION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT AND EACH LOCAL GOVERNING BODY RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF PLAY AREAS MAY CONSTRUCT A COMMUNICATION
BOARD IN AN EXISTING PLAY AREA UNDER ITS JURISDICTION WHEN MAKING
ALTERATIONS TO THAT PLAY AREA.

~~5–2103.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL USE PROGRAM OPEN SPACE FUNDING
PROVIDED UNDER § 5–904 OF THIS TITLE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF
~~COMMUNICATION~~ ~~BOARDS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~PLAY~~ ~~AREAS~~ ~~UNDER~~
ITS JURISDICTION.

(B) (1) A LOCAL GOVERNING BODY SHALL APPLY FOR PROGRAM OPEN
SPACE FUNDING UNDER § 5–905 OF THIS TITLE FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF
~~COMMUNICATION~~ ~~BOARDS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~PLAY~~ ~~AREAS~~ ~~UNDER~~
ITS JURISDICTION.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
~~FUNDING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSTRUCTION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~COMMUNICATION~~ ~~BOARDS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~
THIS SUBTITLE IN PLAY AREAS UNDER A LOCAL GOVERNING BODY’S JURISDICTION
SHALL BE PROVIDED BY THE LOCAL GOVERNING BODY.

5–2B–03.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 568

(A) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND RECREATION COMMUNICATION BOARDS
PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO, SUBJECT TO THE
AVAILABILITY OF FUNDING, IMPROVE PLAY AREA ACCESSIBILITY BY COVERING THE
COSTS OF PURCHASING AND INSTALLING COMMUNICATION BOARDS AT STATE AND
LOCAL PARKS.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) (1) A LOCAL GOVERNING BODY MAY APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT
FOR A GRANT FROM THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, AND
IN AWARDING A GRANT TO A LOCAL GOVERNING BODY UNDER THIS SECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL AWARD A GRANT EQUAL TO THE COST OF PURCHASING AND
INSTALLING EACH COMMUNICATION BOARD.

(II) A GRANT MAY NOT EXCEED $3,000 FOR EACH
COMMUNICATION BOARD THAT IS PURCHASED AND INSTALLED.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PRIORITIZE THE AWARD OF GRANTS TO
A LOCAL GOVERNING BODY THAT IS INSTALLING A COMMUNICATION BOARD IN A
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED PLAY AREA.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025, AND JULY 1, 2026, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT AN INTERIM REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THAT
PROVIDES AN EVALUATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT
A FINAL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE PILOT PROGRAM, INCLUDING A
RECOMMENDATION ON WHETHER THE PILOT PROGRAM SHOULD BE CONTINUED.

5–901.

(a) In this subtitle the following terms have the meanings indicated.

(g) “Local governing body” means the Maryland–National Capital Park and
Planning Commission and the governing body of any county or Baltimore City.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 568 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

30, 2028, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6