START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 356

Chapter 356

(House Bill 495)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission
– ~~Records~~ Publishing and Meetings Requirements

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~that~~ ~~certain~~ ~~records~~ ~~requested~~ ~~by~~ ~~and~~ ~~submitted~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~Baltimore~~ ~~County~~ ~~School~~ ~~Board~~ ~~Nominating~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~are~~ ~~not~~ ~~confidential~~ ~~and~~
~~are~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~certain~~ ~~disclosure~~ ~~requirements~~ requiring the Baltimore County School
Board Nominating Commission to publish the names of the candidates for
appointment to the Baltimore County Board of Education on the Commission’s
website before interviewing the candidates; requiring certain meetings of the
Commission to be public; requiring certain meetings of the Commission to be held
without the public in attendance and recorded, and for the recording to be provided,
on request, within a certain period of time for public inspection; and generally
relating to records and meetings of the Baltimore County School Board Nominating
Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 3–2B–03(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

3–2B–03.

(a) (1) There is a Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission.

(2) The purpose of the Commission is to select nominees to be
recommended to the Governor as qualified candidates for appointment to the Baltimore
County Board of Education.

(3) (i) The Commission shall hold at least three public hearings, each
in a different councilmanic district, on the selection of multiple nominees before
recommending to the Governor nominees for appointment to the county board.

(ii) For a single vacancy on the county board, the Commission shall
hold public meetings in the following manner on the selection of a nominee before
recommending to the Governor the nominee for appointment to the county board:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 356 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. For a vacancy in a councilmanic district, at least one public
meeting in that councilmanic district; or

2. For a vacancy for a member appointed at large, at least
one public meeting at the county board administrative offices.

(iii) The Commission shall make publicly available on its website:

1. Live video streaming of each public meeting; and

2. A complete and unedited archived video recording of each
public meeting for which live streaming was made available under item 1 of this
subparagraph.

(4) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW, AN
APPLICATION TO THE COMMISSION FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE COUNTY BOARD, OR
ANY RECORD REQUESTED OR RECEIVED BY THE COMMISSION FROM AN APPLICANT,
IS NOT CONFIDENTIAL AND IS SUBJECT TO DISCLOSURE UNDER TITLE 4 OF THE
GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE BEFORE THE COMMISSION BEGINS INTERVIEWING
CANDIDATES FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE COUNTY BOARD, THE COMMISSION SHALL
PUBLISH THE NAMES OF ALL THE CANDIDATES ON THE COMMISSION’S WEBSITE.

(5) (I) A EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A MEETING OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC IF IT
INVOLVES AN INTERVIEW OF, DELIBERATION ABOUT, OR ACTION ON A CANDIDATE
FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE COUNTY BOARD.

(II) 1. A MEETING OF THE COMMISSION THAT INVOLVES AN
INTERVIEW OF OR A DELIBERATION ABOUT A CANDIDATE FOR APPOINTMENT TO THE
COUNTY BOARD SHALL BE HELD WITHOUT THE PUBLIC IN ATTENDANCE AND THE
MEETING SHALL BE RECORDED.

2. THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE A COPY OF A
MEETING RECORDING FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER
RECEIVING A REQUEST FOR THE RECORDING.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2