START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 312

Chapter 312

(House Bill 498)

AN ACT concerning

Real Property – Access to Counsel in Evictions Program – Mandated Reports

FOR the purpose of altering the information relating to the Access to Counsel in Evictions
Program required to be reported by the Maryland Legal Services Corporation each
year; and generally relating to mandated reports and the Access to Counsel in
Evictions Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 8–901(a), (c), (d), (f), and (g) and 8–903
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 8–907
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

8–901.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “Covered individual” means an individual who:

(1) Occupies a residential property under a claim of legal right other than
owner, including a tenant in a building owned, operated, or managed by a public housing
authority; and

(2) Is a member of a household with an income that is not greater than 50%
of the median income, adjusted for household size, in the State as determined by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services or its successor.

(d) “Designated organization” means a nonprofit entity designated by MLSC with
the ability to provide legal representation to covered individuals.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 312 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) “Legal representation” includes all representation by an attorney beyond brief
legal advice and is not limited to the formal entry of appearance in court.

(g) “MLSC” means the Maryland Legal Services Corporation.

8–903.

(a) There is an Access to Counsel in Evictions Program administered by MLSC.

(b) The purpose of the Program is to organize and direct services and resources
in order to provide all covered individuals in the State with access to legal representation
as required under this subtitle.

8–907.

On or before August 31 each year, MLSC shall report to the Governor and, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly THE
FOLLOWING INFORMATION FOR THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR:

(1) The number of CASES IN WHICH A covered [individuals] INDIVIDUAL
WAS provided legal representation [during the previous fiscal year], DISAGGREGATED BY
CASE TYPE, INCLUDING:

(I) NONPAYMENT OF RENT UNDER § 8–401 OF THIS TITLE;

(II) TENANT HOLDOVER UNDER § 8–402 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(III) BREACH OF LEASE UNDER § 8–402.1 OF THIS TITLE;

(2) [Information on and metrics evaluating case outcomes] THE AMOUNT
PAID TO ATTORNEYS FOR EACH CASE MANAGED; [and]

(3) [A summary of the engagement and education of tenants] THE
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF CASES;

(4) DATA ON THE DISPOSITION OF CASES DECIDED;

(5) THE AMOUNT OF STATE AND FEDERAL FUNDS ALLOCATED TO
EACH DESIGNATED ORGANIZATION; AND

(6) THE NUMBER OF COVERED INDIVIDUALS PROVIDED LEGAL
REPRESENTATION FOR MULTIPLE CASES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and 9 months and, at the

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 312

end of June 30, 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly,
shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3