START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 410 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 410 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Equitech Growth Fund - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the permissible uses of the Equitech Growth Fund (EGF) in the Maryland 
Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) and a related mandated appropriation to 
allow for the payment of costs to administer the fund. More specifically, EGF may be used 
only to (1) make awards from the fund in accordance with existing program requirements 
and (2) pay the costs of administering the fund. The bill likewise alters the existing 
mandated appropriation so that the annual $5.0 million appropriation is made to EGF, and 
not for awards. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for TEDCO decrease by $0.6 million annually 
beginning in FY 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures for TEDCO decrease 
correspondingly. Special fund revenues and expenditures for TEDCO may further decrease 
in future years from foregone loan and investment revenues. Assumptions for this estimate 
are discussed below. State revenues and expenditures may decrease beginning in FY 2025 
due to fewer program awards (not shown but discussed below). This bill modifies eligible 
uses of an existing mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
GF Expenditure 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
SF Expenditure 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
($0.6) 
Net Effect 
$0.6 
$0.6 
$0.6 
$0.6 
$0.6  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues (and local expenditures to provide matching funds) may 
decrease beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful, as discussed below. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 410/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 461 and 462 of 2023 established the Equitech Growth 
Commission and Fund in TEDCO to support economic competitiveness and inclusive 
growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the creation of supporting 
infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that builds the strengths of the 
State’s economy. TEDCO must administer the fund. The fund consists of money 
appropriated in the State budget, interest earnings, and any other money from any other 
source accepted for the benefit of the fund. EGF must leverage investment from the private 
sector, funding from federal sources, and other sources of funding.  
 
TEDCO must award grants, investments, loans, or other financial assistance from EGF to 
public, nonprofit, or private entities in the State, including institutions of higher education 
and public-private partnerships. Awards must target workforce development and 
infrastructure that will attract and retain businesses in the State. Awards must be consistent 
with the 10-year goals in a strategic plan developed by the Equitech Growth Commission. 
 
The Acts do not specify whether EGF can, or cannot, be used for administrative expenses. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from EGF. While the mandate is temporary, the 
program is permanent. 
 
For further information on TEDCO, including a general overview and recent program 
additions, see the Appendix – Maryland Technology Development Corporation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, Chapters 461 and 462 do not specify whether EGF 
can, or cannot, be used for administrative expenses. The fiscal and policy note for the 
legislation assumed that the mandated funding for EGF could not be used for such 
purposes, and instead assumed additional funding would be provided ($0.6 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025) and that it would, nevertheless, flow through EGF as 
special fund revenues and expenditures. This estimate maintains those assumptions for 
consistency. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for TEDCO decrease by $0.6 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures for TEDCO decrease 
correspondingly. The general fund reduction is already reflected in the fiscal 2025 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly, which does not include additional general funds for 
EGF administration. Additionally, since some program awards may generate revenue for 
the program in future years, decreased funding for awards also decreases special fund 
revenues and expenditures associated with those future revenues. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 410/ Page 3 
Both of the above effects mean that fewer funds are available for awards to eligible 
recipients. Therefore, special fund revenues (Executive Branch agencies) and/or higher 
education revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2025 to the extent that funds are no longer 
received from EGF. State expenditures (all funds) and/or higher education expenditures 
likewise decrease from any foregone matching requirements. The effect on overall funding 
for State entities, and on any particular State entity, is unknown. 
 
Local/Small Business Effect:  Local governments and small businesses are affected in the 
same manner as State entities described above by the reduction in available award funding 
beginning in fiscal 2025. However, the effect on overall funding for local governments and 
small businesses, or the effect on any particular local government or small business, is 
unknown. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 457 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 15, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 410/ Page 4 
Appendix – Maryland Technology  
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The fiscal 2024 budget includes $54.7 million in general funds for TEDCO 
programs. The following programs have been established by legislation since 2021, with 
mandated appropriations also noted. 
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund – supports the development of start-up companies run by 
entrepreneurs from socially or economically disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder 
access to traditional forms of capital and executive networks at the pre-seed stage. 
The Governor must include appropriations in the budget bill in the following 
amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund – provides capital investment in technology-based businesses that  
(1) would qualify for investment under the Builder Fund, as provided in TEDCO 
regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at least one year after the time 
of investment by an individual or individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program – encourages the establishment and 
expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund – allows unappropriated general fund surplus 
to be invested in a “qualified business” – with a goal to increase private equity and 
venture capital in the State – and the interest earnings and investment returns 
realized to the benefit of participants of the several pension systems managed by the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 410/ Page 5 
State Retirement and Pension System. For fiscal 2024, the Governor was required 
to include an appropriation in the budget bill to the fund equal to 10% of the 
unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of $10.0 million from the 
second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, with a corresponding 
decrease in the typical required appropriation. The maximum amount was 
appropriated. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program – allows eligible small businesses to apply for State 
awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal grants, limited to $25,000 for 
Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. TEDCO may make up to  
20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per fiscal year for a total of 
$1.25 million. 
 
 
Equitech Growth Fund and Commission – supports economic competitiveness 
and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the 
creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that 
builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, 
investments, loans, or other financial assistance to public, nonprofit, or private 
entities in the State. Awards must target workforce development and infrastructure. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from the fund. 
 
 
Cyber Maryland Program and Fund – creates a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, 
serves as a hub for State workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and 
generally coordinates cybersecurity and research and innovation in the State, among 
other things. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor may include an appropriation 
in the annual budget bill of $250,000 for the fund; however, the Governor must 
include an appropriation that is sufficient to hire staff for the program. 
 
 
Human-relevant Research Program and Fund – promotes State-funded research 
intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish a grant and 
loan program, as specified, which includes contracting with an independent 
scientific review board to review research proposals and make recommendations to 
TEDCO. The program is funded by fees on entities conducting research on 
nonhuman animals. 
 

END OF PAGE 5