START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 499 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 499 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Private Dental Offices - Infection Control 
 
 
This bill requires each owner of a private dental office to designate a licensed dentist to be 
the supervising dentist for the office. A supervising dentist must complete the registration 
required by the State Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) and be responsible for all 
“infection control activities” within the office. If a supervising dentist relinquishes their 
responsibility for infection control activities, the owner of the private dental office must 
immediately designate an interim supervising dentist until a new supervising dentist 
registers with the board. The board may charge a registration fee. The bill may not be 
construed to prevent an unlicensed individual from assisting with regulatory compliance. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  BDE can register supervising dentists and promulgate regulations with 
existing budgeted resources. BDE special fund revenues likely increase by minimal amount 
beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Infection control activities” means structural infection control or 
infection control that impacts the entirety of the private dental office, as determined by 
BDE in regulation. “Infection control activities” includes (1) adherence to the U.S. Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental 
Health-Care Settings or its successor guidelines; (2) water quality testing; and (3) spore 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 499/ Page 2 
testing. “Infection control activities” does not include activities in control of individual 
dentists, including use of adequate personal protective equipment or sterilization of 
instruments. 
 
The bill specifies that “practice dentistry” does not include the responsibilities of a 
supervising dentist. 
 
Current Law:  “Private dental office” means dental office owned and operated by a 
(1) licensed dentist or (2) professional corporation, partnership, limited liability company, 
or limited liability partnership owned and controlled by a licensed dentist. 
 
A licensed dentist may supervise specified activities within a dental office, including the 
practice of licensed dental hygienists and/or certified dental assistants. Supervising dentists 
are typically required to be on premises and available for personal consultation while dental 
services are being performed, or not on the premises under specified circumstances. 
Supervising dentists may also consult with other dental or health care professionals 
regarding the dental care of patients. 
 
In 2003, the CDC published the Guidelines for Infection Control in Dental Health-Care 
Settings. Additional infection control guidance was issued during the COVID-19 
pandemic.  
 
State Revenues:  The bill authorizes BDE to charge a fee for the registration of a 
supervising dentist in a private dental office. BDE advises that the initial registration of a 
supervising dentist will likely be combined with the initial or renewal license application 
and will likely result in no additional fee. However, BDE will likely charge a registration 
fee when the supervising dentist at a private dental office changes. BDE anticipates 
charging a $10 registration fee for approximately 200 private dental offices that may 
change their supervising dentist annually. Thus, BDE special fund revenues likely increase 
by approximately $2,000 annually ($1,500 in fiscal 2025, and $2,000 in fiscal 2026 and 
thereafter). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 335 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 499/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3