START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 351

Chapter 351

(House Bill 486)

AN ACT concerning

Residential Property Sales – Contract Disclosures – Superfund Sites

FOR the purpose of requiring the seller of residential real property located within a certain
distance of a National Priorities List (NPL) Superfund site to include a certain
addendum to the contract for the sale of the property; and generally relating to
disclosure requirements for a contract for the sale of residential real property.

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 10–714
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

10–714.

(A) THE SELLER OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY THAT IS LOCATED WITHIN 0.5
MILES 1 MILE OF A NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) SUPERFUND SITE SHALL
PROVIDE THE BUYER WITH AN ADDENDUM TO THE CONTRACT OF SALE THAT
CONTAINS, IN CONSPICUOUS TYPE:

(1) IDENTIFICATION OF THE SUPERFUND SITE THAT IS WITHIN 0.5
MILES 1 MILE OF THE PROPERTY;

(2) THE DEFINITION OF A NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
SUPERFUND SITE UNDER U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
GUIDELINES;

(3) THE UNIFORM RESOURCE LOCATOR (URL) FOR THE FOLLOWING
U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY WEBSITES:

(I) SEARCH FOR SUPERFUND SITES WHERE YOU LIVE; AND

(II) SUPERFUND HUMAN EXPOSURE DASHBOARD; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 351 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) A NOTICE THAT WITHIN 5 DAYS AFTER SIGNING AND DATING THE
CONTRACT OF SALE AND ON WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE SELLER, THE BUYER:

(I) MAY VOID THE CONTRACT OF SALE; AND

(II) ON RESCISSION OF THE CONTRACT OF SALE, SHALL
RECEIVE A FULL REFUND OF ANY MONEY PAID TO THE SELLER.

(B) AN ADDENDUM UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE
PROVIDED IN THE FOLLOWING FORM OR A SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR FORM:

~~“THIS~~ NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) SUPERFUND SITE
DISCLOSURE ADDENDUM (THE “ADDENDUM”) IS ENTERED INTO THIS ____ DAY
OF ________________, 20____, BY AND BETWEEN _______________________
(“SELLER”) AND __________________________ (“BUYER”). THIS ADDENDUM IS
INCORPORATED INTO THE ORIGINAL CONTRACT OF SALE SIGNED ON
~~____________________.~~

BUYER AND SELLER HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THIS ADDENDUM IS
INCORPORATED INTO THE CONTRACT OF SALE FOR THE PROPERTY REFERENCED
THEREIN AS THE “PREMISES” AND SERVES TO AFFIRM THE FOLLOWING:

(1) A NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL) SUPERFUND SITE IS A SITE OF
NATIONAL PRIORITY AMONG THE KNOWN RELEASES OR THREATENED RELEASES OF
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES, POLLUTANTS, OR CONTAMINANTS THROUGHOUT THE
UNITED STATES AND ITS TERRITORIES;

(2) THE SELLER HEREBY NOTIFIES THE BUYER THAT THE PREMISES
ARE PROPERTY IS LOCATED WITHIN 0.5 MILES 1 MILE OF
____________________________, WHICH IS A NATIONAL PRIORITIES LIST (NPL)
SUPERFUND SITE. INFORMATION ABOUT THE LOCATION OF SUPERFUND SITES
THROUGHOUT THE STATE OF MARYLAND AND ACROSS THE UNITED STATES CAN BE
FOUND AT THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY’S SEARCH FOR
SUPERFUND SITES WHERE YOU LIVE WEBSITE
~~(HTTPS://WWW.EPA.GOV/SUPERFUND/SEARCH–SUPERFUND–SITES–WHERE–YOU–~~
LIVE). INFORMATION ABOUT THE STATUS OF SUPERFUND SITE CONTAMINATION
STABILIZATION CAN BE FOUND AT THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY’S
~~SUPERFUND~~ ~~HUMAN~~ ~~EXPOSURE~~ ~~DASHBOARD~~
~~(HTTPS://WWW.EPA.GOV/SUPERFUND/SUPERFUND–HUMAN–EXPOSURE–~~
DASHBOARD); AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 351

(3) BY SIGNING AND DATING BELOW, THE BUYER AND SELLER AGREE
THAT THE ADDENDUM SHALL BE LEGALLY BINDING AND INCORPORATED INTO THE
ABOVE–REFERENCED CONTRACT OF SALE; AND

(4) THE BUYER HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT THE BUYER HAS READ
THE ADDENDUM IN FULL AND UNDERSTANDS THAT WITHIN FIVE (5) DAYS AFTER
SIGNING AND DATING THE ADDENDUM, AND ON WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE SELLER,
THE BUYER MAY VOID THE CONTRACT OF SALE AND IS ENTITLED TO THE RETURN
OF ANY MONEY PAID TO THE SELLER ON ACCOUNT OF THE CONTRACT OF SALE.

SELLER SIGNATURE _____________________________ DATE _______________

BUYER SIGNATURE ______________________________ DATE _______________”.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3