START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 461 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 461 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health - State Advisory Council on Quality Care at the End of Life - Renaming 
 
 
This bill renames the State Advisory Council on Quality Care at the End of Life as the 
State Advisory Council on Serious Illness Care.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Renaming the advisory council does not affect State finances or 
operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Advisory Council on Quality Care at the End of Life was 
established by Chapter 265 of 2002. The council, which comprises 23 members, must 
(1) monitor trends in the provision of care to Marylanders with life-limiting illnesses; 
(2) study the impact of State statutes, regulations, and other aspects of public policy on the 
provision of end-of-life care; (3) advise the Office of the Attorney General, the Maryland 
Department of Health, the Maryland Department of Aging, and other State agencies of 
their activities; (4) advise the General Assembly on relevant legislative proposals; 
(5) participate in or otherwise promote public and professional educational efforts 
concerning end-of-life care; and (6) carry out other duties as may be requested by the 
Governor or the General Assembly. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 461/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2