START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 468 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 468 
(Delegates Love and Boyce) 
Economic Matters and Environment and 
Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Commission to Advance Lithium-Ion Battery Safety in Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes the Commission to Advance Lithium-Ion Battery Safety in Maryland. 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal (OSFM) must provide staff for the commission. By 
December 1, 2024, the commission must submit an interim report on the progress and 
status of the commission to the Legislative Policy Committee. By December 1, 2025, the 
commission must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. 
The 
bill 
takes 
effect 
June 
1, 
2024, 
and 
terminates 
December 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures increase by $64,700 in 
FY 2025 and by $27,600 in FY 2026. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
64,700 
27,600 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($64,700) 
($27,600) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 468/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The commission must study and make legislative, regulatory, 
programmatic, or other recommendations regarding:  
 
 
best practices, standards, and guidelines (1) to prevent, detect, and suppress 
lithium-ion battery fires in consumer and transportation applications and in utility 
applications, with review and consideration of the National Fire Prevention 855 
Standards for Grid Scale Storage and Safety; (2) to prevent, detect, and suppress 
lithium-ion fires at recycling facilities; and (3) for reusing, recycling, and 
decommissioning lithium-ion batteries; 
 
the viability of extended producer responsibility for lithium-ion batteries; 
 
training, education, and other information to better inform the public and 
first responders regarding lithium-ion battery safety; and 
 
any other global issues the commission may consider useful for enhancing the safety 
and reuse of batteries in the State. 
 
The commission may, at its own discretion, seek advice and consultation from outside 
individuals and entities. 
 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. 
 
Current Law:  The U.S. Department of Transportation regulates the transportation of 
lithium-ion batteries through its hazardous materials regulations. Generally, lithium-ion 
batteries must be packaged in a manner to prevent short circuits, damage caused by shifting 
or placement within the package, and accidental activation of the equipment. In addition, 
damaged, defective, or recalled lithium-ion batteries may only be shipped by highway, rail, 
or vessel and may not be transported by aircraft. 
 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reports that most lithium-ion batteries 
are likely to meet the definition of hazardous waste under the federal Resource 
Conservation and Recovery Act but that households are generally exempt from those 
regulations. EPA further reports that it is planning to propose new rules to improve the 
management and recycling of end-of-life lithium-ion batteries. 
 
The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) advises that State regulations do not 
specifically address the disposal or recycling of lithium-ion batteries. The 
2019 Joint Chairmen’s Report required MDE to submit a report outlining how the 
department will establish and fund a lithium-ion battery recycling battery recycling 
program. That report can be read here. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 468/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  OSFM cannot provide staff for the commission with existing 
resources. Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $64,673 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual management associate to staff the 
commission, study lithium-ion batteries and related safety protocols, and complete the 
required reports. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$57,147 
Operating Expenses 
7,526 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$64,673 
 
Fiscal 2026 expenditures, which total $27,629, reflect ongoing costs and the termination 
of the contractual position midway through fiscal 2026, following the completion of the 
commission’s final report and concurrent with the bill’s termination date. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Department of Legislative Services advises that the National 
Fire Prevention Association 855 (Standard for the Installation of Stationary Energy Storage 
Systems) provides, among other things, guidance for the installation and maintenance of 
energy storage systems, which can include lithium-ion batteries. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 532 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; U.S. Department of Transportation; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 468/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4