START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 495 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 495 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission - 
Publishing and Meetings Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires that, before the Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission 
begins interviewing candidates for the appointment to the Baltimore County Board of 
Education, the commission must publish the names of all candidates on the commission’s 
website. The bill also requires that a commission meeting must be open to the public if it 
involves action on a candidate for appointment to the county board. However, a 
commission meeting that involves an interview of or a deliberation about a candidate for 
appointment to the county board must be held without the public in attendance and must 
be recorded. The commission must provide a copy of a meeting recording for public 
inspection within 48 hours after receiving a request for the recording. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission can record 
meetings as specified with existing resources. Local revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
The Baltimore County Board of Education 
 
The Baltimore County Board of Education consists of 12 members, including 4 at-large 
members appointed by the Governor; 7 nonpartisan members each elected from  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 495/ Page 2 
1 of 7 school board districts; and 1 student member. The Baltimore County Board of 
Education is 1 of 4 hybrid school boards in the State with both appointed and elected 
members. There are 20 elected school boards in the State. Appendix – Local Boards of 
Education Membership shows the selection methods, terms of office, and membership of 
the 24 local boards of education.  
 
The Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission 
 
The Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission consists of 19 members, 
which must reflect the diversity of Baltimore County. The Governor, in consultation with 
the Baltimore County Executive, must appoint 8 members, 1 from each legislative district 
in Baltimore County. The county executive must appoint 1 member from the county at 
large, and 10 specified organizations must each appoint 1 member. The county executive 
must designate a member as chair, and the Baltimore County Public School System must 
provide staff for the commission. 
 
For each nomination for a vacancy on the county board, the commission must submit a list 
of names to the Governor. Absent an extraordinary circumstance, the Governor must 
appoint a member to the county board from the list provided by the commission. If the 
Governor elects not to appoint a member from a list submitted by the commission, the 
Governor must return the list and request that the commission submit a list of additional 
qualified candidates.   
 
When the commission considers the selection of multiple nominees to recommend to the 
Governor as qualified candidates for appointment, the commission must hold at least 
three public hearings, each in a different councilmanic district. However, when only a 
single vacancy occurs on the county board, the commission must only hold at least 
one public meeting at either the councilmanic district in which the vacancy occurred when 
the vacancy occurs in a councilmanic seat or in the county board’s administrative offices 
when the vacancy occurs in an at-large seat. Regardless of the number of candidates 
considered, the commission must make live video streams and a complete and unedited 
archived video recording of each public meeting available on its website. 
 
The commission may retain and reactivate the application of a candidate for a vacancy on 
the county board for up to two years from the date the commission submitted the list of 
nominees to the Governor for the vacancy for which the applicant was initially considered. 
In order to reactivate an application, the commission must (1) notify and request consent 
from applicants within 14 days of the new vacancy and (2) receive consent from the 
applicant within 14 days of the applicant receiving notification.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 495/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 78 (Senator Sydnor) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 495/ Page 4 
Appendix – Local Boards of Education Membership 
 
 
Membership 
 
The composition of the local boards of education varies with members serving three- to 
four-year terms. Twenty counties have elected school boards and four counties have 
combined appointed and elected school boards. Twenty-two boards have student members; 
however, only 8 boards allow student members to vote, which generally excludes authority 
to vote on matters relating to collective bargaining and personnel. Three counties with 
voting student members also preclude student members from voting on matters relating to 
operating and capital budgets. Exhibit 1 shows the selection methods, terms of office, and 
membership of the 24 local school boards. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Local Boards of Education 
As of January 2024 
 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Allegany 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Anne Arundel2 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore City3 
12 
3 or 4 
years 
A/E 
2 elected from city at large 
9 appointed by mayor 
1 student (one-year term)  
Baltimore4 
12 
4 years 
A/E 
4 appointed from county at large  
7 elected from councilmanic districts  
1 student (one-year term)  
Calvert 
6 
4 years 
E   2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Caroline 
7 
4 years 
A/E 
3 elected from school board districts 
2 appointed from county at large 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Carroll 
11 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
5 commissioners ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Cecil 
6 
4 years 
E 
 
5 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 495/ Page 5 
School System 
Number of 
Members 
Term 
Means of Selection1 
Charles5 
10 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
8 from commissioner districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Dorchester 
8 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Frederick 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Garrett 
6 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
3 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term) 
Harford6 
11 
4 years 
A/E   6 elected from councilmanic districts 
3 appointed from county at large 
1 superintendent ex officio (nonvoting) 
1 student (one-year term)  
Howard 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from councilmanic districts 
1 student (one-year term) 
Kent7 
6 
4 years 
E 
5 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Montgomery 
8 
4 years 
E 
2 from county at large 
5 from school districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Prince George’s8 
10 
4 years 
E   9 from school board districts 
1 student (one-year term)  
Queen Anne’s 
7 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
St. Mary’s 
6 
4 years 
E 
1 from county at large 
4 from commissioner districts 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Somerset 
5 
4 years 
E 
5 from commissioner districts 
Talbot 
9 
4 years 
E   7 from school board districts 
2 students (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Washington9 
8 
4 years 
E 
7 from county at large 
1 student (nonvoting, one-year term)  
Wicomico 
7 
4 years 
E 
5 from councilmanic districts 
2 from county at large 
Worcester 
10 
4 years 
E 
7 from commissioner districts 
3 students (nonvoting, one-year term) 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 495/ Page 6 
1 E = Elected and A/E = Combined appointed by Governor and elected board, except (1) in Baltimore City, 
members are appointed by the mayor from a list of names provided by the Baltimore City Public School 
Board Community Panel and (2) in Harford County, members are appointed by the county executive with 
the advice and consent of the county council. Entries for local boards that are at any point in the process of 
transitioning between means of selection reflect the final state the board will be in once the transition fully 
takes effect. 
 
2 Chapter 473 of 2017 restructured the Anne Arundel County Board of Education from a nine-member 
appointed board to an eight-member elected board consisting of seven elected members (one from each of 
the seven councilmanic districts on a nonpartisan basis) and one student member. The terms of the elected 
members are staggered; four members were elected at the 2018 general election and three members were 
elected at the 2020 general election as the terms of previously appointed board members expired. In this 
manner, the elected board is phased in. The members elected in 2018 serve a six-year term, while the 
members elected in 2020 serve a four-year term. Thus, beginning in 2024, all members must stand for 
election. An elected member of the board generally serves a four-year term beginning on the first Monday 
in December after the member’s election and until a successor is elected and qualifies. 
 
3 Elected members serve a four-year term and appointed members serve a three-year term. Chapters 764 
and 765 of 2023 expanded student member voting rights to include matters relating to capital and operating 
budgets; school closings, reopenings, and boundaries; and student disciplinary matters. Additionally, 
Chapters 764 and 765 require that the student member be elected by the high school students of 
Baltimore City Public Schools in accordance with procedures established by the board in collaboration with 
the Associated Student Congress of Baltimore City. 
 
4 Chapter 785 of 2023 authorized the student member of the board to vote on matters relating to capital and 
operating budgets provided the student member completes specified budget training within two months of 
their election. Chapter 786 of 2023 altered the timing of elections for board members such that (1) the 
four appointed members must be appointed by the Governor in presidential election years from a list of 
nominees submitted by the Baltimore County School Board Nominating Commission and (2) the 
seven elected members of the county board must continue to be elected in gubernatorial election years. 
 
5 Chapters 404 and 405 of 2021 added two new members to the Charles County Board of Education and 
altered the selection method for board members by requiring that eight board members be elected from the 
county commissioner districts (two from each of the four districts) and one board member be elected from 
the county at large. Previously, the seven board members were all elected from the county at large. All seats 
are subject to election in November 2022; however, the at-large member elected in November 2022 must 
serve a two-year term (instead of the usual four-year term) until a successor is elected to a full term in 
November 2024. Chapters 404 and 405 also provided the student member with voting rights, subject to 
certain restrictions. 
 
6 Chapter 569 of 2022 eliminated the role of the Governor in appointing members to the Harford County 
Board of Education. Instead, beginning with members appointed following the 2022 gubernatorial election, 
the Harford County Executive will appoint board members, subject to the advice and consent of the 
Harford County Council by a vote of at least five members. In appointing members to the board, the county 
executive must ensure, to the extent practicable, that the total makeup of the board reflects the gender, 
ethnic, and racial diversity of the county. Members appointed to the board following the 2022 election must 
serve for a term of two years until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Subsequent board members will 
be appointed following the 2024 presidential election and each presidential election thereafter. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 495/ Page 7 
7 Chapters 674 and 675 of 2023 codify a nonvoting student member of the Kent County Board of Education 
into statute and specify the selection method and responsibilities of the student member. 
 
8 Chapter 217 of 2022 altered the membership of the Prince George’s County Board of Education by 
removing the four appointed members from the board. Effective July 1, 2024, the board will become an 
elected board that consists of nine elected members, each of whom must reside in and be elected from a 
different school board district, and one student member. Chapter 793 of 2023 expanded the voting rights of 
the student member by allowing the student member to vote on, among other matters before the board, 
(1) capital and operating budgets; (2) school closings, reopenings, and boundaries; and (3) student 
disciplinary matters. The student member still may not vote on collective bargaining decisions, teacher and 
administrator disciplinary matters, and other personnel matters. The Act preserved a restriction on the 
student member attending an executive session relating to specified hearings or collective bargaining and 
additionally prohibits the student member from attending an executive session on a personnel matter on 
which the student member may not vote. 
 
9 Although not in statute, the Washington County Board of Education reports that there is a student member 
on the board and that the student member can only concur on votes and must abstain from certain matters. 
 
Source:  Sections 3-101 through 3-1405 of the Education Article; Local Boards of Education 
 

END OF PAGE 7