START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 415 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 415 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Administration - Clarification and 
Technical Correction 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System 
(SRPS) to pay, within 30 days, any remaining earned financial incentives to the Chief 
Investment Officer (CIO) if the CIO retires directly from the Investment Division. It also 
clarifies that only members of the State Police Retirement System (SPRS) (and, therefore, 
not members of the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS)) must terminate 
their participation in the Deferred Retirement Option Program (DROP) before reaching 
age 60. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical and clarifying in nature and has no direct effect 
on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is technical (with respect to LEOPS) and has no direct effect 
on local pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Chief Investment Officer Compensation 
 
In addition to setting the compensation of the CIO, the SRPS board may also award 
financial incentives to the CIO. Any financial incentives must be paid over multiple 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 415/ Page 2 
fiscal years in equal installments. If the CIO separates from employment, the SRPS board 
may not pay out any remaining financial incentives due to be paid after the date of 
separation. 
 
Deferred Retirement Option Program 
 
An SPRS member is eligible to retire at age 50 or after accumulating 22 years of eligibility 
service (if hired before July 1, 2011) or 25 years of eligibility service (if hired on or after 
July 1, 2011). A member must retire at age 60. 
 
SPRS and LEOPS members are eligible to participate in DROP. For SPRS, members hired 
before July 1, 2011, are eligible to participate if they have at least 22 years of eligibility 
service but less than 30 years. SPRS members hired on or after July 1, 2011, and all LEOPS 
members are eligible for DROP if they have at least 25 years of eligibility service but less 
than 30 years. Regardless of their date of hire, their time in DROP cannot exceed 7 years 
(some members are subject to shorter limits if their time in DROP will cause them to pass 
age 60 (for SPRS) or their maximum number of years of service). During the DROP period, 
members continue employment at their regular salary but are deemed to be retired and do 
not earn any additional service credit. The retirement allowance is placed in an account 
earning 4% annual interest. At the end of the DROP period, the lump sum held in the 
DROP account is paid to the member, who must then terminate employment and receive a 
regular retirement allowance. 
 
More specifically, Chapter 400 of 2023 allows members of SPRS or LEOPS to remain in 
DROP for up to seven years (two additional years beyond the five years previously 
allowed). However, it inadvertently establishes that members of both systems terminate 
participation in DROP before reaching age 60. As only SPRS has mandatory retirement at 
age 60, Chapter 400 erroneously requires LEOPS members to end participation early. The 
State Retirement Agency became aware of this error and has been interpreting the provision 
to apply only to SPRS members, consistent with the Attorney General’s bill review letter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 320 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; State Retirement Agency; Office of 
the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 415/ Page 3 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 16, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3