START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 426 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 426 
(Delegates Bhandari and Jackson) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Places of Public Accommodation - Motion Picture Houses - Captioning 
 
 
This bill requires a place of public accommodation that is a motion picture house to provide 
access to fully operational and well-maintained “closed movie captioning” technology for 
the general public for each screening of a motion picture that is produced and available 
with closed movie captioning, as required by Title III of the federal Americans with 
Disabilities Act. If a motion picture is produced and available with “open movie 
captioning,” a place of public accommodation that controls, operates, owns, or leases a 
motion picture house with eight or more screens in the State must provide open movie 
captioning for at least two screenings for each motion picture it screens each week; this 
requirement does not apply to motion pictures screened fewer than five times during a 
seven-day period, as specified, and is applicable only to the first three weeks after 
premiering in the motion picture house. Beginning three weeks after the premiere, a place 
of public accommodation that controls, operates, owns, or leases a motion picture house 
with eight or more screens in the State may provide open movie captioning with reasonable 
notice. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR) can handle any 
additional complaints potentially generated by the bill with existing resources. Revenues 
are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 426/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Closed movie captioning” means the written display of the dialogue and 
certain nonspeech information of a motion picture that is generally delivered to individual 
patrons on a captioning device in a motion picture house. 
 
“Open movie captioning” means a transcript or dialog of the audio portion of a motion 
picture that is displayed on a motion picture screen that cannot be turned off by a viewer. 
 
Current Law:  MCCR is the State agency charged with the enforcement of laws 
prohibiting discrimination in public accommodations, employment, housing, and State 
contracting. Under State law, an owner or operator of a place of public accommodation, or 
an agent or employee of the owner or operator, may not refuse, withhold from, or deny to 
any person any of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, or privileges of the place of 
public accommodation because of the person’s race, sex, age, color, creed, national origin, 
marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or disability. Any structural changes, 
modifications, or special equipment that is necessary to accommodate an individual with a 
disability must be reasonable. A reasonable accommodation is defined as making a place 
of public accommodation suitable for access, use, and patronage by an individual with a 
disability without danger to the individual’s health or safety and undue hardship or expense 
to the person making the accommodation. 
 
State law generally requires a place of public accommodation, on request, to keep closed 
captioning activated on any closed-captioning television receiver that is in use during 
regular hours in any public area. 
 
Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act requires places of public accommodation, 
including movie theaters, to provide effective communication through the use of auxiliary 
aids and services. Pursuant to a Final Rule issued by the U.S. Department of Justice in 
2016, movie theaters must provide closed captioning equipment whenever showing a 
movie produced, distributed, or otherwise made available with these features. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that open movie captioning deters viewers from a 
particular showing, any movie theater that qualifies as a small business may experience 
decreased revenues; conversely, to the extent that open movie captioning attracts hearing 
impaired or other customers, revenues may increase. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 400 and HB 264 of 2023 and HB 1238 of 2022. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 426/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 92 (Senator Brooks) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3