START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 416 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 416 
(Delegates Solomon and Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Schools - Active Shooter Safety Drills or Trainings - Requirements 
 
 
This bill prohibits active shooter drills or trainings in schools from including specified 
activities that may be traumatic for students or school personnel. It also requires local 
school systems to (1) notify parents in advance of active shooter drills or trainings in 
schools; (2) provide mental health follow-up to students and school personnel after an 
active shooter drill or training; and (3) collect data on the effectiveness and psychological 
impact of the drills or trainings and report the data to the Maryland Center for School Safety 
(MCSS) for further analysis. Finally, the bill requires MCSS to develop and distribute 
model content regarding the State’s firearm storage laws, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $200,000 in FY 2025 and by 
$100,000 annually thereafter for analysis of the local school system data. MCSS can likely 
otherwise implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not directly 
affected, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
200,000 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
Net Effect 
($200,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures may increase to provide mental health 
follow-up for students and school personnel, but a reliable estimate is not feasible. No 
effect on revenues. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 416/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Center for School Safety and Model Policy 
 
MCSS must collaborate with an institution of higher education or federal or national 
research entity to study the effectiveness and psychological impact of active shooter safety 
drills or trainings by researching and analyzing data collected from local school systems. 
By October 1, 2024, MCSS must identify best practices for active shooter safety drills or 
trainings and periodically update them using data collected from local school systems. 
 
Active Shooter Safety Drills and Trainings 
 
Except for a voluntary drill or training occurring after school hours, active shooter safety 
drills or trainings may not include (1) loud sounds intended to imitate gun fire or 
explosions; (2) live exercises with individuals role-playing as an active shooter or victim; 
or (3) similar activities that may cause the drill to be traumatic for students or school 
personnel. If a concern is raised that a component of a drill or training best practice is 
contrary to the intent of these trauma-sensitive restrictions, MCSS must, after consulting 
with the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), make the final determination 
as to whether the component complies with these restrictions. 
 
Before the 2025-2026 school year and annually thereafter, MSDE must review the best 
practices for active shooter safety drills or trainings identified by MCSS and update any 
drills and trainings that have been incorporated into the annual schedule of drills to reflect 
best practices. Items incorporated into the annual schedule of drills for local school systems 
may take the form of a training rather than a drill. Further, drills or trainings incorporated 
into the annual schedule must be developmentally and age appropriate. 
 
Each local school system must:   
 
 
provide parents with the annual schedule of active shooter safety drills or trainings 
at the beginning of the school year, including specified information; 
 
announce drills or trainings in advance to students and school personnel; 
 
notify parents after a drill or training has taken place; 
 
provide mental health follow-up for students and school personnel after a drill or 
training; 
 
identify and provide support to students or school personnel who may require 
additional support during and after a drill or training, as specified; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 416/ Page 3 
 
collect and report to MCSS data on the effectiveness and psychological impact of 
the drills or trainings, including requesting feedback from school personnel, parents, 
and students in a manner and format provided by MCSS. 
 
Model Content on Firearm Storage Laws 
 
By July 1, 2025, MCSS, in consultation with the Department of State Police (DSP), must 
develop model content that informs parents of the State’s firearm storage laws. MCSS must 
evaluate and update the model content as needed each year. At the beginning of each 
school year, each local school system must distribute the model content to parents. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Center for School Safety and School Safety Subcabinet 
 
Chapter 372 of 2013 established MCSS as an independent unit within State government 
under the direction of a governing board chaired by the State Superintendent of Schools. It 
mandated that the Governor include $500,000 annually for the center’s operations. 
Chapter 30 of 2018, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act, made MCSS an independent unit 
within MSDE under the direction of the School Safety Subcabinet, consisting of the 
following individuals or their designees:   
 
 
the State Superintendent of Schools; 
 
the Secretary of Health; 
 
the Secretary of State Police; 
 
the Attorney General; 

the Secretary of the Department of Disabilities; and 
 
the Executive Director of the Interagency Committee on School Construction. 
 
Chapter 30 also increased the mandated appropriation for MCSS’s operations to 
$2.0 million annually. 
 
Safety Drills for Public Schools 
 
MSDE, in consultation with the School Safety Subcabinet, may adopt regulations to 
incorporate developmentally and age-appropriate components of the Active Shooter 
Preparedness Program developed by the federal Department of Homeland Security or 
guidelines developed by the Maryland Active Assailant Work Group into the annual 
schedule of school safety drills. MSDE must notify the Governor and the Legislative Policy 
Committee of any changes to the schedule of drills in regulation. Local school systems 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 416/ Page 4 
must collaborate with local law enforcement agencies to establish policies for responding 
to an emergency at each public school. 
 
MSDE’s 2019 update of its Emergency Planning Guidelines for Local School Systems and 
Schools recommends carrying out the following six types of drills at least once per year:   
 
 
Evacuation:  conditions outside are safer than inside; 
 
Reverse Evacuation:  conditions inside are safer than outside; 
 
Severe Weather:  severe weather emergencies; 
 
Lock-down:  to protect building occupants from potential dangers in the building; 
 
Shelter-in-place:  outdoor biological, chemical, or radiological contamination 
scenarios; and 
 
Drop, Cover, and Hold:  earthquake or imminent danger to buildings or 
surroundings. 
 
State regulations, which incorporate the guidelines by reference, require each local school 
system to develop and implement an annual schedule for drills for each school that, in 
addition to fire drills, must include the drills specified above. They do not specifically 
require any active shooter safety drills. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires MCSS to collaborate with an institution of 
higher education or federal or national research entity to study the effectiveness and impact 
of active shooter safety drills or trainings by researching and analyzing data collected from 
local school systems. As MCSS lacks staff expertise regarding program evaluation, this 
analysis assumes that it contracts with an institution of higher education or other entity to 
conduct the necessary research and analysis of active shooter safety drills or trainings. It 
further assumes that the contracted entity coordinates all data collection and reporting with 
local school systems and reports findings to MCSS. The bill’s requirement to assess and 
analyze data from local school systems is ongoing. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $200,000 in fiscal 2025 and by $100,000 
annually thereafter for MCSS to contract with an institution of higher education or other 
entity to collect, analyze, and report data on the effectiveness and impact of the drills or 
trainings on students and school personnel. This assumes that initial start-up costs include 
(1) developing survey and other data collection instruments to collect data from students, 
school personnel, and parents and (2) conducting outreach to local school systems to 
develop data collection procedures. Out-year costs reflect ongoing collection, analysis, and 
reporting of data. If a public four-year institution of higher education is selected as the 
contractor, higher education revenues and expenditures increase accordingly. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 416/ Page 5 
MCSS can otherwise implement the bill with existing resources, and DSP can consult on 
State firearm laws with existing resources. Likewise, MSDE – in consultation with 
others – can assess the types of drills and trainings incorporated into the annual schedule 
for developmental and age appropriateness with existing resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill requires local school systems to provide mental health 
follow-up to students and school personnel after each drill or training. It also requires them 
to provide additional resources and coping strategies to individuals who require additional 
support during and after a drill or training. Local school systems have limited mental health 
resources, and many schools, especially elementary schools, do not have regular mental 
health staff available. To the extent that local school systems must contract for or hire 
additional mental health professionals to meet the bill’s requirements, local school system 
expenditures increase. For a similar prior introduction of the bill, some local school systems 
indicated that they can likely provide additional support with existing resources, but 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools advises that additional staff may be necessary. 
However, a reliable estimate is not feasible. 
 
Local school systems can likely provide the necessary notifications with existing resources. 
They can also likely collect and provide data on the effectiveness of active shooter drills 
or trainings to the MCSS contractor but doing so may detract from instructional time and 
planning. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 515 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 432 (Senators Kagan and Feldman) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Center for 
School Safety; Department of State Police; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Anne Arundel County 
Public 
Schools; 
Baltimore 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 416/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6