START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 453 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 453 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax – Technical Corrections 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals obsolete provisions of the Tax-General Article relating to 
the distribution of income tax revenue and corrects an erroneous cross-reference relating 
to the catalytic revitalization project tax credit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The changes are technical in nature and do not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that the bill’s technical, nonsubstantive 
changes to State tax law serve to improve consistency and accuracy within the Tax-General 
Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 453/ Page 2 
Designated Cross File:  SB 678 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
ea/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 453/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax – Technical Corrections 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0453 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill makes minor technical corrections to the state tax code, and will not have any 
impact on small businesses. 

END OF PAGE 3