START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 435 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 435 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Human Services) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Child Support - Incarcerated Obligors 
 
 
This departmental bill alters statutory provisions that determine the calculation and 
modification of child support for incarcerated obligors by (1) specifying that a court may 
determine that a material change of circumstances has occurred if a party becomes 
incarcerated, provided that the party’s ability to pay child support is sufficiently reduced 
due to incarceration; (2) establishing that a parent who is incarcerated may not be considered 
to be voluntarily impoverished; (3) prohibiting a determination of potential income for a 
parent who is incarcerated; and (4) repealing provisions that limit the circumstances under 
which a child support payment may not be considered past due and arrearages may not 
accrue during (and for a specified time after) a period of an obligor’s incarceration. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $124,800 in FY 2025 only for 
one-time computer programming costs for the Department of Human Services (DHS). The 
bill may help protect federal funding by ensuring that Maryland law conforms to federal 
requirements. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
124,800 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($124,800) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 435/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In a proceeding to establish or modify child support, whether pendente lite 
or permanent, the court is required to use the child support guidelines. The basic child 
support obligation is established in accordance with a schedule provided in statute. The 
current schedule uses the combined monthly adjusted actual income of both parents and 
the number of children for whom support is required to determine the basic child support 
obligation. Adjusted actual income, which is the basis for determining the basic child 
support obligation, is calculated from actual income minus preexisting reasonable child 
support obligations actually paid and, except as specified, alimony or maintenance 
obligations actually paid. The child support statute establishes a rebuttable presumption 
that the amount of child support that would result from the application of the child support 
guidelines is the correct amount of child support that the court is to award. The presumption 
may be rebutted, however, by evidence that the application of the guidelines would be 
unjust or inappropriate in a particular case. If the court determines that application of the 
guidelines would be unjust or inappropriate in a particular case, the court must make a 
written finding or specific finding on the record that states the reasons for departure from 
the guidelines, as required by statute. 
 
A court is authorized to modify a child support award after a filing of a motion for 
modification and on a showing of a material change of circumstance. A court may not 
retroactively modify an award prior to the date of the filing of the motion for modification. 
 
A child support payment is not past due and arrearages may not accrue during an obligor’s 
incarceration (and through the next 60 days after the obligor’s release from confinement), 
if (1) the obligor was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 180 consecutive 
calendar days or more; (2) the obligor is not on work release and has insufficient resources 
with which to make payment; and (3) the obligor did not commit the crime with the intent 
of being incarcerated or otherwise becoming impoverished. (The bill repeals the 
aforementioned provisions regarding the obligor’s minimum term of sentence to 
imprisonment and specified intent.) 
 
Subject to limited exception, if a parent is voluntarily impoverished, child support may be 
calculated based on a determination of potential income. If there is a dispute as to whether 
a parent is voluntarily impoverished, the court must make a finding as to whether, based 
on the totality of the circumstances, the parent is voluntarily impoverished. If the court 
determines a parent is voluntarily impoverished, it must consider certain factors to 
determine the amount of potential income that should be imputed to the parent. 
 
“Potential income” means income attributable to a parent determined by (1) the parent’s 
employment potential and probable earnings level based on specified factors; (2) the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 435/ Page 3 
parent’s assets; (3) the parent’s actual income from all sources; and (4) any other factor 
bearing on the parent’s ability to obtain funds for child support. 
 
“Voluntarily impoverished” means that a parent has made the free and conscious choice, 
not compelled by factors beyond the parent’s control, to render the parent without adequate 
resources. 
 
Background:  DHS advises that the federal Office of Child Support Services identified 
technical changes required to bring statute in compliance with the State Title IV-D Child 
Support State Plan and the federal Flexibility, Efficiency, and Modernization in Child 
Support Enforcement Programs Final Rule of 2017. According to DHS, noncompliance 
jeopardizes significant federal funding, including funds received for child support services 
and the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program block grant. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 435/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Child Support - Incarcerated Obligors 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0435 
 
PREPARED BY:  Stephen J. Holmes 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 4