START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 455 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 455 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Comptroller - Electronic Tax and Fee Return Filing Requirements 
 
 
This departmental bill generally requires the electronic filing of specified fee and tax 
returns, specifically:  (1) for periods beginning after December 31, 2026, tire recycling fee 
returns, bay restoration fee returns, admissions and amusement tax returns, alcoholic 
beverage tax returns, digital advertising gross revenues tax returns, motor fuel tax returns, 
sales and use tax returns, and tobacco tax returns; (2) beginning in tax year 2027, income 
tax withholding returns, income tax returns for pass-through entities, and income tax 
returns for corporations with at least 15 employees; and (3) beginning in tax year 2030, 
individual income tax returns, subject to specified exceptions. Additionally, the bill 
prohibits a tax return preparer or software company from charging a separate fee for the 
electronic filing of authorized tax documents; a violation is subject to a civil penalty of 
$500 for a first violation or $1,000 for a second or subsequent violation. The bill generally 
takes effect July 1, 2024; prohibitions relating to tax return preparers and software 
companies take effect January 1, 2030.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s requirements within the 
contemplated timeframe and likely realizes operational efficiencies once fully 
implemented. Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues beginning in FY 2030 
due to the bill’s civil penalty provisions.       
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.)  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 455/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Exemptions from Electronic Filing Requirements  
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person is not required to file a return, 
schedule, or report with the Comptroller electronically if (1) the person has a disability as 
defined in the federal Americans with Disabilities Act; (2) the person has religious beliefs 
that prohibit the person’s use of electronic filing technology; or (3) the person is determined 
by the Comptroller to have a special need to file a paper return, schedule, or report.  
 
Additionally, the bill’s electronic filing requirement for individual income tax returns does 
not apply to an individual who: 
 
 
is at least 65 years old as of December 31 of the tax year for which the return is 
being filed;  
 
is single or a dependent taxpayer and whose Maryland adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) is less than $200,000;  
 
is married filing separately, a head of household, or a qualifying widow or widower 
with a dependent child and whose MAGI is less than $400,000; or 
 
is married filing jointly and whose MAGI is less than $400,000.  
 
Prohibitions Relating to Tax Return Preparers and Software Companies 
 
As noted above, effective January 1, 2030, the bill prohibits a tax return preparer or 
software company (defined as a developer of tax software) from charging a separate fee 
for the electronic filing of authorized tax documents (defined as tax documents that the 
Comptroller has authorized or requires to be filed electronically). The bill further prohibits 
a software company from selling a version of the company’s tax software that charges a 
separate fee for the electronic filing of authorized tax documents and a version of the same 
tax software that does not charge the separate fee.  
 
Each transaction in which a customer is charged a prohibited fee or each sale to a customer 
of tax software that charges a prohibited fee is an independent violation. Before a civil 
penalty is imposed, the Comptroller must provide to the person against whom the civil 
penalty will be imposed notice of the alleged violation and an opportunity for a hearing, 
and a person against whom a civil penalty is imposed may seek review of the penalty under 
the Administrative Procedure Act. Civil penalties collected under the bill must be paid into 
the general fund.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 455/ Page 3 
Current Law:  State law generally allows for, but does not require, the electronic filing of 
fee and tax returns with the Comptroller. Subject to specified exceptions, an income tax 
return preparer must file all qualified returns that the income tax return preparer prepares 
by electronic means as prescribed by the Comptroller if the income tax return preparer has 
prepared more than 100 qualified tax returns in the prior tax year.  
 
Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that it currently accepts nearly 
three-quarters of a million pieces of paper from returns across all tax types; this significant 
volume of paper correspondence must be processed by Comptroller staff, resulting in 
delayed processing times as well as the potential for processing errors. Digital returns allow 
for faster processing of returns and refunds, fewer errors, and additional staff time for more 
complex, customer-facing work. The Comptroller’s Office further advises that digital 
returns allow for faster capture of State data, thus allowing for better financial estimates 
and economic forecasts on shorter deadlines, as well as the development of an online return 
and refund status tracking system for taxpayers.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 677 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Baltimore City; Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester counties; North East Maryland Waste 
Disposal Authority; City of Laurel; Town of La Plata; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 455/ Page 4 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Comptroller - Electronic Tax and Fee Return Filing Requirements  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0455 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill sets a timeline for all business tax filings and personal income taxes to be filed 
electronically. There are exemptions to the online filing requirement for both small businesses 
and some individuals. Below is a brief summary of the phased implementation process and the 
specific exemptions: 
1. 
All business fees and taxes will need to be filed online in calendar year 2026. 
2. 
Personal income taxes will need to be filed online in calendar year 2030. 
3. 
Exceptions to the online filing requirements include the following: 
a. 
Age 65 or older 
b. 
Single filers under $200,000 or joint filers under $400,000 
c. 
Marylanders with disabilities 
d. 
Small businesses with 15 or fewer full-time employees 
 
No significant impact on small businesses should be anticipated for this move to electronic –  
rather than hardcopy – business tax filings.  

END OF PAGE 4