START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

Chapter 761

(House Bill 496)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Law – Sexual Crimes – Definition of Consent and Repeal of Force

FOR the purpose of requiring certain facts to be considered when determining whether a
lack of consent exists for the purposes of certain sexual crimes; altering the elements
of second–degree rape; requiring the Maryland Judiciary to annually report certain
information to the General Assembly until a certain date; and generally relating to
sexual crimes.

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–301.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 3–304(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 1–212
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Law

3–301.1.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE, “CONSENT” MEANS THE CLEAR AND VOLUNTARY
AGREEMENT BY AN INDIVIDUAL TO ENGAGE IN VAGINAL INTERCOURSE, A SEXUAL
ACT, OR SEXUAL CONTACT.

(B) FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING WHETHER A LACK OF CONSENT
EXISTS WHEN IT IS AN ELEMENT OF A VIOLATION OF A PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE,
THE FOLLOWING SHALL BE CONSIDERED IN THIS SUBTITLE:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 761 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE EXISTENCE OF CONSENT, LACK OF CONSENT, OR
WITHDRAWAL OF CONSENT ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~INFERRED~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~WORDS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~AND~~ ~~IS~~
~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TOTALITY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CIRCUMSTANCES~~ SHALL BE DETERMINED BASED ON A
TOTALITY OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES, INCLUDING THE WORDS AND CONDUCT OF THE
VICTIM AND THE DEFENDANT;

(2) CONSENT MAY BE WITHDRAWN BEFORE OR DURING VAGINAL
INTERCOURSE, A SEXUAL ACT, OR SEXUAL CONTACT;

(3) THE LACK OF CONSENT MAY BE COMMUNICATED THROUGH
WORDS OR CONDUCT;

(4) A CURRENT OR PREVIOUS DATING, SOCIAL, OR SEXUAL
RELATIONSHIP BY ITSELF DOES NOT CONSTITUTE CONSENT;

(5) SUBMISSION AS A RESULT OF FEAR, THREAT, OR COERCION DOES
NOT CONSTITUTE CONSENT IF THE INDIVIDUAL ALLEGED TO HAVE PERFORMED THE
ACT IN VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE KNOWS OR REASONABLY SHOULD KNOW THAT
THE VICTIM WOULD SUBMIT AS A RESULT OF FEAR, THREAT, OR COERCION; AND

(6) THE MANNER OF DRESS OF AN INDIVIDUAL DOES NOT
CONSTITUTE CONSENT.

(C) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE DOCUMENTATION
OF CONSENT.

3–304.

(a) A person may not engage in vaginal intercourse or a sexual act with another:

(1) [by force, or the threat of force,] without the consent of the other;

(2) if the victim is a substantially cognitively impaired individual, a
mentally incapacitated individual, or a physically helpless individual, and the person
performing the act knows or reasonably should know that the victim is a substantially
cognitively impaired individual, a mentally incapacitated individual, or a physically
helpless individual; or

(3) if the victim is under the age of 14 years, and the person performing the
act is at least 4 years older than the victim.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 761

Article – Criminal Procedure

1–212.

BEGINNING OCTOBER 1, 2024, AND EACH OCTOBER 1 THEREAFTER, THE
MARYLAND JUDICIARY SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
FOLLOWING DATA FOR THE PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR, DISAGGREGATED BY
COUNTY AND OFFENDER AGE, RACE, AND SEX:

(1) THE NUMBER OF CHARGES FILED IN THE STATE FOR VIOLATIONS
OF §§ 3–303 THROUGH 3–308 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE, DISAGGREGATED BY
THE MODALITY BY WHICH THE OFFENSE WAS COMMITTED; AND

(2) THE NUMBER OF CONVICTIONS IN THE STATE FOR VIOLATIONS OF
§§ 3–303 THROUGH 3–308 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE, DISAGGREGATED BY THE
MODALITY BY WHICH THE OFFENSE WAS COMMITTED.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and 7
months and, at the end of April 30, 2029, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action
required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3