START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 432 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 432 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings and Criminal Procedure - Technical 
Corrections - References to Intellectual Disability 
 
 
This bill generally replaces the term “mental retardation” with “intellectual disability” in 
the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article and the Criminal Procedure Article. All related 
references are also replaced. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is technical in nature and has no effect on governmental 
operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 119 of 2009 replaced references to “mental retardation” with the 
term “intellectual disability” in other provisions of State law and changed related 
references. However, the Act did not alter provisions within the Courts and Judicial 
Proceedings Article or the Criminal Procedure Article. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 432/ Page 2 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2