START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 465 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 465 
(Delegate Boafo, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Workplace Fraud and Prevailing Wage - Violations - Civil Penalty and Referrals 
 
 
This bill increases the maximum civil penalty from $5,000 to $10,000 for each employee 
that an employer is found to have knowingly failed to properly classify under the 
Workplace Fraud Act. On a showing of clear and convincing evidence that a relevant 
Workplace Fraud Act or State Prevailing Wage Law violation has occurred, the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry must refer any complaint that alleges a violation of 
specified tax withholding and tax fraud provisions in the Tax-General Article to the 
Comptroller, the State’s Attorney with jurisdiction over the alleged violation, the 
U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Department of Labor (USDOL), and the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues may increase beginning in FY 2025 due to the bill’s 
increased penalty provision, increased compliance with the Workplace Fraud Act, and 
additional tax compliance referrals, as discussed below. General fund expenditures may 
also increase due to tax compliance referrals beginning in FY 2025. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 465/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Workplace Fraud Act 
 
Chapter 188 of 2009 (the Workplace Fraud Act) established, for the purpose of 
enforcement only, a presumption that work performed by an individual paid by an 
employer creates an employer-employee relationship, subject to specified exemptions. It 
prohibits construction companies and landscaping businesses from failing to properly 
classify an individual as an employee and establishes investigation procedures and 
penalties for noncompliance. 
 
The “ABC test” incorporated in the Workplace Fraud Act is used by the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MDL) to establish whether an employer-employee relationship 
exists for the purpose of determining whether an employee has been misclassified under 
the Act. While only used to detect workplace fraud in the specified industries, MDL is 
required to use the ABC test in determining whether an individual is an employee in any 
industry for the purpose of determining whether the employer should pay unemployment 
insurance for the individual. The ABC test has three components, all of which must be met 
to establish that an individual is an independent contractor and not an employee:   
 
A. 
the individual is free from control and direction over his or her performance both in 
fact and under the contract (Alone); 
B.  
the individual customarily is engaged in an independent business or occupation 
(Business); and 
C.  
the work performed is outside the usual course of business, or outside the place of 
business, of the person for whom work is performed (Control). 
 
The Act distinguishes between an employer who improperly misclassifies an employee and 
an employer who knowingly misclassifies an employee, and civil penalties are more severe 
for an employer who is guilty of knowingly misclassifying an employee. The 
maximum penalty for a knowing violation is a $5,000 fine for each employee who was not 
properly classified. The Commissioner of Labor and Industry or the administrative law 
judge must consider specified factors when determining the penalty amount. Penalties can 
be doubled for employers who have previously violated the Act’s provisions. An employer 
who has been found to have knowingly misclassified employees on three or more occasions 
may be assessed an administrative penalty of up to $20,000 for each misclassified 
employee. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 465/ Page 3 
Prevailing Wage 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland 
must pay their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, 
including a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that 
are constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
 
The commissioner has the authority to enforce contractors’ compliance with the prevailing 
wage law, including assessing liquidated damages of $250 per day per employee that is not 
paid the proper prevailing wage. See the Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law 
for additional information. 
 
Penalties for Specified Tax Violations 
 
Among other related penalties, a person who is required to withhold income tax and who 
willfully fails to withhold the tax as required under Title 10 of the Tax-General Article is 
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum penalty of a $10,000 fine and/or 
five years imprisonment. 
 
Generally, a person who willfully or with the intent to evade payment of a tax under the 
Tax-General Article, or to prevent the collection of the tax, fails to provide information as 
required or provides false or misleading information is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject 
to a maximum penalty of a $5,000 fine and/or 18 months imprisonment. 
 
Joint Enforcement Task Force on Workplace Fraud 
 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.04, dated January 9, 2024, establishes the Joint Enforcement 
Task Force on Workplace Fraud to coordinate the investigation and enforcement of 
workplace fraud. Among its charges is to facilitate data sharing among task force members, 
including maintaining an inter-agency online platform to share such information. The 
task force must report to the Governor by December 31 of each year as specified in the 
executive order; the report must, among other things, identify successful strategies for 
preventing workplace fraud that reduce the need for greater enforcement. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues may increase minimally beginning in 
fiscal 2025 from increasing the civil penalty for knowingly misclassifying employees. To 
the extent that increasing the penalty strengthens its deterrent effect, increased compliance 
with the Workplace Fraud Act may generate increased tax revenues, thereby increasing 
general fund revenues. Any increase in unemployment trust fund contributions from 
increased compliance likely does not materially affect the Unemployment Insurance Trust 
Fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 465/ Page 4 
The bill does not substantively change the inspection process or the method by which wage 
and hour inspectors enforce the prevailing wage or worker classification laws. MDL has a 
portal to refer Workplace Fraud violations to the Comptroller for investigation, and MDL 
is working with the Joint Enforcement Task Force on Workplace Fraud to develop a 
protocol for these referrals. MDL already has an established referral/escalation process 
with USDOL and can create and implement a new referral process with the other federal 
agencies with existing resources. 
 
While the bill may increase compliance with the Workplace Fraud Act due to strengthening 
the civil penalty for a knowing violation, any violations that do occur must be referred to 
the Comptroller, along with Prevailing Wage violations. Thus, if the bill results in 
additional violations being referred to the Comptroller, then the Comptroller would require 
at least one additional compliance-related staff, at an annual general fund cost, per staff, of 
approximately $88,000 to $100,000 over the next five years. In that case, general fund 
revenues may also increase to the extent that additional tax audits result in additional 
assessments and collection of unpaid income taxes. However, MDL advises that it is 
already strengthening enforcement of the Workplace Fraud Act independent of the bill, so 
it is unclear if any future increase in referrals to the Comptroller would be attributable to 
the bill or to current efforts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses covered under the Workplace Fraud Act are 
subject to an increased civil penalty for knowing violations. At a minimum, this may 
provide additional incentive for such businesses to remain in compliance with the law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 838 and HB 1261 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 436 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Board of Public Works; 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 465/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 21, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 465/ Page 6 
Appendix – Maryland’s Prevailing Wage Law 
 
 
Contractors and subcontractors working on eligible public works projects in Maryland, 
including mechanical service contractors that are part of public works projects, must pay 
their employees the prevailing wage rate. “Public works” are structures or works, including 
a bridge, building, ditch, road, alley, waterwork, or sewage disposal plant, that are 
constructed for public use or benefit or paid for entirely or in part by public money. 
 
Eligible public works projects are: 
 
● 
those carried out by the State; 
● 
any public work for which at least 25% of the money used for construction is State 
money; 
● 
specified projects in tax increment financing districts if the local governing body 
approves of the application of prevailing wages; and 
● 
construction projects by investor-owned gas and/or electric companies involving 
any underground gas or electric infrastructure. 
 
Applicability in Maryland 
 
Generally, any public works contract valued at less than $250,000 is not required to pay 
prevailing wages. However, the prevailing wage law was amended in 2022 to include 
mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. Mechanical service contracts are 
defined as contracts for (1) heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, including duct work; 
(2) refrigeration systems; (3) plumbing systems, as specified; (4) electrical systems, as 
specified; and (5) elevator systems, as specified. 
 
The State prevailing wage rate also does not apply to (1) any part of a public works contract 
funded with federal funds for which the contractor must pay the prevailing wage rate 
determined by the federal government; (2) specified construction projects carried out by 
public service companies under order of the Public Service Commission (except the 
underground projects mentioned above); or (3) local House or Senate initiatives that 
receive State funds in the capital budget. 
 
Prevailing wages are wages paid to at least 50% of workers in a given locality who perform 
the same or similar work on projects that resemble the proposed public works project. If 
fewer than 50% of workers in a job category earn the same wage, the prevailing wage is 
the rate paid to at least 40% of those workers. If fewer than 40% receive the same wage 
rate, the prevailing wage is calculated using a weighted average of local pay rates. The 
State Commissioner of Labor and Industry is responsible for determining prevailing wages 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 465/ Page 7 
for each public works project and job category based on annual wage surveys, in which 
contractors and subcontractors working on both public works and private construction 
projects may participate. 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), St. Mary’s 
College of Maryland, and the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) are all exempt from the 
prevailing wage law. However, USM and MSU advise that they voluntarily comply with 
prevailing wage requirements for contracts that exceed the $250,000 threshold. MSA 
largely administers its own prevailing wage program, using wage rates borrowed from the 
commissioner’s annual wage survey. 
 
Enforcement 
 
The commissioner has the authority to enforce contractors’ compliance with the prevailing 
wage law, including issuing a stop work order if the commissioner makes an initial 
determination that a contractor or subcontractor may have violated the prevailing wage 
requirements. Contractors found to have violated the prevailing wage law must pay 
restitution to the employees and liquidated damages to the public body in the amount of 
$20 a day for each worker who is paid less than the prevailing wage, or $250 per worker 
per day if the employer knew or reasonably should have known of the obligation to pay the 
prevailing wage. If an employer fails to comply with an order by the commissioner to pay 
restitution, either the commissioner or an employee may sue the employer to recover the 
difference between the prevailing wage and paid wage. The court may order the employer 
to pay double or triple damages if it finds that the employer withheld wages or fringe 
benefits willfully and knowingly or with deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard for the 
law. 
 
The Governor must include at least $385,000 in the budget each year for the Prevailing 
Wage Unit within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL).  
 
The number of prevailing wage projects rose dramatically following the Great Recession 
and has remained high each year since. MDL advises that, during fiscal 2023, its Prevailing 
Wage Unit monitored 913 projects, consistent with 921 projects in fiscal 2022, but 
significantly higher than the 496 projects in fiscal 2014. To accommodate the increase in 
projects, the number of prevailing wage investigators increased in fiscal 2016 from three 
to six; as of January 2024, there are five investigators in the unit. In fiscal 2024, the 
legislature provided five new wage and hour investigators to the division, three of which 
were designated to the Prevailing Wage Unit and are under active recruitment. This brings 
the total number of field investigator positions to eight. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 465/ Page 8 
History of the Prevailing Wage 
 
The federal Davis-Bacon Act, originally enacted in 1931, requires contractors working on 
federal public works contracts valued at more than $2,000 to pay their employees the 
prevailing local wage for their labor class, as determined by the U.S. Secretary of Labor. 
The general intent of the law, and similar state and local laws, is to stabilize local wage 
rates by preventing unfair bidding practices and wage competition. Thirty-two states and 
the District of Columbia currently have prevailing wage laws; since 1979, nine states have 
repealed their prevailing wage laws. 
 
Maryland adopted a prevailing wage law in 1945 (Chapter 999), but it only applied to road 
projects in Allegany, Garrett, and Washington counties. In 1969, the statute was amended 
to include State public works contracts of $500,000 or more. There have been periodic 
changes to the law and the definition of “prevailing wage.” In 1983, the law was broadened 
to include public works projects in which the State funds 50% or more of the total project 
costs and 75% or more in the case of public schools. Chapter 208 of 2000 reduced the 
prevailing wage threshold for public schools from 75% to 50% of construction costs, 
thereby bringing school construction projects in line with prevailing wage requirements for 
other public works projects. Chapters 281 and 282 of 2014 further lowered the State 
funding threshold for school construction projects to 25% of total construction costs, 
thereby requiring the vast majority of public school construction projects in the State to 
pay the prevailing wage, subject to the $500,000 contract value threshold.  
Chapters 57 and 58 of 2021 lowered the State funding threshold for all public works 
projects (including school construction) to 25% of total construction costs and lowered the 
contract value threshold for payment of prevailing wages to $250,000; however, legislative 
bond initiatives that receive State funds in the capital budget are exempt from the 
requirement to pay prevailing wages. As noted above, Chapter 51 of 2022 extended the 
prevailing wage requirement to mechanical service contracts valued at more than $2,500. 
 
Six Maryland jurisdictions – Allegany, Baltimore, Charles, Montgomery, and 
Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City – have local prevailing wage laws requiring 
public works projects in the jurisdiction to pay prevailing wages. 
 
Research on the Effects of Prevailing Wage on Contract Costs 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) has reviewed research on the effect of 
prevailing wage laws on the cost of public works contracts and has found inconsistent 
and/or unreliable results. The primary challenge confronted by all prevailing wage 
researchers is identifying an appropriate “control group” consisting of projects of similar 
type, timing, and location that do not pay the prevailing wage. In most jurisdictions that 
require a prevailing wage, all projects of a specified type and size are subject to it, so there 
is no natural control group. Some researchers have compared project costs in states or 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 465/ Page 9 
localities before and after they adopted prevailing wage requirements, but their findings 
are clouded by the difference in time, during which construction costs changed and other 
factors were not consistent. Another deficiency in the research is that it almost always relies 
on project bid prices (i.e., the anticipated cost prior to the beginning of construction) rather 
than actual final costs. As most construction projects experience change orders or cost 
overruns affecting their cost, reliance on bid prices negatively affects the validity of the 
findings. Therefore, research findings related to the effect of the prevailing wage on 
project costs are inconsistent and often inconclusive. A similar review of research 
conducted by MDL (at the time, the Department of Labor, Licensing, and Regulation) for 
the Task Force to Study the Applicability of the Maryland Prevailing Wage Law also 
concluded that “data limitations create difficulty for researchers on both sides of the issue.” 
 
Local school systems occasionally solicit side-by-side bids with and without prevailing 
wages to help them decide whether they want to accept the full State match (and, thus, be 
subject to the prevailing wage) or a lesser State match without being subject to the 
prevailing wage. Data provided to the Public School Construction Program by 
Anne Arundel, Carroll, Frederick, Howard, and Washington counties, from 2012 through 
2015, shows that the cost differential between bids with and without prevailing wages for 
266 individual bids submitted for 26 different school construction and renovation projects 
averaged 11.7%, with a range from 0% to 49%. As with other research data, these represent 
bid prices, not actual construction costs. An independent analysis of the Maryland 
side-by-side bid data concluded that factors other than prevailing wages, including bid 
timing and the level of competition for the bids, accounted for most of the differences 
between the prevailing wage and nonprevailing wage bids. 
 
One area of the research in which there is a general consensus, and which is supported by 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, is that labor costs represent between 20% and 30% of 
construction costs (with materials and site costs making up most of the rest). Therefore, a 
10% gap between prevailing wages and market wages could theoretically increase total 
contract costs by about 2.5%, and a 20% gap in wages could increase total contract costs 
by about 6%. Given the empirical evidence that prevailing wages tend to be higher than 
nonprevailing wages and that labor costs are a significant portion of overall project costs, 
DLS believes that it is reasonable to expect that the prevailing wage requirement adds 
between 2% and 5% to the cost of a public works project. Given the inconsistency and 
inconclusiveness of the empirical research, however, actual effects may vary by project, 
with some projects exhibiting higher cost differences and others experiencing negligible 
differences. 
 

END OF PAGE 9