START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 784

Chapter 784

(House Bill 490)

AN ACT concerning

Income Tax – Subtraction Modification for Donations to Diaper Banks and
Other Charitable Entities – Sunset ~~Repeal~~ Extension

FOR the purpose of ~~repealing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~termination~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~relating~~ extending the
termination date applicable to a subtraction under the Maryland income tax for
certain donations to diaper banks and other certain charitable entities; and generally
relating to a subtraction under the Maryland income tax for donations to diaper
banks and other charitable entities.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 10–208(a) and (z) and 10–308(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 221 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 3

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 222 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 3

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

10–208.

(a) In addition to the modification under § 10–207 of this subtitle, the amounts
under this section are subtracted from the federal adjusted gross income of a resident to
determine Maryland adjusted gross income.

(z) (1) (i) In this subsection the following words have the meanings
indicated.

(ii) “Diaper bank” means a nonprofit organization located in the
State that:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 784 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. is qualified as tax exempt under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code;

2. is established and operating primarily for the purpose of
collecting or purchasing disposable diapers or other hygiene products for infants or
children; and

3. distributes those diapers or hygiene products through
schools, health care facilities, government agencies, or other nonprofit entities for eventual
distribution to individuals free of charge.

(iii) “Donation” means an irrevocable gift of:

1. disposable diapers, other hygiene products for infants or
children, or feminine personal hygiene products; or

2. cash that is specifically designated for the purchase of
disposable diapers, other hygiene products for infants or children, or feminine personal
hygiene products.

(iv) “Feminine personal hygiene products” means sanitary pads,
tampons, menstrual sponges, menstrual cups, or other similar feminine hygiene products,
whether reusable or disposable.

(v) “Qualified charitable entity” means a diaper bank, homeless
shelter, domestic violence shelter, religious organization, or other charitable organization
that has registered with the Comptroller as a distributor of disposable diapers, other
hygiene products for infants or children, or feminine personal hygiene products.

(2) Subject to the limitations of this subsection, the subtraction allowed
under subsection (a) of this section includes up to $1,000 of donations made by the taxpayer
during the taxable year to a qualified charitable entity.

(3) To qualify for the subtraction under this subsection, the taxpayer shall
file with the taxpayer’s income tax return:

(i) the name of each qualified charitable entity to which a donation
was made;

(ii) proof of the value of the donation; and

(iii) any other information that the Comptroller requires.

(4) The Comptroller shall adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of
this section, including the criteria and procedures for registration as a qualified charitable
entity.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 784

10–308.

(a) In addition to the modification under § 10–307 of this subtitle, the amounts
under this section are subtracted from the federal taxable income of a corporation to
determine Maryland modified income.

(b) The subtraction under subsection (a) of this section includes the amounts
allowed to be subtracted for an individual under:

(1) § 10–208(d) of this title (Enhanced agricultural management
equipment expenses);

(2) § 10–208(i) of this title (Reforestation or timber stand expenses);

(3) § 10–208(k) of this title (Wage expenses for targeted jobs);

(4) § 10–208(p) of this title (Elevator handrails in health care facilities);

(5) § 10–208(z) of this title (Donations to diaper banks and other charitable
entities); and

(6) § 10–208(bb) of this title (Trade or business expenses of medical
cannabis grower, processor, dispensary, or any other cannabis establishment).

Chapter 221 of the Acts of 2021

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2021, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2020[,
but before January 1, 2024 2027. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 6 years and, at
the end of June 30, 2024 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect].

Chapter 222 of the Acts of 2021

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2021, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 2020[,
but before January 1, 2024 2027. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 6 years and, at
the end of June 30, 2024 2027, this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect].

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3