START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 270

Chapter 270

(House Bill 475)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Open–Source Phonics Matching Grant Program – Establishment
(Open–Source Phonics Matching Grant Program Act)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Open–Source Phonics Matching Grant Program within
the State Department of Education; requiring the Department to administer the
Program; authorizing certain organizations to apply for grants from the Program;
requiring the Department periodically to review the open–source phonics learning
materials to ensure the materials are consistent with best practices in literacy
education, including the science of reading; and generally relating to the
Open–Source Phonics Matching Grant Program.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–135
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–135.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “OPEN–SOURCE” MEANS MATERIAL WITH EITHER FREELY
OBTAINABLE SOURCE CODE, A LICENSE FOR MODIFICATION, OR PERMISSION FOR
FREE DISTRIBUTION.

(3) “OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS ORGANIZATION” MEANS A ANY
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION, INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION, OR PUBLIC
LIBRARY THAT PRODUCES OR DISTRIBUTES FREE, OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS
MATERIALS IN THE STATE.

(4) “PHONICS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 4–136 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 270 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS MATCHING
GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS AN OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS MATCHING GRANT PROGRAM IN
THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE MATCHING FUNDS TO
OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS ORGANIZATIONS TO PROVIDE FREE, OPEN–SOURCE
PHONICS LEARNING MATERIALS TO BE USED BY ADULTS TO TUTOR STUDENTS IN
THE STATE.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(E) (1) AN OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS ORGANIZATION MAY SUBMIT AN
APPLICATION FOR A GRANT ON THE FORM THAT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES.

(2) AN APPLICATION FOR A GRANT SHALL INCLUDE A PLAN TO
ENSURE THAT THE OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS ORGANIZATION IS ABLE TO PROVIDE
FREE, OPEN–SOURCE PHONICS LEARNING MATERIALS TO ENABLE THAT:

(I) ARE CONSISTENT WITH BEST PRACTICES IN LITERACY
EDUCATION, INCLUDING THE SCIENCE OF READING; AND

(II) ENABLE ADULTS TO TUTOR STUDENTS IN THE STATE.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DISBURSE GRANTS TO OPEN–SOURCE
PHONICS ORGANIZATIONS.

(F) PERIODICALLY, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REVIEW THE OPEN–SOURCE
PHONICS LEARNING MATERIALS PROVIDED UNDER THIS SECTION TO ENSURE THE
MATERIALS ARE CONSISTENT WITH BEST PRACTICES IN LITERACY EDUCATION,
INCLUDING THE SCIENCE OF READING.

~~(F)~~ (G) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025, AND EVERY OTHER YEAR
THEREAFTER, REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF
THE PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE; AND

(2) COLLECT STATISTICS AND OTHER INFORMATION NECESSARY FOR
THIS PURPOSE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 270

(G) (H) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $150,000 TO THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3