START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 743

Chapter 743

(House Bill 404)

AN ACT concerning

~~Law~~ ~~Enforcement~~ Public Safety – Wellness Checks – Requirements
(Gabriel’s Law)

FOR the purpose of requiring a law enforcement agency ~~or~~ ~~fire,~~ ~~rescue,~~ ~~or~~ ~~emergency~~
~~medical~~ ~~services~~ ~~entity~~ that receives a certain request for a wellness check of an
individual to ~~immediately~~ conduct a wellness check or submit a request for the
relevant law enforcement agency ~~or~~ ~~fire,~~ ~~rescue,~~ ~~or~~ ~~emergency~~ ~~medical~~ ~~services~~ ~~entity~~
to conduct a wellness check without unreasonable delay; requiring a fire, rescue, or
emergency medical services entity to conduct the wellness check simultaneously with
the law enforcement agency if the request concerns a life–threatening condition; and
generally relating to law enforcement agencies, fire, rescue, or emergency medical
services entities, and wellness checks.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–531 ~~and~~ ~~7–405~~
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

3–531.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “INTERESTED PARTY” MEANS A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER, AS
DEFINED IN § 19–144(3) OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE, OR ANOTHER
INTERESTED PERSON WHO HAS SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO INFORM A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OF ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL’S HEALTH–RELATED CONDITION
OR CIRCUMSTANCE THAT REPRESENTS A LIFE–THREATENING EMERGENCY SAFETY
CONCERN OF THE INDIVIDUAL.

(2) (3) “QUALIFIED REQUEST” MEANS AN ORAL OR WRITTEN
REQUEST THAT INCLUDES ~~SUFFICIENT~~ CREDIBLE INFORMATION REGARDING A
SPECIFIC SAFETY LIFE–THREATENING CONCERN FOR IMMEDIATE ACTION OR
RESPONSE OF A LIFE–THREATENING CONDITION.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 743 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) (4) “WELLNESS CHECK” MEANS AN IN–PERSON VISIT BY A LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER CONCERNING THE WELL–BEING OF AN INDIVIDUAL.

(B) (1) IF SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, IF A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY RECEIVES A QUALIFIED REQUEST FROM AN INTERESTED
PARTY FOR A WELLNESS CHECK OF AN INDIVIDUAL LOCATED IN THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY’S JURISDICTION, THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY SHALL
~~IMMEDIATELY~~ CONDUCT A WELLNESS CHECK OF THE INDIVIDUAL WITHOUT
UNREASONABLE DELAY.

(2) IF SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, IF A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY RECEIVES A QUALIFIED REQUEST FROM AN INTERESTED
PARTY FOR A WELLNESS CHECK OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS NOT LOCATED IN THE
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY’S JURISDICTION, THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
SHALL ~~IMMEDIATELY~~ SUBMIT A REQUEST TO THE RELEVANT LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY IN THE STATE OR ANOTHER STATE TO CONDUCT A WELLNESS CHECK OF
THE INDIVIDUAL WITHOUT UNREASONABLE DELAY.

(C) IF THE INTERESTED PARTY STATES IN THE QUALIFIED REQUEST THAT
THERE IS A CONCERN FOR A LIFE–THREATENING CONDITION, THEN A FIRE, RESCUE,
OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY SHALL CONDUCT THE WELLNESS CHECK
SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

(C) (D) A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY AND, IF APPLICABLE, A FIRE,
RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY, THAT RECEIVES A QUALIFIED
REQUEST UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF ~~SUBSECTION~~
(B) OF THIS SECTION REGARDLESS OF WHERE THE INDIVIDUAL OR ENTITY
INTERESTED PARTY MAKING THE QUALIFIED REQUEST IS LOCATED.

~~7–405.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “INTERESTED PARTY” MEANS A HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONER, AS
DEFINED IN § 19–144(3) OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE, OR ANOTHER
INTERESTED PERSON WHO HAS SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO INFORM A FIRE,
RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY OF ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL’S
HEALTH–RELATED CONDITION OR CIRCUMSTANCE THAT REPRESENTS A
~~LIFE–THREATENING~~ ~~EMERGENCY.~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 743

(3) “QUALIFIED REQUEST” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3–531 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

(4) “WELLNESS CHECK” MEANS AN IN–PERSON VISIT BY A
FIREFIGHTER, A RESCUE SQUAD MEMBER, OR EMERGENCY SERVICES PERSONNEL
CONCERNING THE WELL–BEING OF AN INDIVIDUAL.

(B) (1) IF A FIRE, RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY
~~RECEIVES~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INTERESTED~~ ~~PARTY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~WELLNESS~~
CHECK OF AN INDIVIDUAL LOCATED IN THE FIRE, RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICES ENTITY’S JURISDICTION, THE FIRE, RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL
~~SERVICES~~ ~~ENTITY~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~A~~ ~~WELLNESS~~ ~~CHECK~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~
WITHOUT UNREASONABLE DELAY.

(2) IF A FIRE, RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY
~~RECEIVES~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INTERESTED~~ ~~PARTY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~WELLNESS~~
CHECK OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS NOT LOCATED IN THE FIRE, RESCUE, OR
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY’S JURISDICTION, THE FIRE, RESCUE, OR
~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~ENTITY~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~SUBMIT~~ ~~A~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
RELEVANT FIRE, RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY IN THIS
STATE OR ANOTHER STATE TO CONDUCT A WELLNESS CHECK ON THE INDIVIDUAL
WITHOUT UNREASONABLE DELAY.

(C) A FIRE, RESCUE, OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ENTITY THAT
~~RECEIVES~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~MEET~~ ~~THE~~
REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION REGARDLESS OF WHERE THE
INTERESTED PARTY MAKING THE QUALIFIED REQUEST IS LOCATED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3