START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 472 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 472 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - School Mapping Data Program - Established 
 
 
This bill creates the School Mapping Data Program in the Maryland Center for School 
Safety (MCSS) to provide funds to local school systems to produce school mapping data 
for each public school in the county, including charter schools. The Interagency 
Commission on School Construction (IAC) must adopt facility mapping standards for the 
uniform mapping of the physical attributes of public schools. The bill authorizes the School 
Safety Subcabinet to use funds in the Safe Schools Fund to make grants to local school 
systems under the program. Under the Public Information Act (PIA), a custodian must deny 
inspection of any record disclosing school mapping data produced under the bill. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MCSS and IAC can implement the bill with existing budgeted 
resources. However, fewer funds from the Safe Schools Fund may be available for other 
authorized purposes, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
 
Local Effect:  No direct effect on local finances. Nonetheless, to the extent that a local 
school system applies for and receives a grant under the program, local revenues and 
expenditures increase. However, fewer funds may be available for currently authorized 
purposes. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 472/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Local school systems must cooperate with IAC in the development of 
uniform mapping standards and contribute data to IAC as requested. They may also, in 
consultation with local law enforcement agencies, apply to the School Safety Subcabinet 
for funds to produce school mapping data. Any mapping data produced with grant funds 
must comply with the mapping standards and: 
 
 
be compatible with specified software platforms without requiring the purchase of 
additional software or charging a fee to access the data; 
 
be in a printable format and, if requested, in a digital file format that can be 
integrated into interactive mobile platforms; 
 
be verified for accuracy by a walk-through of the school building and grounds; 
 
be oriented true north; 
 
be overlaid on current aerial imagery; 
 
contain site specific labeling, as specified; and 
 
be overlaid with gridded X and Y coordinates. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Center for School Safety 
 
Chapter 372 of 2013 established MCSS as an independent unit within State government 
under the direction of a governing board chaired by the State Superintendent of Schools. It 
mandated that the Governor include $500,000 annually for the center’s operations. 
Chapter 30 of 2018, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act, made MCSS an independent unit 
within the Maryland State Department of Education under the direction of the School 
Safety Subcabinet, consisting of the following individuals or their designees:   
 
 
the State Superintendent of Schools; 
 
the Secretary of Health; 
 
the Secretary of State Police; 
 
the Attorney General; 
 
the Secretary of the Department of Disabilities; and 
 
the Executive Director of the Interagency Committee on School Construction. 
 
Chapter 30 also increased the mandated appropriation for MCSS’s operations to 
$2.0 million annually. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 472/ Page 3 
School Safety Subcabinet 
 
The School Safety Subcabinet consists of the following individuals or their designees:   
 
 
the State Superintendent of Schools; 
 
the Secretary of Health; 
 
the Secretary of State Police; 
 
the Attorney General; 
 
the Secretary of the Department of Disabilities; and 
 
the Executive Director of the Interagency Commission on School Construction. 
 
The State Superintendent or designee chairs the subcabinet, and the Executive Director of 
MCSS provides staff. 
 
Safe Schools Fund 
 
The Safe Schools Fund is administered by the subcabinet, which must establish procedures 
for local school systems and law enforcement agencies to apply for grants from the fund. 
The purpose of the fund is to provide grants to local school systems to enhance school 
safety, and it may be used only for that purpose, including:   
 
 
conducting training for students and school personnel on de-escalation situations 
and identifying and reporting behaviors of concern; 
 
conducting training of assessment teams; 
 
conducting school safety evaluations; 
 
establishing formal and anonymous mechanisms for reporting safety concerns; 
 
reimbursing local law enforcement agencies for School Resource Officer (SRO) 
training; 
 
enrolling school security employees in specified training; 
 
developing plans to deliver school-based behavioral health and other wraparound 
services to specified students; 
 
outreaching to the broader school community to improve school safety; 
 
providing information to students and parents on traveling safely to and from 
school; and 
 
assisting local school systems to provide and monitor traffic control measures in the 
vicinity of the school. 
 
The fund consists of:   
 
 
$600,000 paid annually to the fund from fines collected from uninsured motorists; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 472/ Page 4 
 
$10.0 million for grants to local school systems and/or law enforcement agencies to 
provide adequate law enforcement coverage and/or SROs for public schools; 
 
money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; 
 
money from any other source; and 
 
interest earnings. 
 
Public Information Act  
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
 
Required Denials 
 
A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a public record if (1) the 
public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the inspection would be contrary 
to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the Maryland Rules, or an order of a court 
of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for specified personal and confidential 
records and information, including, for example, personnel and student records, hospital 
records, specified medical and financial information, and shielded criminal and police 
records. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not affect total funding for the Safe Schools Fund, 
which, as noted above, currently has two main funding sources:  $10 million for adequate 
law enforcement coverage for public schools; and $600,000 available for 10 authorized 
purposes (the bill adds one more). Therefore, to the extent that the subcabinet awards grants 
to local school systems for school mapping data, fewer funds are available for other 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 472/ Page 5 
authorized purposes. If all available funds are used for school mapping grants, an average 
of $25,000 is available for each of 24 local school systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 540 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Montgomery County; 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Center for School Safety; Department of State Police; Baltimore 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 24, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5