START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 476 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 476 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Forensic Genetic Genealogical DNA Analysis and Search - 
Applicability for Deceased and Missing Individuals 
 
 
This bill exempts from statutory provisions relating to the use of forensic genetic 
genealogical DNA analysis and search (FGGS), FGGS conducted solely for the purpose of 
identifying an individual who is (1) deceased or (2) the subject of a missing person report 
filed with a law enforcement agency and whose whereabouts are unknown. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  FGGS means the forensic genetic genealogical DNA analysis of biological 
material using single-nucleotide polymorphisms or other sequencing techniques to develop 
a forensic genetic genealogical (FGG) profile; a subsequent search using the FGG profile 
in a publicly available open-data personal genomics database or a direct-to-consumer 
genetic genealogy service to find individuals related to the source of the FGG profile; and 
a genealogical search using public records and other lawful means to obtain information in 
accordance with statutory requirements. 
 
Generally, FGGS may not be initiated without judicial authorization and without certifying 
before the court that the forensic sample and the criminal case meet specified criteria. If an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 476/ Page 2 
FGGS is certified in accordance with specified criteria, the court must authorize the 
initiation of the FGGS. 
 
As part of this process, a law enforcement agent must submit a sworn affidavit, with 
prosecutorial approval, asserting specified facts regarding the crime being investigated, 
testing that has already been conducted on the forensic sample, and the progress of the 
investigation. FGGS is restricted to direct-to-consumer or publicly available open data 
personal genomics databases meeting specified notice requirements. There are informed 
consent requirements that must be met before law enforcement can obtain a DNA sample 
from a third party to assist in FGGS. Law enforcement may not collect a covert reference 
sample for an FGGS investigation from any third-party individual who has refused consent. 
However, investigators may seek authorization to obtain a covert sample from a third party 
if obtaining informed consent from the third party presents specified risks to the 
investigation and the third party has not already refused informed consent. The fear that a 
third party will refuse informed consent may not constitute the basis for seeking a covert 
sample. The person obtaining the informed consent must have training from a genetic 
counselor approved by the Office of Health Care Quality, as specified. 
 
Law enforcement seeking to collect a covert DNA sample from a potential putative 
perpetrator or a third party must meet specified criteria, including (1) required notification 
to the authorizing court prior to collection of the covert sample; (2) with respect to a covert 
sample from a third party, an affidavit submitted by investigative authorities to the court 
that seeking informed consent from a third party presents specified risks to the 
investigation; and (3) a proffer by investigative authorities to the court of their plan to 
collect the sample without unduly intrusive surveillance and invasions of privacy. Law 
enforcement must also follow requirements regarding testing, use, and destruction of the 
sample. The law enforcement officer conducting the covert collection must report back to 
the court every 30 days about the progress of the covert collection, as specified. Absent a 
showing of good cause, efforts to collect a covert sample must cease after six months. 
 
DNA samples and genetic genealogy information must be destroyed in compliance with 
specified requirements. A genetic genealogist participating in an FGGS must turn over to 
investigators all records and materials collected in the course of the FGGS on the 
completion of an FGGS investigation and a genetic genealogist may not keep any records 
or materials. In addition, a genetic genealogist must ensure that specified records have been 
deleted or removed from any FGG website. Further, the prosecutor must retain and disclose 
any records or materials as required under the Maryland Constitution, U.S. Constitution, 
and the rules of discovery under Maryland Rules 4-262 and 4-263, but the prosecutor may 
not otherwise use or share the records or materials. 
 
A person who discloses genealogical or DNA information without authorization of a court 
order is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 476/ Page 3 
a $5,000 maximum fine. A person who willfully fails to destroy DNA and genetic 
information as required is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 
one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine. A person whose genetic genealogy information, 
FGG profile, or DNA sample is wrongfully disclosed, collected, or maintained in violation 
of statutory provisions has a private right of action under relevant State law guiding tort 
claims, and is entitled to minimum liquidated damages of $5,000 for a violation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 549 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s 
counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; 
Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of State Police; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3