START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 361

Chapter 361

(House Bill 426)

AN ACT concerning

Places of Public Accommodation – Motion Picture Houses – Captioning

FOR the purpose of requiring all motion picture houses to offer closed movie captioning for
each screening of a motion picture; requiring that certain motion picture houses
provide open movie captioning for at least certain screenings each week; and
generally relating to motion picture houses as places of public accommodation.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 20–306
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

20–306.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Closed captioning” means a transcript or dialog of the audio portion of
a television program OR MOTION PICTURE that is displayed on a television receiver screen
OR A MOTION PICTURE SCREEN when the user activates the feature.

(3) “CLOSED MOVIE CAPTIONING” MEANS THE WRITTEN DISPLAY OF
THE DIALOGUE AND CERTAIN NONSPEECH INFORMATION OF A MOTION PICTURE
THAT IS GENERALLY DELIVERED TO INDIVIDUAL PATRONS ON A CAPTIONING
DEVICE IN A MOTION PICTURE HOUSE.

(3) (4) “Closed–captioning television receiver” means a receiver of
television programming that has the ability to display closed captioning, including a
television, digital set top box, and any other technology capable of displaying closed
captioning.

(4) (5) “OPEN MOVIE CAPTIONING” MEANS A TRANSCRIPT OR
DIALOG OF THE AUDIO PORTION OF A MOTION PICTURE THAT IS DISPLAYED ON A
MOTION PICTURE SCREEN THAT CANNOT BE TURNED OFF BY A VIEWER.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 361 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(4)] (5) (6) “Public area” means a part of a place of public accommodation
that is open to the general public.

[(5)] (6) (7) “Regular hours” means the hours of any day in which a place of
public accommodation is open to members of the general public.

(b) (1) On request, a place of public accommodation may not fail to keep closed
captioning activated on any closed–captioning television receiver that is in use during
regular hours in any public area.

[(c)] (2) This [section] SUBSECTION does not require a place of public
accommodation to make closed captioning available in a public area of the place of public
accommodation if:

[(1)] (I) no television receiver of any kind is available in the public area;
or

[(2)] (II) the only public television receiver available in the public area is
not a closed–captioning television receiver.

(C) (1) A PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION THAT IS A MOTION
PICTURE HOUSE SHALL PROVIDE ACCESS TO FULLY OPERATIONAL AND
WELL–MAINTAINED CLOSED–CAPTIONING CLOSED MOVIE CAPTIONING
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE GENERAL PUBLIC FOR EACH SCREENING OF A MOTION
PICTURE THAT IS PRODUCED AND ~~OFFERED~~ AVAILABLE WITH CLOSED MOVIE
CAPTIONING AS REQUIRED BY TITLE III OF THE FEDERAL AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT.

(2) (I) THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY DURING THE FIRST 7
~~DAYS~~ ~~AFTER~~ ~~A~~ ~~MOTION~~ ~~PICTURE~~ ~~PREMIERES~~ TO MOTION PICTURES SCREENED
FEWER THAN FIVE TIMES FROM FRIDAY THROUGH THURSDAY IN A 7–DAY PERIOD
IN THE MOTION PICTURE HOUSE.

(II) THIS PARAGRAPH APPLIES ONLY TO THE FIRST 3 WEEKS
AFTER A MOTION PICTURE PREMIERES IN THE MOTION PICTURE HOUSE.

(II) (III) A IF A MOTION PICTURE IS PRODUCED AND
AVAILABLE TO MOTION PICTURE HOUSES WITH OPEN MOVIE CAPTIONING, A PLACE
OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION THAT CONTROLS, OPERATES, OWNS, OR LEASES AT
~~LEAST~~ ~~TWO~~ A MOTION PICTURE ~~HOUSES~~ HOUSE WITH EIGHT OR MORE SCREENS IN
THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE OPEN MOVIE CAPTIONING FOR AT LEAST TWO
SCREENINGS FOR EACH MOTION PICTURE IT SCREENS EACH WEEK ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~
~~PRODUCED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OFFERED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~CLOSED~~ ~~CAPTIONING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AT~~ ~~LEAST~~ ~~TWO~~
SCREENINGS EACH WEEK.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 361

(IV) BEGINNING 3 WEEKS AFTER A MOTION PICTURE
PREMIERES, A PLACE OF ACCOMMODATION THAT CONTROLS, OPERATES, OWNS, OR
LEASES A MOTION PICTURE HOUSE WITH EIGHT OR MORE SCREENS IN THE STATE
MAY PROVIDE OPEN MOVIE CAPTIONING WITH REASONABLE NOTICE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3