START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 497 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 497 
(Delegate Hornberger, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Hunting - Nonresident Sika Deer Stamp - Fee Alteration 
 
   
This bill increases the fee for a nonresident sika deer stamp from $25 to $200. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Under one set of assumptions, net special fund revenues increase by an 
estimated $332,200 annually beginning in FY 2025, and federal fund revenues increase by 
an estimated $996,500 annually beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. Expenditures 
are not directly affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$332,200 
$332,200 
$332,200 
$332,200 
$332,200 
FF Revenue 
$0 
$996,500 
$996,500 
$996,500 
$996,500 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$332,200 
$1,328,600 
$1,328,600 
$1,328,600 
$1,328,600  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  With certain exceptions, a person must have a Maryland resident or 
nonresident hunting license to hunt or attempt to hunt all legal game birds and mammals 
during the appropriate season in the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 497/ Page 2 
Resident and Nonresident Hunting Licenses 
 
Resident and nonresident hunting licenses enable a holder to hunt game birds and mammals 
during any appropriate season without the purchase of additional stamps, unless the holder 
is hunting migratory game birds, wild waterfowl, sika deer, or any deer during bow and 
arrow season or muzzle loader season (in which cases specified stamps are required). The 
purchase of a resident or nonresident hunting license does not authorize the purchaser to 
hunt furbearers or black bears. Each hunting license is valid from the date of issuance 
through July 31 the following year. The annual fee for a resident hunting license is $35, 
while the annual fee for a nonresident hunting license is $160.  
 
Sika Deer Stamp 
 
A sika deer stamp, in addition to a hunting license and any weapon-specific stamp, is 
required to hunt sika deer. For a Maryland resident, the stamp costs $10; for a nonresident, 
the cost is $25. 
 
State Revenues:  Net special fund revenues to the Wildlife Management and Protection 
Fund increase by an estimated $332,160 annually beginning in fiscal 2025 due to the fee 
increase. This estimate is based on information provided by the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) on the sale of sika deer stamps during the 2023-2024 hunting season. 
The information and assumptions used in calculating the estimate are stated below:  
 
 
13,000 sika deer stamps were sold for the 2023-2024 hunting season, of which 
approximately 3,200 were purchased by nonresident hunters; 
 
53% of nonresident hunters only hunt sika deer; 
 
due to the fee increase, (1) an estimated 25% of the nonresident hunters who only 
hunt sika deer no longer purchase a sika deer stamp or a hunting license and (2) an 
estimated 25% of nonresident hunters who purchase a sika deer stamp but also hunt 
other game birds or mammals no longer purchase a sika deer stamp (but continue to 
purchase a hunting license); 
 
the remaining 2,400 nonresident hunters continue to purchase a sika deer stamp and 
are subject to the $175 fee increase; and 
 
the sale of nonresident sika deer stamps (and hunting licenses) would otherwise 
remain constant in future years. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that the extent to which the bill’s fee increase 
will cause some hunters to no longer hunt for sika deer in the State is uncertain and may 
vary from the 25% assumption described above. Accordingly, the net increase in special 
fund revenues may vary. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 497/ Page 3 
Also, this estimate does not reflect any loss in revenue from any weapon-specific stamps 
the nonresidents who no longer hunt at all in Maryland would otherwise purchase; 
accordingly, the net special fund revenue increase could be slightly less.  
 
In addition, federal fund revenues increase by an estimated $996,480 annually beginning 
in fiscal 2026 from federal matching grant funding for conservation-related work. DNR 
advises that federal funding is awarded at a 1:3 ratio; for every $1 that DNR’s Wildlife and 
Heritage Service (WHS) receives directly in increased fee revenue and spends on eligible 
conservation-related work, WHS receives $3 in federal grant funding through the Federal 
Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act. DNR applies for the federal grant funding at the end of 
each fiscal year, so the increase in fee revenues in fiscal 2025 drives an increase in federal 
fund revenues in fiscal 2026. To the extent the increase in special fund revenues varies 
from the above estimate, the increase in federal fund revenues varies accordingly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced with the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 508 (Senators Bailey and Hester) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 15, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3