START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 496 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 496 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Sexual Crimes - Definition of Consent and Repeal of Force 
 
 
This bill, by repealing force or threat of force as an element of the crime, establishes that 
it is second-degree rape under § 3-304 (a)(1) of the Criminal Law Article for a person to 
engage in vaginal intercourse or a sexual act with another person without the consent of 
the other person. The bill also defines “consent” for purposes of Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the 
Criminal Law Article (sexual crimes); establishes that the existence of consent, lack of 
consent, or withdrawal of consent must be determined based on a totality of the 
circumstances; and specifies other factors related to consent as an element of a sexual 
crime. By October 1 each year beginning in 2024, the Maryland Judiciary must report 
specified data regarding charges and convictions for specified sexual crimes from the 
preceding calendar year to the General Assembly. The reporting requirement terminates 
April 30, 2029. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by at least $7,000 in 
fiscal 2025 only for information technology costs, as discussed below. General fund 
expenditures may also increase significantly depending on the bill’s overall effect on 
prosecutions, convictions, and incarcerations for second-degree rape, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances, including the workloads of State’s Attorneys’ offices. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 496/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Consent – Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article (Sexual Crimes)  
 
“Consent” means the clear and voluntary agreement by an individual to engage in vaginal 
intercourse, a sexual act, or sexual contact.  
 
The existence of consent, lack of consent, or withdrawal of consent must be determined 
based on a totality of the circumstances, including the words and conduct of the victim and 
the defendant. The bill specifies the following additional factors related to consent as an 
element of a sexual crime:   
 
 
consent may be withdrawn before or during vaginal intercourse, a sexual act, or 
sexual contact;  
 
the lack of consent may be communicated through words or conduct; 
 
a current or previous dating, social, or sexual relationship by itself does not 
constitute consent; 
 
submission as a result of fear, threat, or coercion does not constitute consent if the 
individual alleged to have performed the prohibited act knows or reasonably should 
know that the victim would submit as a result of fear, threat, or coercion; and 
 
an individual’s manner of dress does not constitute consent. 
 
The aforementioned provisions may not be construed to require documentation of consent. 
 
Reporting Requirement  
 
By October 1, 2024, and by October 1 of each year thereafter, the Maryland Judiciary must 
report to the General Assembly data for the preceding calendar year on the number of 
charges filed in the State and the number of convictions in the State for violations of 
§§ 3-303 through 3-308 of the Criminal Law Article (rape and sexual offenses). The data 
must be disaggregated by the modality by which the offense was committed, county, and 
offender age, race, and sex. As noted above, this statutory reporting requirement terminates 
April 30, 2029.   
 
Current Law:  Section 3-304 of the Criminal Law Article (second-degree rape) prohibits 
a person from engaging in vaginal intercourse or a sexual act with another:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 496/ Page 3 
 
by force, or the threat of force, without the consent of the other; 
 
if the victim is a substantially cognitively impaired individual, a mentally 
incapacitated individual, or a physically helpless individual, and the person 
performing the act knows or reasonably should know that the victim is a 
substantially cognitively impaired individual, a mentally incapacitated individual, 
or a physically helpless individual; or 
 
if the victim is younger than age 14, and the person performing the act is at least 
4 years older than the victim. 
 
Second-degree rape is a felony and is generally punishable by imprisonment for up to 
20 years. However, a person at least age 18 who commits any of the aforementioned 
prohibited acts with a child younger than age 13 is subject to imprisonment for not less 
than 15 years and not exceeding life. The 15-year mandatory minimum sentence is 
nonsuspendable and nonparolable. The State must comply with specified notice 
requirements if it intends to seek the 15-year mandatory minimum sentence, and the 
mandatory minimum sentence does not apply if the State fails to comply with specified 
notice requirements. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Judiciary Reporting  
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by at least $7,000 in fiscal 2025 only 
for information technology costs related to reporting on data that currently exists. However, 
the Judiciary advises that certain offenses and subsections of the Criminal Law Article do 
not have separate Criminal Justice Information System (CJIS) codes, making it impossible 
to differentiate between these offenses without creating new CJIS codes. According to the 
Judiciary, if the creation of new CJIS codes is necessary to meet the bill’s reporting 
requirement (1) the CJIS codes will only apply prospectively and (2) additional 
expenditures beyond what is contemplated above will be necessary.  
 
The Judiciary also advises that further clarification of the bill’s reporting requirement is 
necessary before it can proceed. The Judiciary notes that (1) while it does have information 
on a defendant’s date of birth, it does not store the defendant’s age at the time of the 
offense; (2) the term “offender” includes only individuals with a guilty disposition; and 
(3) the term “modality” is unclear.   
 
Alteration of the Elements for the Crime of Second-Degree Rape 
 
General fund expenditures may increase significantly if the bill’s alteration of the 
second-degree rape statute results in more people being committed to State correctional 
facilities and significantly alters workloads for the Office of the Public Defender (OPD). 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 496/ Page 4 
The number of people convicted of second-degree rape as altered under the bill cannot be 
reliably predicted at this time and is dependent upon charging, prosecuting, and sentencing 
practices in the State. 
 
The Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy reports that for 
fiscal 2023, 76 individuals were sentenced to 111 total counts of second-degree rape in 
violation of § 3-304 (all provisions). 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,110 per month. Excluding overhead, the average cost of housing a new 
State incarcerated individual (including health care costs) is about $1,244 per month. 
Excluding all health care (which is a fixed cost under the current contract), the average 
variable costs total $336 per month. 
 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
OPD advises that the bill increases agency caseloads, necessitating the hiring of 
three additional attorneys, one secretary, and one licensed certified social worker-clinical 
(known as LCSW-C) at a cost of $476,347 in fiscal 2025 and increasing to $654,224 by 
fiscal 2029. As mentioned above, the increase in caseloads to OPD is dependent upon 
charging practices in the State. Thus, the Department of Legislative Services advises that 
without actual experience under the bill, it is difficult to determine that actual increase in 
the workloads for OPD. Nevertheless, general fund expenditures for OPD likely increase 
beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association advises that the bill 
does not have a fiscal or operational effect on State’s Attorneys’ offices. 
 
Additional Comments:  The only sexual offense for which a lack of consent is the only 
element for the crime is sexual offense in the fourth degree under § 3-308 of the Criminal 
Law Article. 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 496/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 412 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 758 (Senator Kelly, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland 
State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 20, 2024 
Enrolled - April 24, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5