START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 475 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 475 
(Delegate Korman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Open-Source Phonics Matching Grant Program - Establishment 
(Open-Source Phonics Matching Grant Program Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Open-Source Phonics Matching Grant Program within the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to provide matching funds to 
open-source phonics organizations to provide free, open-source phonics learning materials 
to be used by adults to tutor students in the State. MSDE must (1) distribute grants to 
open-source phonics organizations; (2) periodically review the materials, as specified; and 
(3) by December 1, 2025, and every other year thereafter, collect statistics and other 
information and report to the General Assembly on the effectiveness of the program. For 
each fiscal year, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of 
$150,000 to the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Beginning in FY 2025, general fund expenditures increase by $150,000 
annually for the matching grant program. Funding in FY 2025 is discretionary. MSDE can 
likely administer the program using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. This 
bill establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
150,000 
Net Effect 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000) 
($150,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system operations and finances are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 475/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An open-source phonics organization may submit an application for a 
grant on the form required by MSDE. An application for a grant must include a plan to 
ensure that the open-source phonics organization is able to provide free, open-source 
phonics learning materials that are consistent with best practices in literacy education, 
including the science of reading and enable adults to tutor students in the State. 
 
Periodically, MSDE must review the open-source phonics learning materials to ensure the 
materials are consistent with best practices in literacy education, including the science of 
reading. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 512 of 2019 requires, beginning with the 2020-2021 school year, 
each local school board to ensure that specified elementary school students are screened to 
identify if the student is at risk for reading difficulties. If the screening results indicate that 
the student is at risk of reading difficulties, the local board must provide supplemental 
reading instruction, as appropriate, and provide a notification letter to the student’s parent 
as specified. These requirements apply to students newly required to be screened under the 
bill. MSDE must develop and update resources for local boards every four years and 
provide technical support to local boards allowing them to provide training opportunities 
annually. Local boards must report annually to MSDE. 
 
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires that a child with 
disabilities be provided a free appropriate public education in the least restrictive 
environment from birth through the end of the school year in which the student turns 
21 years old, in accordance with an individualized family service plan (IFSP) or an 
individualized education program (IEP) specific to the individual needs of the child. An 
IFSP is for children with disabilities from birth up to age 3, and up to age 5 under 
Maryland’s Extended IFSP Option if a parent chooses the option. An IEP is for students 
with disabilities from age 3 through 21. Local school systems are required to make a free 
appropriate public education available to students with disabilities from age 3 through 21. 
However, the State, under its supervisory authority required by IDEA, has the ultimate 
responsibility for ensuring that this obligation is met. The State Board of Education (SBE) 
must adopt, as regulations, standards for the identification, evaluation, educational 
placement, and the provision of a free appropriate public education of each child in this 
State who has begun the school year under the age of 21 and is found to need special 
education and related services, whether or not the child is receiving nonduplicative services 
from another governmental agency. 
 
In January 2024, the SBE resolved that all literacy instruction in Maryland public schools 
must be aligned to the Science of Reading, including structured literacy, by the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 475/ Page 3 
2024-2025 school year. MSDE advises that the Science of Reading is in alignment with 
phonics programs. 
 
Additional Comment:  Although the stated purpose of the program is to provide matching 
grants, the bill does not require that grant applications specify a source of matching funds 
or that grant recipients provide matching funds.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland State 
Library Agency; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3