START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 431 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 431 
(Delegate Pruski, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Department of Veterans Affairs - Renaming and Deputy Secretary of Military 
Family Policy and Programs 
 
 
This bill renames the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) to be the 
Department of Veterans and Military Families (DVMF) and the Secretary of Veterans 
Affairs to be the Secretary of Veterans and Military Families. The Secretary must appoint 
a Deputy Secretary of Military Family Policy and Programs. The deputy secretary (1) must 
serve at the pleasure of the Secretary; (2) is entitled to the salary provided in the State 
budget; and (3) must direct policy and programs related to military families. The bill also 
makes a series of conforming changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDVA general fund expenditures increase by $178,600 in FY 2025 to hire 
a deputy secretary and for supplies related to renaming the department. The FY 2025 
budget includes $153,600 in general funds for the new deputy secretary position, 
contingent on enactment of House Bill 431 of 2024; $25,000 is also provided for supplies. 
Future years reflect annualization, elimination of one-time costs, and ongoing costs. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
178,600 
170,300 
177,800 
185,500 
193,600 
Net Effect 
($178,600) 
($170,300) 
($177,800) 
($185,500) 
($193,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 431/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  DVMF is the successor of MDVA. In every law, executive order, rule, 
regulation, policy, or document created by an official, an employee, or a unit of the State, 
the names and titles of those agencies and officials mean the names and titles of the 
successor agency or official. 
 
The bill does not affect the term of office of an appointed or elected member of any 
commission, office, department, agency, or other unit. An individual who is a member of 
a unit on the bill’s effective date must remain for the balance of the term to which appointed 
or elected, unless the member sooner dies, resigns, or is removed under provisions of law. 
 
The bill specifies that the continuity of every commission, office, department, agency, or 
other unit is retained by MDVA. All files, furniture, fixtures, records, other properties, 
credits, liabilities, and obligations are also retained by MDVA. 
 
Documents, including letterhead and business cards, reflecting the renaming of MDVA to 
DVMF may not be used until all documents already in print have been used. The publisher 
of the Annotated Code of Maryland is required to change cross references and terminology 
throughout the code and to describe each change in an editor’s note. 
 
Current Law:  MDVA delivers services and programs to assist Maryland veterans, their 
families, and survivors in obtaining State, federal, and local benefits provided by law in 
recognition for their service. MDVA assures the quality maintenance of veterans’ 
cemeteries and memorials to honor Maryland veterans. MDVA also manages 
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home, an assisted living and skilled nursing facility for veterans 
and their eligible spouses who are unable to care for themselves due to disability, advancing 
age, or who require nursing home care. Additionally, MDVA engages in public awareness 
and outreach to veterans, their families, and other stakeholders. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by a total of $178,572 in 
fiscal 2025, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective 
date. This estimate reflects the cost (1) of hiring one Deputy Secretary of Military Family 
Policy and Programs and (2) one-time supply expenses related to the renaming and 
rebranding of MDVA to DVMF. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, one-time supply expenses related to the renaming of MDVA, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 431/ Page 3 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$145,646 
One-time Supply Expenses 
25,000 
Operating Expenses 
     7,926 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$178,572 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget includes $25,000 for supplies related to renaming the department. 
In addition, the fiscal 2025 budget includes $153,572 in general funds for a new 
Deputy Secretary for Military Families, contingent on enactment of House Bill 431 of 2024 
(Chapter 12 of 2024).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 411 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 9, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3