START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 471 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 471 
(Delegates Fair and Pruski) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Postelection Procedures 
 
 
This emergency bill makes changes to State election law regarding (1) the process of 
canvassing and certifying election results; (2) the appointment of designees to serve on the 
Board of State Canvassers; and (3) the ascertainment of results by the Governor. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Canvassing and Certification of Election Results 
 
 
Error in Documents or Records 
 
The bill broadens a requirement that a local board of canvassers immediately investigate – 
if it determines that there appears to be an error in the documents or records produced at a 
polling place following an election – to ascertain whether the records or documents are 
correct. Under the bill, the local board of canvassers must investigate if it determines that 
there appears to be an error in any of the documents or records produced during the election 
(not limited to those produced at a polling place) and the investigation must be conducted 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 471/ Page 2 
in consultation with the State Administrator of Elections. Under current law and under the 
bill, the board of canvassers may correct a document or record only in accordance with 
State Board of Elections (SBE) regulations. 
 
 
Dissent Related to Local Certification of Election Results 
 
The bill modifies existing provisions governing the verification of the vote count and 
certification of election results by each board of canvassers. The bill adds a requirement 
that, if a member of a board of canvassers files a specified written statement of dissent 
(described below under Current Law) with the local board of elections, the 
State Administrator must review the dissent and submit it to the Board of State Canvassers 
for a final determination. In place of an existing requirement that SBE maintain a file of 
the written statements, the bill requires SBE to maintain a file of the final determination. 
 
 
State Certification of Election Results 
 
The bill alters provisions governing the preparation and transmittal (to SBE) of certified 
election results by the Board of State Canvassers, so that the board must convene and 
prepare and transmit certified election results to SBE after each election unless the election 
is a special primary election that included a candidate for member of Congress (for which 
election results are prepared and certified by SBE, instead of the board). (Under current 
law, the board must convene only after a presidential primary election, a State general 
election, or a general or special general election that includes a candidate for member of 
Congress.) 
 
The bill also reduces the time within which the board must convene after an election from 
35 days to 30 days. 
 
The bill also authorizes the Board of State Canvassers, as well as SBE when it is certifying 
election results following a special primary election to fill a vacancy in the office of 
Representative in Congress, to reject a statement by a local board of canvassers that the 
Board of State Canvassers (or SBE) determines, based on clear and convincing evidence, 
is inaccurate, and ascertain the accurate election results. The board (or SBE) must prepare 
a distinct written statement of the reasons for the determination, including the evidence on 
which the determination was based, to be transmitted to or filed with (and maintained by) 
SBE. 
 
The State Administrator must transmit the certified election results to the Governor within 
three days after receipt. SBE may adopt regulations governing the certification of election 
results. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 471/ Page 3 
Appointment of Designees to Serve on the Board of State Canvassers 
 
The bill also authorizes the remaining members of the Board of State Canvassers – other 
than the State Treasurer who is currently authorized to appoint a deputy treasurer as 
designee – to appoint designees to serve in their stead as follows: 
 
 
the Secretary of State may appoint a Deputy Secretary of State; 
 
the Comptroller may appoint the Chief Deputy Comptroller; 
 
the Clerk of the Supreme Court of Maryland may appoint the Chief Deputy; and 
 
the Attorney General may appoint the Deputy Attorney General. 
 
The bill also modifies the authorization for the State Treasurer to appoint a designee so that 
the State Treasurer is authorized to appoint the deputy treasurer rather than a deputy 
treasurer. Members of the Board of State Canvassers must submit a designation of a 
designee to the State Administrator at least seven days before the Board of State Canvassers 
convenes. 
 
Ascertainment of Results by the Governor 
 
The bill requires the Governor – when ascertaining and enumerating the number of votes 
cast for candidates in an election, for the purpose of declaring presidential electors or 
congressional candidates to be elected – to ascertain and enumerate the number of votes 
cast for each candidate consistent with the returns of the election received by the Governor 
in accordance with provisions requiring SBE to certify, deliver, and publish election 
results. After ascertaining and enumerating the number of votes for candidates, in addition 
to signing and issuing a proclamation, the Governor must issue and transmit a certificate 
of electors under 3 U.S.C. § 5. The bill also modifies a requirement that the proclamation 
be published in newspapers so that the proclamation instead must be posted on SBE’s 
website. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Canvassing and Certification of Election Results 
 
 
Error in Documents or Records 
 
If a local board of canvassers (a local board of elections after it organizes itself for the 
purpose of canvassing) determines that there appears to be an error in the documents or 
records produced at the polling place following an election, it immediately must investigate 
the matter to ascertain whether the records or documents are correct. The board of 
canvassers may correct a document or record only in accordance with SBE regulations. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 471/ Page 4 
 
Dissent Related to Local Certification of Election Results 
 
Within 10 days after any election, and before certifying the results of the election, each 
local board of canvassers must verify the vote count in accordance with regulations 
prescribed by SBE for the voting system used in the election. Upon completion of the 
verification process, the members of the board of canvassers must (1) certify in writing that 
the election results are accurate and that the vote has been verified and (2) provide copies 
of the election results to the Governor, SBE, and the clerk of the circuit court for the 
appropriate county. 
 
If a member of a board of canvassers dissents from a determination of an election result or 
reasonably believes that the conduct of a local board of elections member or local board 
proceeding was not in compliance with applicable law or regulation or was otherwise 
illegal or irregular, the member must prepare and file with the local board a distinct written 
statement of the reasons for the dissent or concern. SBE must maintain a file of the written 
statements submitted by members of the local boards. 
 
 
Canvassing of Certain Primary Election Results by the State Board of Elections 
 
Following each gubernatorial primary or special primary election to fill a vacancy in the 
office of Representative in Congress, SBE must: 
 
 
convene within two days after the certified official election results are received from 
the local boards;  
 
if a majority of the members of SBE is not present, adjourn for not more than 
one day; 
 
determine which candidates, by the greatest number of votes, have been nominated 
to each office and which questions have received a sufficient number of votes to be 
adopted or approved; and 
 
prepare and certify statewide election results based on the certified copies of the 
statements made by the boards of canvassers. 
 
If a member of SBE dissents from a determination of an election result or reasonably 
believes that the conduct of a member of SBE or the conduct of an SBE proceeding was 
not in compliance with applicable law or regulation or was otherwise illegal or irregular, 
the member must prepare and file with SBE a distinct written statement of the reasons for 
the dissent or concern. SBE must maintain a file of the written statements submitted by 
members of SBE. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 471/ Page 5 
 
Canvassing of Election Results by the Board of State Canvassers 
 
The Board of State Canvassers must: 
 
 
(1) convene only after a presidential primary election, a State general election, or a 
general or special general election that includes a candidate for member of the 
Congress of the United States; (2) convene within 35 days of that election; and (3) if 
a majority of members of the board is not present, adjourn for not more than 
one day; 
 
determine which candidates, by the greatest number of votes, have been elected to 
each office and which questions have received a sufficient number of votes to be 
adopted or approved; 
 
prepare statewide election results for each candidate and question, based on the 
certified copies of the statements made by the local boards of canvassers; and 
 
prepare and transmit a certified statement of the election results to SBE. 
 
If a member of the Board of State Canvassers dissents from a determination of an election 
result or reasonably believes that the conduct of a board member or board proceeding was 
not in compliance with applicable law or regulation or was otherwise illegal or irregular, 
the member must prepare and transmit a distinct written statement of the reasons for the 
dissent or concern to SBE. SBE must maintain a file of the written statements submitted 
by members of the Board of State Canvassers. 
 
Board of State Canvassers Membership 
 
The Board of State Canvassers consists of: 
 
 
the Secretary of State; 
 
the Comptroller; 
 
the State Treasurer; 
 
the Clerk of the Supreme Court of Maryland; and 
 
the Attorney General. 
 
The State Treasurer may appoint, as the Treasurer’s designee, a deputy treasurer to serve 
on the Board of State Canvassers. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 471/ Page 6 
Ascertainment of Results by the Governor 
 
 
State Law 
 
The Governor must, on receipt of the returns of an election for electors to choose a 
President and Vice President of the United States or of an election to choose a member of 
Congress, (1) ascertain and enumerate the number of votes cast for each candidate for 
President and Vice President of the United States and declare elected the presidential 
electors of the candidates who receive the highest number of votes and (2) in each contest, 
ascertain and enumerate the number of votes cast for each candidate voted for as a member 
of Congress and declare elected the candidate who receives the highest number of votes. 
 
After ascertaining and enumerating the number of votes for candidates, the Governor must 
sign and issue a proclamation declaring the name of each candidate who is elected and 
cause the proclamation to be published in newspapers. 
 
 
Federal Law 
 
Under 3 U.S.C. § 5, as amended by the Electoral Count Reform Act of 2022 (ECRA), not 
later than six days before the time fixed for the meeting of presidential electors, the 
executive of each state must issue a certificate of ascertainment of appointment of electors, 
pursuant to applicable laws of the state enacted prior to election day. The executive of each 
state must transmit the certificate to the Archivist of the United States immediately after 
its issuance and by the most expeditious method available. 
 
Under 3 U.S.C. § 7, as amended by ECRA, the electors must meet and give their votes on 
the first Tuesday after the second Wednesday in December following their appointment. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 494 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Baltimore, 
Carroll, 
Harford, 
Queen 
Anne’s, 
and  
St. Mary’s counties; Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 471/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7