START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1048

Chapter 1048

(House Bill 464)

AN ACT concerning

Health Occupations – Practice Audiology – Definition

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “practice audiology” for the purposes of certain
provisions of law governing the licensure and regulation of audiologists; and
generally relating to the practice of audiology.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 2–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 2–101(q)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 2–101(r–1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

2–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(q) (1) “Practice audiology” means to[:

~~(1)~~ ~~Apply~~ ~~the~~ ~~principles,~~ ~~methods,~~ ~~and~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~of~~ ~~measurement,~~
~~prediction,~~ ~~evaluation,~~ ~~testing,~~ ~~counseling,~~ ~~consultation,~~ ~~and~~ ~~instruction~~ ~~that~~ ~~relate~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~development~~ ~~and~~ ~~disorders~~ ~~of~~ ~~hearing,~~ ~~vestibular~~ ~~functions,~~ ~~and~~ ~~related~~ ~~language~~ ~~and~~
~~speech~~ ~~disorders,~~ ~~to~~ ~~prevent~~ ~~or~~ ~~modify~~ ~~the~~ ~~disorders~~ ~~or~~ ~~assist~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~in~~ ~~hearing~~ ~~and~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1048 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

auditory and related skills for communication; and] USE ANY MEANS KNOWN IN THE
SCIENCE OF AUDIOLOGY TO:

(I) EVALUATE, DIAGNOSE, MANAGE, AND TREAT AUDITORY OR
VESTIBULAR CONDITIONS IN THE HUMAN EAR;

[(2)] (II) Prescribe, order, sell, dispense, or fit hearing aids to an
individual for the correction or relief of a condition for which hearing aids are worn;

(III) PRESCRIBE, ORDER, SELL, DISPENSE, OR EXTERNALLY FIT
A SOUND PROCESSOR TO AN OSSEO–INTEGRATED DEVICE FOR THE CORRECTION OR
RELIEF OF A CONDITION FOR WHICH OSSEO–INTEGRATED DEVICES ARE WORN; AND

(IV) PRESCRIBE, ORDER, SELL, DISPENSE, OR EXTERNALLY FIT
A SOUND PROCESSOR TO A COCHLEAR IMPLANT FOR THE CORRECTION OR RELIEF
OF A CONDITION FOR WHICH COCHLEAR IMPLANTS ARE WORN.

(2) “PRACTICE AUDIOLOGY” INCLUDES:

(I) THE CONDUCTING OF HEALTH SCREENINGS;

(II) THE REMOVAL OF A FOREIGN BODY FROM THE EXTERNAL
AUDITORY CANAL THAT IS NOT IMPACTED TO THE POINT IT REQUIRES ANESTHESIA;

(III) THE REMOVAL OF CERUMEN FROM THE EXTERNAL
AUDITORY CANAL THAT IS NOT IMPACTED TO THE POINT IT REQUIRES ANESTHESIA;

(IV) THE ORDERING OF CULTURES AND BLOODWORK TESTING
AS IT RELATES TO THE AUDITORY OR VESTIBULAR CONDITIONS IN THE HUMAN EAR;

(V) THE ORDERING AND PERFORMING OF IN–OFFICE,
NONRADIOGRAPHIC SCANNING OR IMAGING OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL;
AND

(VI) THE ORDERING OF RADIOGRAPHIC IMAGING AS IT RELATES
TO THE AUDITORY OR VESTIBULAR CONDITIONS IN THE HUMAN EAR.

(3) “PRACTICE AUDIOLOGY” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) SURGERY USING AN INSTRUMENT, INCLUDING A LASER, A
SCALPEL, A NEEDLE, CAUTERY, A CRYOPROBE, OR A SUTURE, IN WHICH HUMAN
TISSUE IS CUT, BURNED, VAPORIZED, REMOVED, OR OTHERWISE PERMANENTLY

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1048

ALTERED BY MECHANICAL MEANS, LASER, IONIZING RADIATION, ULTRASOUND, OR
OTHER MEANS;

(II) OSSEO–INTEGRATED DEVICE SURGERY;

(III) COCHLEAR IMPLANT SURGERY; OR

(IV) THE PREPARATION, OPERATION, OR PERFORMANCE OF
RADIOGRAPHIC IMAGING.

(R–1) “SOUND PROCESSOR” MEANS A NONSURGICAL, EXTERNAL UNIT THAT
ATTACHES TO AN INTERNAL OSSEO–INTEGRATED DEVICE OR COCHLEAR IMPLANT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Enacted under Article II, § 17(c) of the Maryland Constitution, May 26, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3