START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 950

Chapter 950

(House Bill 468)

AN ACT concerning

Commission to Advance Lithium–Ion Battery Safety in Maryland

FOR the purpose of establishing the Commission to Advance Lithium–Ion Battery Safety
in Maryland; and generally relating to the Commission to Advance Lithium–Ion
Battery Safety in Maryland.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Commission to Advance Lithium–Ion Battery Safety in Maryland.

(b) The Commission consists of the following members:

(1) one representative of the Department of the Environment, appointed
by the Secretary of the Environment;

(2) the following members, appointed by the Director of the Maryland
Energy Administration:

(i) one representative of the Maryland Energy Administration; ~~and~~

(ii) one representative of a lithium–ion battery manufacturer; or a
lithium–ion battery manufacturer trade group; and

(iii) one representative of a vehicle propulsion battery manufacturer;

(3) the State Fire Marshal, or the Fire Marshal’s designee;

(4) one representative of the Power Plant Research Project, appointed by
the Secretary of Natural Resources;

(5) one representative of the Public Service Commission, appointed by the
Chairman of the Public Service Commission;

(6) the following members, appointed by the President of the Maryland
Association of Counties;

(i) one representative with a background in emergency response;

(ii) one representative with a background in public works; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 950 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) one representative with a background in climate, clean energy,
and infrastructure;

~~(5)~~ (7) one representative of the Professional Firefighters of Maryland,
designated by the President of the Professional Firefighters of Maryland;

~~(6)~~ (8) one representative of the Metropolitan Fire Chiefs Association,
designated by the President of the Metropolitan Fire Chiefs Association;

(9) one representative of the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute,
designated by the Director of the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute;

~~(7)~~ (10) one citizen representative, designated by the President of the
Maryland State Firemen’s Association;

~~(8)~~ (11) one representative of a public utility in the State;

~~(9)~~ (12) one representative of the Maryland Recycling Network; ~~and~~

~~(10)~~ (13) one representative of the Maryland Delaware Solid Waste
Association.;

(14) one representative of the vehicle dismantling sector;

(15) one representative of a battery recycling trade group;

(16) one representative of the grid scale battery energy storage industry; and

(17) any other members as determined necessary by the Commission.

(c) The members of the Commission shall elect a chair from its members.

(d) The Office of the State Fire Marshal shall provide staff for the Commission.

(e) A member of the Commission:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Commission; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Commission shall study and make legislative, regulatory, programmatic,
or other recommendations regarding:

(1) best practices, standards, and guidelines:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 950

(i) to prevent, detect, and suppress lithium–ion battery fires in:

1. consumer, and transportation, ~~and~~ ~~utility~~ applications;
and

2. utility applications, with review and consideration of the
National Fire Prevention 855 Standards for Grid Scale Storage and Safety;

(ii) to prevent, detect, and suppress lithium–ion fires at recycling
facilities; and

(iii) for reusing ~~and,~~ recycling, and decommissioning lithium–ion
batteries;

(2) the viability of extended producer responsibility for lithium–ion
batteries;

(3) training, education, and other information to better inform the public
and first responders regarding lithium–ion battery safety; and

(4) any other global issues the Commission may consider useful for
enhancing the safety and reuse of batteries in the State.

(g) At the discretion of the Commission, the Commission may seek advice and
consultation from outside individuals and entities.

~~(g)~~ (h) (1) On or before December 1, 2024, the Commission shall submit an
interim report on the progress and status of the Commission to the Legislative Policy
Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

(2) On or before December 1, 2025, the Commission shall report its findings
and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 7 months and, at the end of
December 31, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall
be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3