START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 481 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 481 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Antlerless Deer Hunting Programs - Authorization 
 
 
This bill authorizes a person to receive a raffle ticket for each antlerless deer hunted by the 
person during a raffle program that (1) is held in January; (2) has as its objective the hunting 
of antlerless deer; and (3) was previously held at least once from January 1, 2020, through 
January 30, 2024, inclusive. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State operations or finances.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local operations or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Prohibition against Selling Deer  
 
Generally, a person may not sell, offer for sale, barter, or exchange, at any time within the 
State, any game bird or mammal taken from the wild in the State or in another state, 
territory, or county. However, the prohibition does not apply to the legally acquired  
(1) meat, pelt, carcass, or mounted specimen of any beaver, coyote, fisher, fox, mink, 
muskrat, nutria, opossum, otter, raccoon, skunk, or long-tailed weasel; (2) hide, hair, tail, 
or feet of deer, squirrel, or rabbit (excluding a mounted specimen); (3) feathers, skin, or 
feet of upland and forest game birds (excluding a mounted specimen); (4) unless prohibited 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 481/ Page 2 
by federal law, feathers of wetland game birds; or (5) antlers of deer legally acquired in 
another state and manufactured into an article of commerce in another state.  
 
Deer Hunting Seasons in General 
 
In general, the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) establishes the open season to hunt 
forest and upland game birds and mammals by regulation each year. DNR may adopt 
regulations to enlarge, extend, restrict, or prohibit hunting wildlife. There are three primary 
seasons to hunt deer in Maryland:  deer bow hunting season; deer firearms season; and 
deer muzzleloader season. Deer hunting with archery equipment extends from early 
September through the end of January. Firearms season is two weeks in November and 
December starting the Saturday after Thanksgiving. There is also a short, three-day 
firearms season in January. There are two muzzleloader seasons:  one in mid-October; and 
a second in late December. There is also a three-day primitive deer hunt in early February. 
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that incentivizing the harvest of antlerless deer 
results in an increase in overall deer hunting in the State, the bill may have a meaningful 
economic impact on certain types of businesses in the State. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service reports that, in 2011, the average hunter in Maryland spent $49 per hunting day on 
trip-related expenditures. In 2011, the National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and 
Wildlife-Associated Recreation estimated that hunters in Maryland spend more than 
$260 million annually on food, lodging, equipment, and transportation. 
 
In addition to businesses directly affected by hunting, to the extent the bill results in a 
decrease in the deer population throughout the State, the bill may also affect several other 
types of businesses, such as farms (due to a reduction in crop damage) and businesses that 
own or repair vehicles (due to a reduction in deer-vehicle collisions). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 934 and SB 779 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 367 (Senator Mautz) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 481/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3