START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 408 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 408 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Mental Health Law - County Mental Health Advisory Committees - Membership 
 
 
This bill adds an individual with experience with mental health care for veterans or 
individuals serving in the military to the list of persons that can be appointed as a voting 
member, as specified, to a county mental health advisory committee.    
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill only pertains to local government operations.  
  
Local Effect:  None. Altering the potential membership of an advisory committee does not 
affect local governmental finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to the Health-General Article, the governing body of each county 
must establish a mental health advisory committee to serve as an advocate for a 
comprehensive mental health system for persons of all ages. The mental health advisory 
committee of each county must consist of specified nonvoting ex officio members and 
specified voting members who are appointed by the governing body of the county and 
representative of the county’s major socioeconomic and ethnic groups. The appointed 
voting members must be selected from a specified list of groups, agencies, and 
organizations.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 408/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 412 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore 
City; Howard and Prince George’s counties; Department of Veterans Affairs; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2