START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 457 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 457 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Synthetic Turf - Disclosure and Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), in consultation 
with the Synthetic Turf Council and other specified stakeholders, including local 
governments, county school systems, and higher education facilities, to conduct a study on 
synthetic turf, existing synthetic turf fields in the State, and the synthetic turf industry in 
the State. MDE must submit a report of its findings to specified committees of the 
General Assembly by July 1, 2026. The bill also requires a producer or seller of synthetic 
turf to disclose the following information to the customer before the sale of synthetic turf:  
(1) the maintenance that is typically performed throughout the lifespan of synthetic turf; 
and (2) the typical cost for removing, replacing, and disposing of synthetic turf.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $59,400 in FY 2025 and by $63,900 
in FY 2026; future years reflect termination of contractual staff at the end of FY 2026. 
State revenues are not affected. It is assumed that any public higher education facilities that 
consult with MDE on the study can do so with existing budgeted resources.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
59,400 
63,900 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($59,400) 
($63,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  It is assumed that any local entities that consult with MDE on the study can 
do so within existing budgeted resources. Local revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 457/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  When conducting the study, MDE must consult with the Synthetic Turf 
Council, and other representatives of the synthetic turf industry, local environmental and 
community stakeholders, and synthetic turf producers, retailers, and users, including local 
governments, county school systems, higher education facilities, and professional sports 
organizations.  
 
The required report must include (1) industry information and background; 
(2) methodologies used for data collection, including public hearings and other public 
outreach; (3) current industry practices and guidelines relating to the sale, maintenance, 
reuse, and disposal of synthetic turf; (4) current industry disposal methods of synthetic turf, 
including known disposal locations; (5) proper and improper disposal methods of synthetic 
turf; (6) current recycling rates and methods of synthetic turf and future recycling 
proposals; (7) factors influencing disposal and recycling; (8) case studies and examples; 
and (9) proposals for improving recycling rates and waste management.  
 
Current Law:  Current law does not specifically address synthetic turf or turf infill. The 
solid waste infrastructure in Maryland consists of both permitted and nonpermitted 
facilities, and solid waste is managed through a combination of recycling, composting, 
landfilling, energy recovery, and exporting for disposal or recycling. Privately and 
county-owned facilities make up the majority of facilities in the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for MDE increase by $59,448 in 
fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one contractual environmental compliance specialist to 
coordinate and conduct the required study and complete the required report. It includes a 
salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$45,617 
Operating Expenses 
  13,831 
Total FY 2025 MDE Expenditures 
$59,448 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect termination of the contractual employee at the end of 
fiscal 2026 after the study is complete and the report has been submitted.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 457/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Caroline and Prince George’s counties; Maryland-National 
Capital Park and Planning Commission; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; 
cities of Annapolis and Takoma Park; Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Independent College and University Association; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; 
Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy and 
Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3