START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 353

Chapter 353

(House Bill 471)

AN ACT concerning

Election Law – Postelection Procedures

FOR the purpose of altering the records and documents that a board of canvassers is
required to investigate under certain circumstances; altering the responsibilities of
the State Administrator, the State Board of Elections, and the Board of State
Canvassers regarding the certification of election results; authorizing the members
of the Board of State Canvassers to appoint certain designees to serve on the Board
of State Canvassers; altering the responsibilities of the Governor regarding election
results; and generally relating to postelection procedures.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 11–307, 11–308, 11–501, 11–502, 11–503, and 11–601
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

11–307.

(a) If a board of canvassers determines FOLLOWING AN ELECTION that there
appears to be an error in the documents or records produced [at the polling place following
an election] DURING THE ELECTION, then it immediately shall, IN CONSULTATION WITH
THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR, investigate the matter to ascertain whether the records or
documents are correct.

(b) The board of canvassers may correct a document or record only in accordance
with the regulations of the State Board.

11–308.

(a) Within 10 days after any election, and before certifying the results of the
election, each board of canvassers shall verify the vote count in accordance with the
regulations prescribed by the State Board for the voting system used in that election.

(b) Upon completion of the verification process, the members of the board of
canvassers shall:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 353 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) certify in writing that the election results are accurate and that the vote
has been verified; and

(2) provide copies of the election results to the persons specified under §
11–401 of this title.

(c) (1) If a member of a board of canvassers dissents from a determination of
an election result or reasonably believes that the conduct of a local board member or local
board proceeding was not in compliance with applicable law or regulation or was otherwise
illegal or irregular, the member shall prepare and file with the local board a distinct written
statement of the reasons for the dissent or concern.

(2) THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR SHALL REVIEW THE DISSENT AND
SUBMIT IT TO THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS FOR A FINAL DETERMINATION.

[(2)] (3) The State Board shall maintain a file of the [written statements
submitted under this subsection by members of the local boards] FINAL DETERMINATION.

11–501.

(a) Following each [gubernatorial primary or] special primary election to fill a
vacancy in the office of Representative in Congress, the State Board shall:

(1) convene within 2 days after the certified official election results are
received from the local boards;

(2) if a majority of the members of the State Board is not present, adjourn
for not more than 1 day;

(3) WITHIN 1 DAY AFTER CONVENING, REVIEW THE CERTIFIED
COPIES OF THE STATEMENTS MADE BY THE BOARDS OF CANVASSERS AND determine
which candidates, by the greatest number of votes, have been nominated to each office and
which questions have received a sufficient number of votes to be adopted or approved; [and]

(4) IF THE STATE BOARD DETERMINES, BASED ON CLEAR AND
CONVINCING EVIDENCE, THAT A STATEMENT BY A BOARD OF CANVASSERS IS
INACCURATE, REJECT THE STATEMENT AND ASCERTAIN THE ACCURATE ELECTION
RESULTS; AND

[(4)] (5) prepare and certify statewide election results [based on the
certified copies of the statements made by the boards of canvassers].

(b) (1) IF THE STATE BOARD DETERMINES THAT A STATEMENT BY A
BOARD OF CANVASSERS IS INACCURATE AND MUST BE REJECTED UNDER

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 353

SUBSECTION (A)(4) OF THIS SECTION, THE STATE BOARD SHALL PREPARE AND FILE
A DISTINCT WRITTEN STATEMENT OF THE REASONS FOR THE DETERMINATION,
INCLUDING THE EVIDENCE ON WHICH THE DETERMINATION WAS BASED, WITH THE
STATE BOARD.

(2) If a member of the State Board dissents from a determination of an
election result or reasonably believes that the conduct of a STATE Board member or STATE
Board proceeding was not in compliance with applicable law or regulation or was otherwise
illegal or irregular, the member shall prepare and file with the STATE Board a distinct
written statement of the reasons for the dissent or concern.

[(2)] (3) The State Board shall maintain a file of the written statements
submitted under this subsection by members of the STATE Board.

11–502.

(a) The Board of State Canvassers consists of the following members:

(1) the Secretary of State;

(2) the Comptroller;

(3) the State Treasurer;

(4) the Clerk of the Supreme Court of Maryland; and

(5) the Attorney General.

(b) Three members of the Board of State Canvassers constitute a quorum.

(c) The State Administrator [of the State Board of Elections] serves as secretary
to the Board of State Canvassers.

(d) THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS MAY APPOINT
DESIGNEES TO SERVE ON THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS AS FOLLOWS:

(1) THE SECRETARY OF STATE MAY APPOINT A DEPUTY SECRETARY
OF STATE;

(2) THE COMPTROLLER MAY APPOINT THE CHIEF DEPUTY
COMPTROLLER;

(3) The State Treasurer may appoint[, as the Treasurer’s designee, a] THE
deputy treasurer [to serve on the Board of State Canvassers];

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 353 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) THE CLERK OF THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND MAY
APPOINT THE CHIEF DEPUTY; AND

(5) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY APPOINT THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY
GENERAL.

(E) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS SHALL SUBMIT A
DESIGNATION UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION TO THE STATE
ADMINISTRATOR AT LEAST 7 DAYS BEFORE THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS
CONVENES.

11–503.

(a) The Board of State Canvassers shall:

(1) (i) convene [only] WITHIN 30 DAYS after [a presidential primary]
EACH election, [a State general election, or a general or] UNLESS THE ELECTION WAS A
special [general] PRIMARY election that [includes] INCLUDED a candidate for member of
the Congress of the United States; AND

(ii) [convene within 35 days of that election; and

(iii)] if a majority of members of the Board of State Canvassers is not
present, adjourn for not more than 1 day;

(2) WITHIN 1 DAY AFTER CONVENING, REVIEW THE CERTIFIED
COPIES OF THE STATEMENTS MADE BY THE BOARDS OF CANVASSERS AND determine
which candidates, by the greatest number of votes, have been elected to each office and
which questions have received a sufficient number of votes to be adopted or approved;

(3) IF THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS DETERMINES, BASED ON
CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE, THAT A STATEMENT BY A BOARD OF
CANVASSERS IS INACCURATE, REJECT THAT STATEMENT AND ASCERTAIN THE
ACCURATE ELECTION RESULTS;

(4) prepare statewide election results for each candidate and question[,
based on the certified copies of the statements made by the boards of canvassers]; and

[(4)] (5) prepare and transmit a certified statement of the election results
to the State Board [of Elections].

(b) (1) IF THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS DETERMINES THAT A
STATEMENT BY A BOARD OF CANVASSERS IS INACCURATE AND MUST BE REJECTED
UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS SECTION, THE BOARD OF STATE CANVASSERS

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 353

SHALL PREPARE AND TRANSMIT A DISTINCT WRITTEN STATEMENT OF THE REASONS
FOR THE DETERMINATION, INCLUDING THE EVIDENCE ON WHICH THE
DETERMINATION WAS BASED, TO THE STATE BOARD.

(2) If a member of the Board of State Canvassers dissents from a
determination of an election result or reasonably believes that the conduct of a MEMBER
OF THE Board [member] OF STATE CANVASSERS or A PROCEEDING OF THE Board
[proceeding] OF STATE CANVASSERS was not in compliance with applicable law or
regulation or was otherwise illegal or irregular, the member shall prepare and transmit a
distinct written statement of the reasons for the dissent or concern to the State Board [of
Elections].

[(2)] (3) The State Board [of Elections] shall maintain a file of the written
statements submitted under this subsection by members of the Board of State Canvassers.

(C) THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR SHALL TRANSMIT THE CERTIFIED
ELECTION RESULTS TO THE GOVERNOR WITHIN 30 3 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT.

(D) THE STATE BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS CONSISTENT WITH THIS
ARTICLE GOVERNING THE CERTIFICATION OF ELECTION RESULTS.

11–601.

(a) On receipt, in accordance with this subtitle, of the returns of an election for
electors to choose a President and Vice President of the United States or of an election to
choose a member of Congress, the Governor shall, CONSISTENT WITH THE RETURNS OF
THE ELECTION RECEIVED BY THE GOVERNOR IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SUBTITLE:

(1) ascertain and enumerate the number of votes cast for each candidate
for President and Vice President of the United States and declare elected the presidential
electors of the candidates who receive the highest number of votes; and

(2) in each contest, ascertain and enumerate the number of votes cast for
each candidate voted for as a member of Congress and declare elected the candidate who
receives the highest number of votes.

(b) After ascertaining and enumerating the number of votes for candidates as
required by subsection (a) of this section, the Governor shall:

(1) ISSUE AND TRANSMIT A CERTIFICATE OF ELECTORS UNDER 3
U.S.C. § 5;

(2) sign and issue a proclamation declaring the name of each candidate who
is elected; and
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 353 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(2)] (3) cause the proclamation to be [published in newspapers] POSTED
ON THE STATE BOARD’S WEBSITE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6