START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 424 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 424 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County - Housing Opportunities Commission - Alterations  
MC 3-24 
 
   
This bill repeals the requirement that the Housing Opportunities Commission (HOC) of 
Montgomery County (1) hold a public hearing on any assisted family housing it proposes; 
(2) report in writing the findings and conclusions from the hearing; and (3) give notice of 
the hearing 15 days prior to the hearing by display advertisement in two newspapers of 
general circulation in the county. The bill also repeals the requirement that HOC publish a 
summary of its annual financial report in at least two newspapers of general circulation in 
the county.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill applies only to Montgomery County.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Montgomery County 
operations or finances.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Housing Opportunities Commission of Montgomery County  
 
HOC is the public housing agency for Montgomery County. Established in 1974, the 
commission administers federal, State, county, and private affordable housing programs. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 424/ Page 2 
In addition, it develops housing; provides mortgage financing to developers and first-time 
homebuyers; manages public housing and other rental units; administers rental subsidy 
programs (including the Housing Choice Voucher Program); and provides counseling and 
support services to lower income individuals and families in assisted housing.    
 
Generally, HOC must hold a public hearing on any assisted family housing it proposes and 
report in writing the findings and conclusions from the hearing. At least 15 days before the 
hearing, HOC must give notice of the hearing by a display advertisement in two newspapers 
of general circulation in the county. However, this requirement does not apply to proposed 
scattered sites and specified moderate priced dwelling units. 
 
By November 30 each year, HOC must issue a financial report for the previous fiscal year 
based on a certified audit. HOC must publish a summary of the financial report in at least 
two newspapers of general circulation in the county. By December 15 each year, HOC 
must publish on its website (1) the financial report and (2) a full and complete copy of the 
certified audit report for the previous fiscal year.  
 
HOC must publish all information in a public record that relates to a financial report or a 
certified audit report of which HOC is not specifically required to deny an inspection under 
the Public Information Act (PIA).   
 
Public Information Act – Generally 
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. Among other things, PIA establishes procedures for the 
inspection of public records, the denial of public records, the denial of a part of a public 
record, and the process to resolve disputes regarding the denial of public records, as 
specified.   
 
Open Meetings Act – Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A “public 
body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by the 
Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum of 
understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of education 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 424/ Page 3 
and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; a rule, 
resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3