START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 451 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 451 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tax Assistance for Low-Income Marylanders - Funding 
 
 
This departmental bill reinstates, beginning in fiscal 2025, a previously mandated annual 
distribution from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to the Tax Clinics for Low-Income 
Marylanders Fund (TCLIM) at an increased amount of $500,000 (compared to $250,000, 
as mandated under previous law). Also, beginning in fiscal 2026, the bill (1) increases the 
amount of the annual mandated appropriation for the Creating Assets, Savings, and Hope 
(CASH) Campaign of Maryland from $500,000 to $800,000 and (2) requires that at least 
$150,000 be used to provide grants to external entities for providing tax assistance through 
on-demand or mobile tax clinics that serve senior populations, rural communities, or 
under-resourced communities. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $500,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2025; TCLIM revenues and expenditures increase by the same amount, and higher 
education revenues and expenditures increase by a portion of that amount ($333,300). The  
FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly anticipates the distribution of 
$250,000 from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to TCLIM, as required under previous 
law. General fund expenditures increase by $300,000 annually beginning in FY 2026. This 
bill establishes a mandated distribution beginning in FY 2025 and increases a 
mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
($500,000) 
SF Revenue 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
Higher Ed Rev. 
$333,300 
$333,300 
$333,300 
$333,300 
$333,300 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$300,000 
$300,000 
$300,000 
$300,000 
SF Expenditure 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
$500,000 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$333,300 
$333,300 
$333,300 
$333,300 
$333,300 
Net Effect 
($500,000) 
($800,000) 
($800,000) 
($800,000) 
($800,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 451/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.)  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Tax clinics receiving TCLIM grant funds (the tax clinics at the University 
of Maryland School of Law, University of Baltimore School of Law, and the Maryland 
Volunteer Lawyers Service) must interact with the CASH Campaign of Maryland at least 
once annually to ensure sufficient access to tax preparation services for low-income 
Maryland residents.  
 
Current Law: 
 
Tax Clinics for Low-Income Marylanders Fund 
 
Chapters 678 and 679 of 2021 established TCLIM, a special, nonlapsing fund administered 
by the Comptroller, to provide grants to the University of Maryland School of Law, the 
University of Baltimore School of Law, and the Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service to 
operate tax clinics for low-income Maryland residents. The Acts required a distribution of 
$250,000 from the Unclaimed Property Fund to TCLIM in each of fiscal 2022 and 2023. 
Chapters 495 and 496 of 2023 permanently extended the distribution beyond fiscal 2023; 
however, Chapter 641 of 2023, which was subsequently signed into law, repealed the 
affected provision of law, as discussed further in the Additional Comments section of this 
fiscal and policy note.  
 
Each fiscal year, the total amount of grant money expended from TCLIM to support tax 
clinics must be distributed as follows:  (1) one-third to the University of Maryland School 
of Law; (2) one-third to the University of Baltimore School of Law; and (3) one-third to 
the Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service.  
 
CASH Campaign of Maryland 
 
Chapter 745 of 2019 required the Governor to include $200,000 in the annual State budget 
bill for the CASH Campaign of Maryland to promote the financial capability of 
low-income individuals and families by providing outreach, education, and free tax 
preparation services. Chapters 260 and 261 of 2022 increased the required appropriation to 
$500,000 beginning in fiscal 2024. The appropriation may be used only to (1) provide free 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 451/ Page 3 
volunteer income tax assistance that helps low-income individuals and families file tax 
returns, avoid predatory fees, and claim the federal and State earned income tax credits; 
(2) coordinate and expand access to free, fact-based financial education and coaching for 
low-income individuals and families; (3) connect low-income individuals and families to 
affordable, high-quality financial services; (4) recruit, train, and manage a corps of 
volunteers to provide financial education, coaching, and tax preparation services for 
low-income individuals and families; and (5) conduct outreach to low-income individuals 
and families.  
 
Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that many Marylanders do not meet the 
minimum income threshold for required tax filing but may be eligible for valuable tax 
refunds upon filing an income tax return; through increasing State financial support for tax 
clinics for low-income Marylanders, the bill aims to increase utilization of antipoverty 
programs within the federal and State tax codes, such as the federal and State earned 
income tax credits.  
 
Maryland Low-Income Taxpayers Clinics 
 
The University of Maryland and University of Baltimore schools of law and the Maryland 
Volunteer Lawyers Service operate low-income taxpayer clinics in part through grant 
funding from the Internal Revenue Service. These clinics provide free legal representation 
to low-income taxpayers in tax disputes; they do not provide tax preparation assistance. 
 
CASH Campaign of Maryland 
 
The CASH Campaign of Maryland is a nonprofit organization that promotes economic 
advancement for low- to moderate-income individuals and operates various direct service 
programs, including free income tax preparation assistance for low- to moderate-income 
individuals and families. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the bill requires the Comptroller to annually 
distribute $500,000 from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to TCLIM beginning in 
fiscal 2025. After required distributions, remaining funds within the Unclaimed Property 
Fund are distributed to the general fund; thus, general fund revenues decrease by 
$500,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025. TCLIM revenues and expenditures increase 
by a corresponding amount as the funds are received and distributed as grants. Higher 
education revenues and expenditures for the University System of Maryland increase by 
$333,333 annually beginning in fiscal 2025, reflecting the share of TCLIM grants 
distributed to and expended by the University of Maryland School of Law and the 
University of Baltimore School of Law. The bill is not anticipated to affect funding for the 
Access to Counsel in Evictions Special Fund, which receives a subsequent distribution 
from the Unclaimed Property Fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 451/ Page 4 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly anticipates the distribution of 
$250,000 from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to TCLIM, as required by 
Chapters 495 and 496 prior to the enactment of Chapter 641, and also includes $250,000 
in general funds for the purpose of providing funding to TCLIM (not contingent on this 
legislation).  
 
The bill also increases, from $500,000 to $800,000, the annual mandated appropriation for 
the CASH Campaign of Maryland. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by 
$300,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes a total of $1.0 million for the CASH Campaign – $500,000 
above the existing mandated funding level. (The fiscal 2024 budget includes $500,000 for 
the CASH Campaign, consistent with the existing mandate.)  
 
Additional Comments:  As noted above, Chapters 495 and 496 permanently extended the 
annual $250,000 distribution from the State’s Unclaimed Property Fund to TCLIM, which 
previously applied only to fiscal 2022 and 2023. However, Chapter 641 (“Access to 
Counsel in Evictions – Funding”) repealed the affected provision of law. Independent of 
the other legislation, the change appears to have been intended as a deletion of an obsolete 
provision. As Chapter 641 was signed into law after Chapters 495 and 496, Chapter 641, 
which removes the distribution provision, controls. The bill restores this funding source for 
TCLIM in fiscal 2025 and future years but does not restore the distribution in fiscal 2024. 
It is worth noting that the DLS 2023 Fiscal Effects Report assumes a $250,000 distribution 
to TCLIM in fiscal 2024 and future years based on Chapters 495 and 496 – as do the 
fiscal 2024 budget and the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 676 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management;  
CASH Campaign of Maryland; Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 451/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - March 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 451/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Tax Assistance for Low-Income Marylanders - Funding 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0451 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill provides funding support for Low-Income Tax Clinics, the CASH Campaign, and 
creates a grant program to incentivize mobile or on-demand tax clinics in underserved or under 
resourced areas.  There is no direct economic impact on small businesses as a result of this bill.  

END OF PAGE 6