START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 452 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 452 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Individual Tax Preparers - Code of Ethics, Notification of Actions, Enforcement, 
and Penalties (Stop Scam Tax Preparers Act) 
 
 
This departmental bill (1) requires the State Board of Individual Tax Preparers, by 
January 1, 2026, to publish on its website a code of ethics and rules of professional conduct 
for engaging in the practice of individual tax preparation; (2) requires the board to notify 
the Comptroller’s Office of specified actions and violations under the Maryland Individual 
Tax Preparers Act; (3) grants authorized employees of the Field Enforcement Bureau with 
the powers, duties, and responsibilities of a peace officer for the purpose of enforcing the 
laws pertaining to income tax preparation; and (4) requires the Comptroller to notify the 
board after prohibiting an income tax return preparer from submitting income tax returns 
electronically. Lastly, the bill prohibits an income tax preparer from willfully preparing, 
assisting in preparing, or causing the preparation of an income tax return or claim for refund 
without being properly licensed or registered to provide income tax preparation services in 
the State; a violation is a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $5,000 to be paid into the 
Tax Clinics for Low-Income Marylanders Fund (TCLIM).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $32,300 only in FY 2025 for 
programming costs. The bill’s requirements and any related enforcement activity can 
otherwise be handled with existing budgeted resources. Minimal increase in TCLIM 
revenues beginning in FY 2025 due to the bill’s monetary penalty provision. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$32,300 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
(-)/- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 452/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Office of the Comptroller has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Individual Tax Preparers Act 
 
Title 21 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article (“Maryland Individual Tax 
Preparers Act”) establishes a registration program designed for the purpose of ensuring that 
qualified individuals provide individual tax preparation services. The Act is subject to the 
evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act and is 
scheduled to sunset July 1, 2026. 
 
The following individuals are exempt from the requirements of Title 21:  (1) an individual 
in good standing with an active license issued by the State Board of Public Accountancy 
or a licensing authority in another state; (2) an individual in good standing and admitted to 
practice law in the State or in another state; (3) an individual employed by a local, state, or 
federal government agency, but only in the performance of official duties; (4) an individual 
enrolled to practice before the Internal Revenue Service, as specified; and (5) an individual 
serving as an employee of or an assistant to an individual tax preparer or exempt individual 
in the performance of official duties, unless the individual signs an individual tax return as 
the preparer. 
 
State Board of Individual Tax Preparers:  The board, which is housed within the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MDL), is charged with (1) adopting rules of professional conduct as 
appropriate to establish a high standard of integrity and dignity for the practice of 
individual tax preparation; (2) select and administer examinations; (3) establish fees; 
(4) maintain a list of all authorized individual tax preparers registered by the board; 
(5) maintain a record of its proceedings; (6) maintain records of all complaints regarding 
individual tax preparers in the State; and (7) report to the General Assembly. 
 
Investigations:  The board may investigate a complaint that alleges a violation of the 
Maryland Individual Tax Preparers Act. On receipt of the results of an investigation, the 
board must promptly take appropriate action to ensure compliance with the Act. If the 
board concludes that an alleged violation will result in harm to a resident of the State, the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 452/ Page 3 
board may seek a permanent or temporary injunction with respect to the conduct from the 
circuit court of the county in which the alleged violation occurs. In seeking an injunction, 
the board need not post bond, allege or prove that an adequate remedy at law does not exist, 
or allege or prove that substantial or irreparable damage would result from the continued 
violation. 
 
Disciplinary Action:  Subject to administrative hearing requirements, the board may deny 
a registration to any applicant, reprimand any registered individual, or suspend or revoke a 
registration if the applicant or registered individual (1) fraudulently or deceptively obtains 
or attempts to obtain a registration for the applicant or registered individual or for another; 
(2) fraudulently or deceptively uses a registration; (3) is convicted of a felony or 
misdemeanor, either of which is directly related to the fitness and qualification of the 
applicant or registered individual to provide individual tax preparation services; (4) is 
guilty of negligence, incompetence, or misconduct while providing individual tax 
preparation services; or (5) violates any provision of the Maryland Tax Preparers Act or 
regulation adopted under the Act. 
 
In addition to reprimanding a registered individual or suspending or revoking a registration, 
the board may impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000 per violation, payable to the 
general fund. To determine the amount of the penalty, the board must consider the 
seriousness of and harm caused by the violation, the good faith of the registered individual, 
and any history of previous violations by the registered individual. The board must use any 
such penalties collected in accordance with this authorization for enforcement purposes. 
 
A violator who has previously been assessed a penalty for a violation is guilty of a 
misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $500, up to six months imprisonment, or both. 
 
Under the bill, if the board seeks an injunction or takes a disciplinary action against an 
individual for a violation of the Act, the board must notify the Comptroller within 
five business days after taking the action. 
 
Prohibited Acts:  Except as otherwise specified, an individual may not provide, attempt to 
provide, or offer to provide individual tax preparation services in the State unless registered 
by the board, nor may a person employ an individual to provide, attempt to provide, or 
offer to provide individual tax preparation services in the State unless the individual is 
registered by the board (§ 21-401 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article).  
Title 21 further specifies additional requirements and prohibitions relating to false 
representations, disclosures, and maintenance of records. 
 
Under the bill, the board must notify the Field Enforcement Bureau of the 
Comptroller’s Office of a violation of § 21-401 (practicing without a registration) within 
five business days after determining that a violation has occurred. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 452/ Page 4 
Application of Maryland Consumer Protection Act:  A violation of the Maryland Individual 
Tax Preparers Act is an unfair or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer 
Protection Act and is subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions contained therein. 
In addition to the aforementioned remedies, an individual who is aggrieved by a violation 
may bring an action against the violator to recover $500 per violation and actual damages 
sustained as a result of the violation. 
 
Income Tax Return Preparer Requirements under Tax-General § 10-824 
 
Subject to specified exceptions, an income tax return preparer must file all qualified returns 
that the income tax return preparer prepares by electronic means as prescribed by the 
Comptroller if the income tax return preparer has prepared more than 100 qualified tax 
returns in the prior tax year. For purposes of this requirement, “income tax return preparer” 
means a person who for compensation prepares a substantial portion or more of a qualified 
return or employs one or more persons to prepare for compensation a substantial portion 
or more of a qualified return; “qualified return” means any original return of individual 
income tax imposed under the State income tax. 
 
Under the bill, if the Comptroller prohibits an income tax return preparer from submitting 
income tax returns electronically, the Comptroller must notify the State Board of Individual 
Tax Preparers within five business days after taking the action. 
 
Prohibitions and Penalties under Tax-General § 13-1004 
 
Section 13-1004 of the Tax-General Article specifies misdemeanor offenses and penalties 
applicable to income tax return preparers. Specifically, an income tax preparer who 
willfully prepares, assists in preparing, or causes the preparation of a false income tax 
return or claim for refund with fraudulent intent or the intent to evade income tax is guilty 
of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, subject to a fine of up to $10,000, up to five years 
imprisonment, or both. Similarly, an income tax return preparer who willfully attempts to 
evade any tax imposed under the Tax-General Article or the payment thereof is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $10,000, up to five years 
imprisonment, or both. 
 
Under the bill, an additional offense and related penalties are added to § 13-1004. 
Specifically, an income tax return preparer may not willfully prepare, assist in preparing, 
or cause the preparation of an income tax return or claim for refund without being properly 
licensed or registered to provide income tax preparation services in the State. A violation 
is a misdemeanor subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per violation, to be paid into TCLIM. 
Each income tax return or claim for refund that an income tax preparer prepares, assists in 
preparing, or causes the preparation of in violation of this provision is a separate violation. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 452/ Page 5 
Tax Clinics for Low-Income Marylanders Fund 
 
Chapters 678 and 679 of 2021 established TCLIM, a special, nonlapsing fund administered 
by the Comptroller, to provide grants to the University of Maryland School of Law, the 
University of Baltimore School of Law, and the Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service to 
operate tax clinics for low-income Maryland residents. Each fiscal year, the total amount 
of grant money expended from TCLIM to support tax clinics must be distributed evenly 
among the three entities. 
 
Background:  The Comptroller’s Office advises that the bill aims to curb tax return 
preparer fraud by improving coordination between the Comptroller’s Office and the State 
Board of Individual Tax Preparers, expanding the enforcement powers of the Field 
Enforcement Bureau, and authorizing the Comptroller’s Office to pursue financial 
penalties against individuals engaging in unauthorized tax preparation services. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Judiciary advises that the new misdemeanor offense and related 
penalty established under the bill necessitate one-time programming changes totaling an 
estimated $32,300. Thus, general fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $32,300 
in fiscal 2025 only. The Judiciary can otherwise handle any additional caseload with 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office and MDL can handle the bill’s requirements and any related 
enforcement activity with existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 675 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Education, Energy, and the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 452/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Individual Tax Preparers - Code of Ethics, Notification of Actions, 
Enforcement, and Penalties (Stop Scam Tax Preparers Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0452 
 
PREPARED BY:  Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill mandates information sharing between the Office of the Comptroller and the 
Maryland Board of Individual Tax Preparers (MBITP) within the Department of Labor 
(DOL) when either body takes disciplinary action against an individual, directs the 
MBITP to develop and publish a code of ethics and rules of professional conduct for 
individual tax preparers registering in Maryland, and authorizes the Comptroller’s Field 
Enforcement Bureau to pursue financial penalties against individuals engaging in scam 
and unregistered tax preparation services.  There is no direct economic impact on 
lawfully operating small businesses from this bill.  To the extent that small businesses 
may be victimized by unregistered tax preparers, there may be a net positive effect – as 
there will be a disincentive (in the form of financial and criminal penalties) to engage in 
fraudulent tax preparation activities. 

END OF PAGE 6