START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 449 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 449 
(Delegate Ivey, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Comprehensive Flood Management Grant Program - Funding for Underserved 
and Overburdened Communities 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Governor, for fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, to include 
in the annual State budget an appropriation for the comprehensive flood management grant 
program of up to $20.0 million. The bill also requires that, for fiscal 2026 and each 
fiscal year thereafter, at least 40% of funding provided under the program be used for 
projects located in or directly benefiting underserved or overburdened communities. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill may affect local government finances, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Underserved community” and “overburdened community” have the 
meanings stated under existing provisions of the Environment Article of the Maryland 
Code that establish and govern the Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable 
Communities. “Underserved community” means any census tract in which, according to 
the most recent U.S. Census Bureau Survey (1) at least 25% of the residents qualify as 
low-income; (2) at least 50% of the residents identify as nonwhite; or (3) at least 15% of 
the residents have limited English proficiency. “Overburdened community” means any 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 449/ Page 2 
census tract for which three or more of specified environmental health indicators are above 
the seventy-fifth percentile statewide. 
 
Current Law:  There is a comprehensive flood management grant program within the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). Subject to specified criteria, MDE may 
provide grants to local governments under the program for:   
 
 
flood control and watershed management capital projects and capital costs of 
automated flood warning projects; 
 
acquisition of any flood damaged owner-occupied dwelling, immediately after a 
flood; and 
 
infrastructure repairs, watershed management, or emergency protection work if the 
local government has incurred at least $1.0 million in infrastructure damage caused 
by a flood event that occurred on or after January 1, 2009. 
 
Statute required – for fiscal 2021 through 2023 – that the Governor include in the annual 
State budget an appropriation for the program of at least $3.0 million in fiscal 2021 and 
2022 and at least $2.0 million in fiscal 2023. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances since the bill authorizes 
funding for the comprehensive flood management grant program of up to $20.0 million 
each fiscal year, beginning in fiscal 2026, and planned spending for the program, in the 
absence of the bill, is consistent with that authorization. The Governor’s fiscal 2025 
through 2029 Capital Improvement Program includes $10.0 million in general obligation 
bond funding for the program in each of fiscal 2026 through 2029. 
 
It is assumed that the bill’s requirement that, beginning in fiscal 2026, at least 40% of 
funding provided under the program be used for projects located in or directly benefiting 
underserved or overburdened communities, can be implemented by MDE with existing 
resources. 
 
To the extent the bill is interpreted as suggesting that a higher level of funding be provided 
for the program than would otherwise be provided in the absence of the bill, additional 
staff are likely needed within MDE to administer the additional funding, with the need for 
additional staff being dependent on the amount of the increase in funding. For illustrative 
purposes only, if $20.0 million annually is provided for the program, three additional 
positions are needed within MDE at a cost of $270,261 in fiscal 2026, with similar costs in 
future years (reflecting salaries with annual increases and employee turnover and annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses). 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  While the bill does not directly affect local government finances 
overall, the allocation of grant funding among individual local governments under the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 449/ Page 3 
program may be affected by the bill’s requirement that at least 40% of funding provided 
under the program be used for projects located in or directly benefiting underserved or 
overburdened communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 813 and HB 892 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 148 (Senator A. Washington, et al.) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
cities of Frederick and Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Department of Planning; Board of Public Works; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2024 
Third Reader - April 9, 2024 
 
Revised – Amendment(s) - April 9, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3