START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 915

Chapter 915

(House Bill 461)

AN ACT concerning

Health – State Advisory Council on Quality Care at the End of Life – Renaming

FOR the purpose of renaming the State Advisory Council on Quality Care at the End of
Life to be the State Advisory Council on Serious Illness Care; and generally relating
to the State Advisory Council on Quality Care at the End of Life.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 5–608.1(b)(1)(ii)3.; 13–1601 to be under the amended subtitle “Subtitle 16.
State Advisory Council on Serious Illness Care”; and 15–109.1(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 13–1602 through 13–1604
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

5–608.1.

(b) (1) (ii) The “Medical Orders for Life–Sustaining Treatment” form and
the instructions for its completion and use shall be developed in consultation with:

3. The State Advisory Council on [Quality Care at the End of
Life] SERIOUS ILLNESS CARE; and

Subtitle 16. State Advisory Council on [Quality Care at the End of Life] SERIOUS
ILLNESS CARE.

13–1601.

There is a State Advisory Council on [Quality Care at the End of Life] SERIOUS
ILLNESS CARE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 915 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

13–1602.

(a) The Advisory Council consists of the following 23 members:

(1) The Attorney General or the Attorney General’s designee;

(2) One member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate of Maryland;

(3) One member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
House;

(4) The Secretary of Aging or the Secretary’s designee;

(5) The Secretary of Health or the Secretary’s designee;

(6) The Secretary of Disabilities or the Secretary’s designee; and

(7) 17 members appointed by the Governor:

(i) One physician with experience in end–of–life care;

(ii) One nurse with experience in end–of–life care;

(iii) One pharmacist with experience in end–of–life care;

(iv) One physician with experience managing long–term care;

(v) One nurse with experience managing long–term care;

(vi) One representative of the health insurance industry;

(vii) One representative from a managed care organization;

(viii) One representative of the legal community;

(ix) One representative from the hospice care community;

(x) Two representatives from advocacy groups for end–of–life care;

(xi) Two representatives from religious groups;

(xii) Two representatives of the general public with experience with
end–of–life or long–term care issues;

(xiii) One representative of the hospital industry; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 915

(xiv) One representative of the nursing home industry.

(b) (1) The term of a member appointed by the Governor is 4 years.

(2) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
appointed and qualifies.

(3) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(4) A member who serves two consecutive 4–year terms may not be
reappointed for 4 years after the completion of those terms.

(5) If a vacancy occurs among the members appointed by the Governor, the
Governor shall promptly appoint a successor.

13–1603.

(a) The Governor shall appoint the chair of the Advisory Council.

(b) The members present at a meeting are a quorum to do business.

(c) The Advisory Council shall meet at least twice a year, at the times and places
that it determines.

(d) A member of the Advisory Council may not receive compensation but is
entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State Travel Regulations, as
provided in the State budget.

(e) The Department of Aging and the Office of the Attorney General shall jointly
provide staff support and technical assistance for the Advisory Council.

13–1604.

The Advisory Council shall:

(1) Monitor trends in the provision of care to Marylanders with
life–limiting illnesses;

(2) Study the impact of State statutes, regulations, policies, and other
aspects of public policy on the provision of care at the end of life;

(3) Provide recommendations to the Office of the Attorney General, the
Department, the Department of Aging, and other agencies of State government with
respect to their activities affecting the provision of care at the end of life;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 915 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) Advise the General Assembly on legislative proposals affecting the
provision of care at the end of life;

(5) Participate in or otherwise promote public and professional educational
efforts concerning care at the end of life; and

(6) Carry out other duties as may be requested by the Governor or the
General Assembly.

15–109.1.

(c) During the development of the plan under subsection (a) of this section and
the information sheet under § 5–615 of this article, the Office of the Attorney General shall
consult with any interested party including the State Advisory Council on [Quality Care at
the End of Life] SERIOUS ILLNESS CARE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4