START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 404 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 404 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Wellness Checks - Requirements (Gabriel's Law) 
 
 
This bill requires a law enforcement agency that receives a “qualified request” from an 
“interested party” for a wellness check of an individual to (1) conduct a wellness check of 
the individual without unreasonable delay, if the individual is located in the agency’s 
jurisdiction or (2) submit a request to the relevant law enforcement agency in the State or 
another state to conduct a wellness check without unreasonable delay, if the individual is 
not located in the agency’s jurisdiction. If the interested party states in the qualified request 
that there is a concern for a life-threatening condition, then a fire, rescue, or emergency 
medical services entity must conduct the wellness check simultaneously with the law 
enforcement agency. A law enforcement agency and, if applicable, a fire, rescue, or 
emergency medical services entity, that receives a qualified request must meet these 
requirements regardless of where the interested party making the qualified request is 
located. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances; however, the bill 
may have an operational impact on affected State law enforcement agencies. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances; however, the bill 
may have an operational impact on affected fire, rescue, or emergency medical services 
entities. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 404/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Interested party” means a health care practitioner, as specified, or another 
interested person who has sufficient information to inform a law enforcement agency of 
another individual’s health-related condition or circumstance that represents a safety 
concern of the individual. “Qualified request” means an oral or written request that includes 
credible information regarding a specific safety concern. “Wellness check” means an  
in-person visit by a law enforcement officer concerning the well-being of an individual. 
 
Current Law:  There is no requirement in statute for wellness checks by a law enforcement 
agency or a fire, rescue, or emergency medical services entity; however, most law 
enforcement agencies dispatch a law enforcement officer to conduct an in-person visit to a 
resident in response to a request from a friend or family member who is concerned for the 
safety or well-being of the resident.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 190 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent and Worcester counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2