START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 167

Chapter 167

(House Bill 472)

AN ACT concerning

Education – School Mapping Data Program – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the School Mapping Data Program in the ~~State~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ ~~Interagency~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~on~~ ~~School~~ ~~Construction~~
Maryland Center for School Safety; providing for the purpose of the Program and
establishing the requirements of the Program; authorizing the School Safety
Subcabinet within the Maryland Center for School Safety to use the Safe Schools
Fund to provide funding to ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~Interagency~~ ~~Commission~~ local school
systems for grants under the Program; requiring the Interagency Commission on
School Construction to adopt facility mapping standards; requiring a certain
custodian of records to deny inspection of school mapping data; and generally relating
to the School Mapping Data Program.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section ~~7–452~~ ~~5–330~~ 5–310.1 and 7–1510.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–1512
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 4–314.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

5–310.1.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 167 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT FACILITY MAPPING
STANDARDS FOR THE UNIFORM MAPPING OF THE PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES OF PUBLIC
SCHOOLS IN THE STATE.

(B) LOCAL EDUCATION AGENCIES SCHOOL SYSTEMS SHALL:

(1) COOPERATE WITH THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF UNIFORM MAPPING STANDARDS; AND

(2) CONTRIBUTE DATA AS REQUESTED BY THE INTERAGENCY
COMMISSION.

~~7–452.~~ 7–1510.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE SCHOOL MAPPING DATA PROGRAM.

(3) “SCHOOL MAPPING DATA” MEANS DATA IN AN ELECTRONIC OR
DIGITAL FORMAT TO ASSIST FIRST RESPONDERS IN RESPONDING TO EMERGENCIES
AT A SCHOOL.

(B) THERE IS A SCHOOL MAPPING DATA PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT
CENTER.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE FUNDS TO COUNTY
~~BOARDS~~ LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO PRODUCE SCHOOL MAPPING DATA FOR EACH
PUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY, INCLUDING PUBLIC CHARTER SCHOOLS.

(D) (1) EACH COUNTY BOARD LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM, IN CONSULTATION
WITH THE LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY, MAY APPLY TO THE DEPARTMENT
SUBCABINET FOR FUNDS TO PRODUCE SCHOOL MAPPING DATA.

(2) SCHOOL MAPPING DATA PRODUCED WITH FUNDING FROM THE
PROGRAM SHALL COMPLY WITH THE FACILITY MAPPING STANDARDS DEVELOPED
BY THE INTERAGENCY COMMISSION ON SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION UNDER § 5–310.1
OF THIS ARTICLE.

(3) THE CENTER SHALL WORK IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
INTERAGENCY COMMISSION ON SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION TO ENSURE THAT SCHOOL
MAPPING DATA PRODUCED WITH FUNDING FROM THE PROGRAM MEETS THE
FACILITY MAPPING STANDARDS DEVELOPED UNDER § 5–310.1 OF THIS ARTICLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 167

(4) AT A MINIMUM, SCHOOL MAPPING DATA PRODUCED WITH
FUNDING FROM THE PROGRAM SHALL:

(I) BE COMPATIBLE WITH SOFTWARE PLATFORMS USED BY
THE SCHOOL AND LOCAL, STATE, AND FEDERAL PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCIES THAT
PROVIDE EMERGENCY SERVICES TO THE SCHOOL WITHOUT REQUIRING THE
PURCHASE OF ADDITIONAL SOFTWARE OR CHARGING A FEE TO VIEW OR ACCESS THE
DATA;

(II) BE IN A PRINTABLE FORMAT AND, IF REQUESTED, BE IN A
DIGITAL FILE FORMAT THAT CAN BE INTEGRATED INTO INTERACTIVE MOBILE
PLATFORMS;

(III) BE VERIFIED FOR ACCURACY BY A WALK–THROUGH OF THE
SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS;

(IV) BE ORIENTED TRUE NORTH;

(V) BE OVERLAID ON CURRENT AERIAL IMAGERY;

(VI) CONTAIN SITE–SPECIFIC LABELING THAT MATCHES THE
STRUCTURE OF SCHOOL BUILDINGS, INCLUDING:

1. ROOM LABELS;

2. HALLWAY NAMES;

3. EXTERNAL DOOR OR STAIRWELL NUMBERS; AND

4. LOCATIONS OF:

A. HAZARDS;

B. CRITICAL UTILITY LOCATIONS;

C. KEY BOXES; AND

D. AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS AND
TRAUMA KITS;

(VII) CONTAIN SITE–SPECIFIC LABELING THAT MATCHES THE
SCHOOL GROUNDS, INCLUDING:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 167 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. PARKING AREAS;

2. ATHLETIC FIELDS;

3. SURROUNDING ROADS; AND

4. NEIGHBORING PROPERTIES; AND

(VIII) BE OVERLAID WITH GRIDDED X AND Y COORDINATES.

7–1512.

(a) There is a Safe Schools Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide grants to local school systems to enhance
school safety.

(c) The Subcabinet shall administer the Fund.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately and the Comptroller shall
account for the Fund in conjunction with the Executive Director of the Center.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) Money credited to the Fund under § 17–106(e) of the Transportation
Article;

(2) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

(3) Money appropriated to the Fund under § 7–1508 of this subtitle;

(4) Money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the Fund; and

(5) Any interest earnings of the Fund.

(f) Except as provided in [subsection (g)] SUBSECTIONS (G) AND (H) of this
section, the Fund may be used only to provide grants to local school systems to enhance
school safety, including:

(1) Conducting training for students and school personnel on de–escalation
of situations and identifying and reporting behaviors of concern;

(2) Conducting training of assessment teams;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 167

(3) Conducting school safety evaluations;

(4) Establishing formal and anonymous mechanisms for reporting safety
concerns;

(5) Reimbursing local law enforcement agencies for school resource officer
training provided by the Center;

(6) Enrolling school security employees in training provided by the Center;

(7) Developing plans to deliver school–based behavioral health and other
wraparound services to students who exhibit behaviors of concern, including establishing
systems to maximize external funding for services;

(8) Outreach to the broader school community to improve school safety,
including to heighten awareness of existing mental health services and other services;

(9) Providing information to students and parents on traveling safely to
and from school, including data related to bus and pedestrian safety, strategies for ensuring
personal safety, efforts of the local school system to improve safety, and information on
available options for reporting incidents and concerns; and

(10) Assisting local school systems to improve and monitor traffic control
measures in the immediate vicinity of schools to reduce the potential for pedestrian and
vehicle accidents.

(g) Beginning in fiscal year 2020 and each fiscal year thereafter, at least
$10,000,000 of the money in the Fund shall be used to provide grants to local school systems
and local law enforcement agencies as provided under § 7–1508 of this subtitle.

(H) THE SUBCABINET MAY USE THE FUND TO PROVIDE FUNDING TO THE
DEPARTMENT TO IMPLEMENT § 7–452 OF THIS TITLE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–1510.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

[(h)] (I) (1) The Subcabinet may make grants to local school systems and
local law enforcement agencies from the Fund.

(2) The Subcabinet shall establish procedures for local school systems and
local law enforcement agencies to apply for grants from the Fund.

[(i)] (J) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the
same manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 167 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(j)] (K) Expenditures from the Fund may only be made:

(1) In accordance with the State budget; or

(2) By the budget amendment procedure as provided in § 7–209 of the State
Finance and Procurement Article, if at least 45 days have passed since the budget
amendment and supporting information were submitted to the budget committees for their
review and comment.

[(k)] (L) Money expended from the Fund by local school systems to enhance
school safety is supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that
otherwise would be appropriated to local school systems.

Article – General Provisions

4–314.1.

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a custodian shall deny
inspection of any record disclosing:

(1) a safety evaluation or school emergency plan developed under § 7–1510
of the Education Article;

(2) an emergency response policy developed under § 7–1509 of the Education
Article and § 3–520 of the Public Safety Article;

(3) guidelines for school resource officers and supplemental coverage by
local law enforcement agencies developed by the Maryland Center for School Safety under §
7–1508 of the Education Article; [or]

(4) a plan to implement the Maryland Center for School Safety’s guidelines
adopted by a local school system under § 7–1508 of the Education Article; OR

(5) ANY SCHOOL MAPPING DATA PRODUCED UNDER THE SCHOOL
MAPPING DATA PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–1510.1 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE.

(b) A custodian shall allow inspection of safety evaluation, school emergency plan,
and emergency response policy records by the following entities in the performance of the
entity’s official duties:

(1) the Maryland Center for School Safety;

(2) the Interagency Commission on School Construction;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 167

(3) the Department of State Police;

(4) the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services;

(5) the Maryland Department of Emergency Management;

(6) local law enforcement agencies; and

(7) local organizations for emergency management.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7