START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 513

Chapter 513

(House Bill 434)

AN ACT concerning

Persons Providing Lobbyist Compensation – Statement of Political
Contributions – Exemption for Nonprofits

FOR the purpose of exempting certain nonprofit organizations from the requirement for a
person providing lobbyist compensation to file a statement of political contributions
with the State Board of Elections; and generally relating to statements of political
contributions by persons providing lobbyist compensation.

BY adding to
Article – General Provisions
Section 5–716(a–1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 5–716(c) and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – General Provisions

5–716.

(A–1) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION
QUALIFIED UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE.

(c) Subject to subsection (i) of this section, a person shall file a statement in
accordance with this section if at any time during the reporting period the person spent at
least $500 to provide compensation to one or more regulated lobbyists.

(f) The statement required under this section shall be made under oath and state:

(1) the name of each applicable recipient to whom an applicable
contribution was made or caused to be made during the reporting period and, if not
previously reported, during the preceding reporting period;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 513 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) the office held or sought by each applicable recipient named in item (1)
of this subsection;

(3) the aggregate contributions made to each applicable recipient named in
item (1) of this subsection;

(4) the name of each regulated lobbyist employed or retained by the person
filing the statement; and

(5) the name of the person who made the political contribution and the
relationship of that person to the person filing the statement if a political contribution was
made by another person but is attributed to the person filing the statement.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2