START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 486 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 486 
(Delegate Fair, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Residential Property Sales - Contract Disclosures - Superfund Sites 
 
  
This bill requires the seller of any residential property located within 1.0 mile of a 
National Priorities List (NPL) Superfund site to provide a specified addendum to the 
contract of sale. The addendum must include (1) the identification of the Superfund site 
that is within 1.0 mile of the property; (2) the definition of an NPL Superfund site under 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) guidelines; (3) information regarding 
specific EPA websites; and (4) a notice that within five days after signing and dating the 
contract (and on written notice to the seller), the buyer may void the contract and, on 
recession, receive a full refund of any money paid to the seller. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions set forth numerous requirements regarding statements, 
disclosures, and notices in contracts for the sale of property, including provisions relating 
to:   
 
 
notice of estimated deferred water and sewer charges; 
 
notice of costs of recordation or transfer taxes; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 486/ Page 2 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a “critical area” of the 
Chesapeake Bay and Atlantic Coastal Bays; 
 
notice of specified development impact fees; 
 
notice of protection by the Real Estate Guaranty Fund; 
 
notices related to deposits, specified contractual provisions, and warranties; and 
 
notice that the subject property may be located in a zone of dewatering influence. 
 
Many requirements regarding such statements, disclosures, and notices vary depending on 
the type of property at issue and/or the jurisdiction where the property is located. Generally, 
unless otherwise specifically provided, a contract of sale is not rendered invalid by the 
omission of any statement, disclosure, or notice. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Department of the Environment administers the 
State’s Superfund program. The program oversees assessment and cleanup of hazardous 
waste sites by responsible persons. The program also conducts assessment and cleanup of 
hazardous waste sites when no responsible person exists for a site or when the person is 
unable or unwilling to do the work. 
 
The federal Superfund program was created as a result of The Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), which was enacted 
in 1980 and amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986. 
Superfund is a program administered by EPA to locate, investigate, and clean up the worst 
hazardous waste sites throughout the United States. These sites include abandoned 
warehouses, manufacturing facilities, processing plants, and landfills. EPA’s Superfund 
Enterprise Management System (known as SEMS) database is the official repository for 
site and nonsite specific Superfund data in support of CERCLA. It contains information on 
hazardous waste site assessment and remediation from 1983 to the present. NPL is the list 
of sites of national priority among the known releases or threatened releases of hazardous 
substances, pollutants, or contaminants throughout the United States and its territories. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 485 and HB 281 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 125 (Senators Lewis Young and Folden) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 486/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3