START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 567

Chapter 567

(House Bill 457)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – Synthetic Turf – ~~Chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~Custody~~ Disclosure and Study

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environment~~ ~~to~~ ~~establish~~ ~~a~~ ~~system~~ ~~to~~
~~track~~ ~~the~~ ~~chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~custody~~ ~~of~~ ~~synthetic~~ ~~turf~~ ~~installed~~ ~~on~~ ~~sports~~ ~~and~~ ~~playing~~ ~~fields~~ ~~in~~
~~the~~ ~~State;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~custodian~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~synthetic~~ ~~turf~~ ~~sports~~ ~~or~~ ~~playing~~ ~~field~~ ~~installed~~
~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~report~~ ~~chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~custody~~ ~~information~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~date~~ ~~or~~ ~~within~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~time~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~completion~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~installation,~~ ~~whichever~~ ~~is~~ ~~later;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~custodian~~ ~~of~~ ~~synthetic~~ ~~turf~~ ~~that~~
~~was~~ ~~removed~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~custody~~ ~~information~~ ~~was~~ ~~reported~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~
~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~to~~ ~~report~~ ~~updated~~ ~~chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~custody~~ ~~information~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~serve~~ ~~as~~ ~~the~~ ~~custodian~~ ~~for~~ ~~chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~custody~~ ~~information~~
~~submitted~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~and~~ ~~develop~~ ~~and~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~a~~ ~~website~~ ~~that~~ ~~includes~~ ~~certain~~
~~chain~~ ~~of~~ ~~custody~~ ~~information;~~ requiring a producer or seller of synthetic turf to
disclose to a customer certain maintenance and cost information ~~and~~ ~~certain~~
~~reporting~~ ~~requirements;~~ requiring the Department of the Environment, in
consultation with representatives of the synthetic turf industry, local environmental
and community stakeholders, and synthetic turf producers, retailers, and users, to
conduct a certain study; and generally relating to synthetic turf.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 9–2601 ~~through~~ and ~~9–2604~~ ~~9–2605~~ 9–2602 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 26. Synthetic Turf”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

SUBTITLE 26. SYNTHETIC TURF.

9–2601.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

~~(B)~~ ~~“CUSTODIAN”~~ ~~MEANS:~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 567 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) A PERSON THAT OWNS OR IS IN CONTROL OF SYNTHETIC TURF IN
THE STATE; OR

(2) ANY CURRENT OR SUBSEQUENT OWNER OF A PROPERTY ON
WHICH THERE IS EXISTING SYNTHETIC TURF.

(C) (B) “PRODUCER” MEANS A PERSON THAT:

(1) OWNS OR LICENSES A TRADEMARK OR BRAND UNDER WHICH
SYNTHETIC TURF IS SOLD, OFFERED FOR SALE, DISTRIBUTED, OR OFFERED FOR
PROMOTIONAL PURPOSES IN THE STATE; OR

(2) IMPORTS SYNTHETIC TURF INTO THE STATE FOR SALE OR
DISTRIBUTION.

(D) (C) (1) “SYNTHETIC TURF” MEANS PLASTIC TUFTED CARPET THAT:

(I) IS INTENDED TO HAVE, OR INCIDENTALLY HAS, AN
APPEARANCE THAT MIMICS GRASS;

(II) FUNCTIONS AS A REPLACEMENT FOR GRASS; AND

(III) HAS THE PRIMARY PURPOSE OF BEING USED AS AN INDOOR
OR OUTDOOR SPORTS OR PLAYING FIELD; AND

(IV) IS AT LEAST 5,000 SQUARE FEET IN SIZE.

(2) “SYNTHETIC TURF” INCLUDES SHOCK PADS AND TURF INFILL.

(E) (D) “TURF INFILL” MEANS A MATERIAL THAT:

(1) IS POURED ON TOP OF SYNTHETIC TURF TO HOLD SYNTHETIC
TURF BLADES IN PLACE;

(2) WEIGHS DOWN THE SYNTHETIC TURF SO IT DOES NOT DEVELOP
WRINKLES OR BUCKLE;

(3) MIMICS THE IMPACT ABSORPTION PROPERTIES OF SOIL UNDER
NATURAL GRASS; AND

(4) INCLUDES SHREDDED OR GRANULATED TIRE, RUBBER, SILICA
SAND, OR OTHER MATERIAL THAT IS USED AS INFILL ON SYNTHETIC TURF.

9–2602.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 567

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A SYSTEM TO TRACK THE CHAIN
~~OF~~ ~~CUSTODY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~SYNTHETIC~~ ~~TURF~~ ~~INSTALLED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~SPORTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~PLAYING~~ ~~FIELDS~~ ~~IN~~
THE STATE, FROM THE TRANSPORTATION, INSTALLATION, AND REMOVAL OF THE
SYNTHETIC TURF TO ITS REUSE, RECYCLING, AND FINAL DISPOSAL.

(B) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, OR WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE
COMPLETION OF THE INSTALLATION, WHICHEVER IS LATER, THE CUSTODIAN OF A
SYNTHETIC TURF SPORTS OR PLAYING FIELD INSTALLED IN THE STATE, INCLUDING
A REPLACEMENT OR BRAND NEW SYNTHETIC TURF SPORTS OR PLAYING FIELD,
SHALL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:

(1) THE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION AND STREET ADDRESS OF THE
INSTALLED SYNTHETIC TURF;

(2) THE NAME, ADDRESS, AND CONTACT INFORMATION OF:

(I) THE CUSTODIAN OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF;

(II) THE PRODUCER OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF; AND

(III) THE BUSINESS OR CONTRACTOR THAT INSTALLED THE
SYNTHETIC TURF;

(3) THE TYPE AND BRAND OF SYNTHETIC TURF INSTALLED;

(4) THE AREA OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF IN SQUARE FEET;

(5) THE WEIGHT OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF;

(6) THE DATE THE SYNTHETIC TURF WAS INSTALLED; AND

(7) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF
~~THE~~ ~~SYNTHETIC~~ ~~TURF~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REMOVED~~ ~~AFTER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHAIN~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CUSTODY~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~IS~~
REPORTED TO THE DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
NEW CUSTODIAN OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF SHALL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT:

(I) THE NEW GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION AND STREET ADDRESS
OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF;

(II) THE NAME, ADDRESS, AND CONTACT INFORMATION OF:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 567 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. THE TRANSPORTER OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF; AND

2. THE NEW CUSTODIAN OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF;

(III) THE AREA OF THE SYNTHETIC TURF IN SQUARE FEET;

(IV) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE WEIGHT OF THE
SYNTHETIC TURF;

(V) HOW THE SYNTHETIC TURF IS USED AT THE NEW LOCATION,
INCLUDING WHETHER THE SYNTHETIC TURF IS RECYCLED, PROCESSED FOR FINAL
DISPOSAL, OR USED TO REFURBISH OR REPLACE A SPORTS OR PLAYING FIELD;

(VI) IF THE SYNTHETIC TURF IS INSTALLED AT A SPORTS OR
PLAYING FIELD, THE DATE OF INSTALLATION; AND

(VII) ANY OTHER INFORMATION REASONABLY RELATED TO THE
CHAIN OF CUSTODY OF SYNTHETIC TURF, AS REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) A NEW CUSTODIAN OF SYNTHETIC TURF THAT TRANSPORTS THE
SYNTHETIC TURF FOR USE OR DISPOSAL OUT–OF–STATE SHALL REPORT TO THE
DEPARTMENT THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(I), (II)1, (III),
(IV), AND (VII) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) CHAIN OF CUSTODY INFORMATION SHALL BE:

(1) REPORTED IN WRITING TO THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(2) IN A FORM REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(E) A CUSTODIAN MAY NOT BE PENALIZED FOR VARIATION IN THE WEIGHT
TOTALS REPORTED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

~~9–2603.~~

~~(A)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) SERVE AS THE REPOSITORY FOR THE CHAIN OF CUSTODY
INFORMATION SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) MAINTAIN THE CHAIN OF CUSTODY INFORMATION
~~PERMANENTLY.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 567

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN A PUBLICLY
ACCESSIBLE WEBSITE THAT INCLUDES:

(1) THE CHAIN OF CUSTODY INFORMATION SUBMITTED TO THE
DEPARTMENT UNDER § 9–2602 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(2) THE NAMES AND CONTACT INFORMATION OF EACH CUSTODIAN
THAT PROVIDED THE CHAIN OF CUSTODY INFORMATION.

~~9–2604.~~

A PRODUCER OR SELLER OF SYNTHETIC TURF SHALL, BEFORE THE SALE OF
SYNTHETIC TURF, DISCLOSE TO A CUSTOMER:

(1) THE MAINTENANCE THAT IS TYPICALLY PERFORMED
THROUGHOUT THE LIFESPAN OF SYNTHETIC TURF; AND

(2) THE INDUSTRY STANDARD TYPICAL COST FOR:

(I) REMOVING SYNTHETIC TURF;

(II) REPLACING SYNTHETIC TURF; AND

(III) DISPOSING OF SYNTHETIC TURF; AND

(3) THE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 9–2602 OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

~~9–2605.~~

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A PERSON THAT
~~VIOLATES~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ADMINISTRATIVE~~ ~~PENALTY~~ ~~NOT~~
EXCEEDING $5,000.

(B) A PENALTY MAY NOT BE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION UNLESS A
PERSON IS FIRST ISSUED A WRITTEN NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Department of the Environment, in consultation with the Synthetic Turf
Council and other representatives of the synthetic turf industry, local environmental and
community stakeholders, and synthetic turf producers, retailers, and users, including local
governments, county school systems, higher education facilities, and professional sports
organizations, shall conduct a study on:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 567 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) synthetic turf;

(2) existing synthetic turf fields in the State; and

(3) the synthetic turf industry in the State.

(b) On or before July 1, 2026, the Department shall submit a report of its findings
to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and the House
Environment and Transportation Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article.

(c) The report required under subsection (b) of this section shall include:

(1) industry information and background;

(2) methodologies used for data collection, including public hearings and
other public outreach;

(3) current industry practices and guidelines relating to the sale,
maintenance, reuse, and disposal of synthetic turf;

(4) current industry disposal methods of synthetic turf, including known
locations of such disposal;

(5) proper and improper disposal methods of synthetic turf;

(6) current recycling rates and methods of synthetic turf and future
recycling proposals;

(7) factors influencing disposal and recycling;

(8) case studies and examples; and

(9) proposals for improving recycling rates and waste management.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6