START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 434 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 434 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Persons Providing Lobbyist Compensation – Statement of Political Contributions 
– Exemption for Nonprofits 
 
 
This bill exempts qualified 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations from having to file a 
disclosure statement with the State Board of Elections (SBE) for spending at least $500 to 
compensate one or more regulated lobbyists. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Lobbying Provisions of the Maryland Public Ethics Law 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the General Provisions Article (“Lobbying”) governs the regulation 
of lobbying in the State. An entity must register with the State Ethics Commission (SEC) 
and is considered a regulated lobbyist under the Maryland Public Ethics Law, if the entity 
has incurred specified expenses and/or received specified compensation for the purpose of 
influencing legislative or executive action, as set forth under § 5-702 of the 
General Provisions Article. A regulated lobbyist must file a registration with SEC within 
five days after first performing an act that requires registration under § 5-702 and by 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 434/ Page 2 
November 1 annually thereafter. Regulated lobbyists are subject to various reporting 
requirements and other provisions under the Ethics Law. 
 
Financial Disclosures, Generally 
 
Under the Maryland Public Ethics Law, a person must file a statement with SBE if at any 
time during a specified six-month reporting period the person (1) spent at least $500 to 
provide compensation to one or more regulated lobbyists and (2) made or caused to be 
made an applicable contribution in the cumulative amount of $500 or more. The statement, 
made under oath, should specify:   
 
 
the name of each applicable recipient to whom an applicable contribution was made 
or caused to be made during the reporting period and, if not previously reported, 
during the preceding reporting period; 
 
the office held or sought by each applicable recipient named; 
 
the aggregate contributions made to each applicable recipient named; 
 
the name of each regulated lobbyist employed or retained by the person filing the 
statement; and 
 
the name of the person who made the political contribution and the relationship of 
that person to the person filing the statement, if a political contribution was made 
by another person but is attributed to the person filing the statement. 
 
SBE is authorized to impose fees for the late filing of a statement, and civil penalties for 
failing to file the required disclosures. A person who knowingly and willfully fails to 
comply with the filing requirement is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up 
to $25,000 and/or imprisonment of up to one year. 
 
Under the bill, these provisions would no longer apply to qualified 501(c)(3) nonprofit 
organizations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1143 (Senator Kagan) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; State Ethics Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 434/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3