START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 458 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 458 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Protection of Identity of Minor Victim 
 
 
This bill prohibits the court or a party in a criminal or juvenile delinquency case, on notice 
that an electronic or paper filing includes “identifying information” of a minor victim, from 
disclosing or allowing inspection of any such filing (including a charging document) to a 
nonparty unless the court or the party disclosing or allowing inspection of the filing redacts 
all identifying information within the filing or the court finds by clear and convincing 
evidence that there is good cause to order otherwise. “Identifying information” means the 
name of, and any other information that could reasonably be expected to identify, a 
minor victim. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal general fund expenditure increase and operational impact for the 
Judiciary, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill may have an operational impact on the circuit courts, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  On motion of the State or on request of a victim or witness, during a 
criminal trial or a juvenile delinquency adjudicatory hearing, a court may prohibit the 
release of the address or telephone number of the victim or witness unless the court 
determines that good cause is shown for the release of the information. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 458/ Page 2 
In general, police and court records concerning children are confidential, and their contents 
may not be divulged, by subpoena or otherwise, except by a court order upon a showing of 
good cause or in limited circumstances specified in statute. However, in 2000, the 
Attorney General noted in a published opinion that this confidentiality provision applies 
only to police records concerning a matter that could bring the child within the jurisdiction 
of the juvenile court, and therefore, does not ordinarily prohibit disclosure of a police 
record in which a child is simply identified as a victim or witness. 85 Md. Op. Att’y Gen. 249 
(September 1, 2000). 
 
State Expenditures:  According to the Judiciary, the bill’s requirements have a significant 
operational and potential fiscal impact. Specifically, the Judiciary states that although the 
bill’s provision regarding notice will facilitate notice to the court on which new documents 
necessitate redaction of identifying information, redaction is still required for any public 
case. The Judiciary further advises that because it operates a number of public kiosks in 
each courthouse for viewing public court documents that have been made available, it must 
preemptively redact all impacted documents and cannot wait to do so until a specific case 
file has been requested. The Judiciary anticipates the need for significant clerical time and 
resources for court staff (in the District and circuit courts) to implement the bill. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) generally acknowledges that the bill results 
in an operational impact and increases expenditures for the Judiciary due to the additional 
work created for court clerks; however, DLS advises that the fiscal impact is likely 
minimal. For purposes of this analysis, because the required redaction of identifying 
information prior to authorizing specified disclosure/inspection appears to be triggered 
only after notice that filings contain such information, it is assumed that identifying 
information within existing records that are available under current standards does not have 
to be redacted (which would necessitate significant time and resources) unless the Judiciary 
receives specific supplemental notice regarding the content of a particular document. It is 
also assumed that the Judiciary can incorporate procedures applicable to all filings after the 
bill’s effective date to effectuate notice of potential identifying information within a new 
filing. The Judiciary can likely implement additional procedures and requirements 
regarding the notice and new case filings to further mitigate the operational and fiscal 
impact (e.g., requiring filers in applicable cases to provide a redacted and unredacted copy 
of any documents). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1032 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 111 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 458/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3