START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 428 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 428 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Appropriations and Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Community Schools - Rental Assistance for Community School Families 
Program and Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Rental Assistance for Community School Families Program and 
related fund to provide rental assistance to eligible student households at community 
schools. The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) must 
administer the program in consultation with the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE). The Governor may include an appropriation of $10.0 million in the annual budget 
bill for the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million in FY 2025, which is 
budgeted contingent on enactment of the bill; special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase commensurately. Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by an 
additional $1.3 million in FY 2025 due to a contingent mandated distribution, as discussed 
below. Assuming discretionary funding is provided in the out-years, general fund 
expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026; special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase commensurately, and by an additional $1.7 million 
annually due to a contingent mandated distribution, as discussed below.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$6.3 
$11.7 
$11.7 
$11.7 
$11.7 
GF Expenditure 
$5.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
SF Expenditure 
$6.3 
$11.7 
$11.7 
$11.7 
$11.7 
Net Effect 
($5.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 428/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Eligibility for Assistance 
 
For a family to be eligible for assistance under the program, a student in the family must 
be: 
 
 
enrolled in a community school that receives funding under the Concentration of 
Poverty School Grant Program (CPG); and 
 
from a household (1) that is housed in a rental property where at least one household 
member is at risk of homelessness or housing instability, as specified, or (2) where 
at least one member qualifies for assistance under the federal McKinney-Vento 
Homeless Assistance Act. 
 
Assistance Provided 
 
Eligible uses for program funding include (1) rental payments or arrears, or fines or fees 
associated with those payments; (2) utility payments or arrears, or fines or fees associated 
with those payments; and (3) relocation expenses. 
 
An eligible household may receive support for up to 12 months, but subject to the 
availability of funding, support may be extended for up to an additional 3 months, as 
specified. 
 
Program Administration and Funding 
 
DHCD must administer the program with support from the Director of Community Schools 
in MSDE.  
 
The Rental Assistance for Community Schools Families Fund (RACSFF) is a special, 
nonlapsing fund that may be used only to provide rental assistance under the program and 
to cover DHCD’s costs of administering the program. It consists of money appropriated in 
the State budget, interest earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted 
for the benefit of the fund. 
 
Current Law:  CPGs have two components. First, each qualifying school receives a 
personnel grant to employ a community school coordinator with specified qualifications 
and provide full-time coverage by at least one health care practitioner. A county that 
provides health coverage or community school services with funds other than the personnel 
grant must continue to provide those services through fiscal 2030. Second, per pupil grants 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 428/ Page 3 
are provided for each qualifying school following the completion of a specified needs 
assessment. The personnel grant is a State-funded categorical amount that increases with 
inflation. Per pupil grants are only wealth equalized for districts that receive the minimum 
State funding (40%) under the compensatory education formula; for all other districts, the 
State pays the full amount. The local funding percentage is based on the compensatory 
education wealth equalization formula. Exhibit 1 lays out the phase-in of the 
two components of the funding. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Current Law Concentration of Poverty Phase-in 
 
School Poverty 
Percentage 
Year Personnel 
Phased-in 
Year Per Pupil 
Phased-in 
> = 80% 
FY 2020 
FY 2022 
75%-80% 
FY 2021 
FY 2023 
70%-75% 
FY 2022 
FY 2024 
65%-70% 
FY 2023 
FY 2025 
60%-65% 
FY 2024 
FY 2026 
55%-60% 
FY 2025 
FY 2027 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Renters’ Rights and Stabilization Act  
 
Chapter 124 of 2024, the Renters’ Rights and Stabilization Act of 2024, effective 
October 1, 2024, increases, from $8 to $43, a maximum surcharge imposed by the 
District Court for summary ejectment cases. Contingent on the enactment of this bill or its 
cross file, revenues from the surcharge must be deposited as follows:  45% into the 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program in DHCD; 45% into the Maryland Legal 
Services Corporation Fund; and 10% into RACSFF. 
 
Maryland Energy Assistance Program  
 
The Maryland Energy Assistance Program, administered by the Office of Home Energy 
Programs within the Department of Human Services, helps the State’s vulnerable 
populations pay their heating bills, minimize crises, and make heating costs more 
affordable. Benefits include utility and fossil fuel payments, the Utility Service Protection 
Program, referrals to weatherization services, emergency heating system repairs and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 428/ Page 4 
replacement, waivers on utility fees, discounts on fuel purchases, and gas arrearage 
assistance. 
 
Homelessness Solutions Program 
 
DHCD’s Division of Neighborhood Revitalization administers the Homelessness Solutions 
Program (HSP), which serves as a statewide response to address the issue of homelessness 
in Maryland, providing technical support and funding to Continuums of Care and Local 
Homeless Coalitions, which coordinate funding and resources for service providers across 
the State. The goals of HSP are to reduce the number of individuals/households who 
become homeless or return to homelessness and to shorten the length of time an individual 
or household is homeless. HSP funds can be used for rapid rehousing, homelessness 
prevention, and other related services. 
 
Emergency Rental Assistance Program 
 
In response to the economic hardships caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, DHCD and 
local governments received a combined total of more than $700 million from the federal 
Emergency Rental Assistance Program (ERAP) to provide relief for families struggling 
with unpaid rent and/or utility bills. However, most of those funds have been exhausted 
and will likely no longer be available when the bill takes effect. 
 
State Expenditures:  Based on the most recent data available, the number of schools 
receiving CPG personnel grants is projected to be 610 in fiscal 2025, with the potential to 
grow to as many as 692 in the next few years. Combined, schools projected to receive 
CPG personnel grants in fiscal 2025 have a total enrollment of about 325,000 students, 
almost 250,000 of whom are eligible for free or reduced-price meals (FRPMs). Based on a 
conservative estimate that 5% of FRPMs families in community schools qualify for rental 
assistance under the bill, at least 12,500 families may be eligible for assistance. Based on 
the authorized appropriation of $10.0 million annually as well as additional funding 
through the mandated distribution, if all these families were to receive assistance, the 
average amount would be approximately $925 per family over the entire 12 months of 
eligibility – which also accounts for staffing requirements discussed below. To further put 
the funding in context, DHCD estimates, based on current average ERAP assistance levels, 
that the discretionary $10.0 million appropriation alone could serve up to 3,000 to 
3,500 families per year, which equates to approximately $2,850 to $3,300 per family each 
year. 
 
The bill authorizes the Governor to provide an appropriation of $10.0 million annually; the 
fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million for the 
program, contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file. As the bill effectuates the 
contingency, general fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025, and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 428/ Page 5 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase commensurately. As the program does not 
terminate and there is a demonstrated ongoing need for rental assistance, this analysis 
assumes that (1) the authorized annual funding of $10.0 million is needed each year 
beginning in fiscal 2026 and (2) general funds are deposited into the special fund each year. 
 
The bill also effectuates the contingency in Chapter 124 that distributes 10% of revenues 
from the District Court surcharge assessed for summary ejectment cases to RACSFF. Total 
annual proceeds for the fund from the contingent mandatory distribution in Chapter 124 
are projected to be $1.7 million, except that, for fiscal 2025, the total is $1.3 million given 
that legislation’s October 1, 2024 effective date. These revenues are assumed to be in 
addition to the $5.0 million budgeted amount in fiscal 2025 and the $10.0 million 
discretionary out-year appropriations assumed by this analysis.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2025, DHCD requires one new position to develop program policies 
and eligibility forms, establish internal systems for payment and data collection, assist local 
school systems and community school coordinators, monitor compliance, and generally 
implement the program. The cost for that rental assistance manager position totals 
approximately $78,000 in the first year (which reflects a 90-day start-up delay from the 
bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date) and increases to about $100,000 in the out-years due to 
annualization and inflation. As RACSFF can be used to cover DHCD’s administrative 
costs, there are no additional State expenditures associated with the position. However, 
fewer funds are available for rental assistance grants to families. Accordingly, residual 
funding of approximately $6.2 million is assumed to be available for rental assistance 
payments in fiscal 2025, and $11.6 million each year thereafter. If, however, the 
$10.0 million in authorized funding is not appropriated in fiscal 2026 or any subsequent 
year, less funding is available for the program. Nevertheless, as the distribution required 
by Chapter 124 must be provided annually, it is assumed that annual administrative costs 
are covered from that source in the out-years and that some grant funding is also available 
each year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 370 (Senator Hettleman) - Budget and Taxation and 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 428/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 8, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6