START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 437 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 437 
(Delegate Wivell, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council - Membership 
 
 
This bill codifies the Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council 
(ZEEVIC), adds members, and otherwise generally clarifies membership and reporting 
dates. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering representation on the council does not affect governmental 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands the membership of ZEEVIC to add (1) the Secretary of 
General Services (or designee); (2) one representative of the automotive dismantling and 
recycling industry; and (3) another member so that existing representation from a plug-in 
electric drive vehicle manufacturer can be bifurcated to encompass both light- and 
heavy-duty vehicle manufacturers. Most other membership changes are clarifying as they 
generally restore changes made by Chapter 118 of 2020, which were subsequently 
inadvertently omitted under further amendments to ZEEVIC by Chapter 607 of 2021. 
However, the bill retains certain representation as it was prior to Chapter 118 – specifically,  
two representatives of electric companies (which had been changed to three under 
Chapter 118) and one representative of a retail electric supplier community (which had 
been eliminated under Chapter 118).  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 437/ Page 2 
The interim and final reporting dates are clarifying and simply restore the dates from 
Chapter 118. Likewise, the statutory termination date for the council is consistent with that 
under Chapter 118.  
 
Current Law:  ZEEVIC was initially established, through uncodified language, by 
Chapters 400 and 401 of 2011 as the Maryland Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council 
(EVIC) with a two-year duration. EVIC was required to develop a plan to expand the 
adoption of electric vehicles and develop an infrastructure charging network. In its (then) 
final report issued in December 2012, the council made several recommendations, 
including (1) extending EVIC through June 2015; (2) increasing the amount of 
zero emission State fleet vehicle purchases to 10% by 2020 and at least 25% by 2025; 
(3) establishing a grant program for electric vehicle support equipment installation and 
procurement of transaction management software for multiunit dwellings; and 
(4) extending the recharging equipment tax credit through December 2016, and the 
qualified electric vehicle excise tax credit to July 1, 2016. Consistent with those 
recommendations, Chapters 64 and 65 of 2013 extended EVIC through June 2015.  
 
Since then, EVIC has been extended multiple times, with more reporting, membership 
changes, and a shift in focus. Specifically, Chapter 378 of 2015 extended EVIC for another 
five years to June 30, 2020, and shifted the reporting deadline to December 1 of each year, 
with a final report due June 30, 2020. Four years later, Chapter 213 of 2019 changed the 
name of the council to be ZEEVIC, expanded membership of the council, altered its 
responsibilities to focus more generally on zero emission vehicles and fuel cell electric 
vehicles, and required an additional interim report (on December 1, 2019). Even so, 
Chapter 213 did not extend the termination date of the council. Nevertheless, ZEEVIC 
received a six-year extension (from June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2026) by Chapter 118 of 
2020, which also established six more interim reporting due dates (every December 1, from 
2020 through 2025). Likewise, the final report was shifted to be June 30, 2026, concurrent 
with ZEEVIC’s new termination date. Chapter 118 also further altered membership of 
ZEEVIC by adding one more member (a second representative of the environmental 
community) and slightly altering affiliations for three existing members, including 
eliminating the representative of the retail electric supplier community and adding a 
third representative of electric companies instead.  
 
Chapter 607 of 2021, which altered the duties of the Office of People’s Counsel, further 
modified membership of ZEEVIC – to include the People’s Counsel or designee – but did 
not change reporting requirements or the duration of the council. However, Chapter 607 
inadvertently omitted the uncodified changes that had been made to membership and 
reporting under Chapter 118. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 437/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1291 and SB 950 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 553 (Senator Corderman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy 
Administration; Public Service Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3