START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 309

Chapter 309

(House Bill 465)

AN ACT concerning

Workplace Fraud and Prevailing Wage – Violations – ~~Penalties~~ Civil Penalty
and Referrals

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~criminal~~ ~~penalties~~ ~~for~~ ~~employers~~ ~~knowingly~~ ~~failing~~
~~to~~ ~~properly~~ ~~classify~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~as~~ ~~employees~~ ~~and~~ ~~contractors~~ ~~and~~ ~~subcontractors~~
~~knowingly~~ ~~violating~~ ~~State~~ ~~prevailing~~ ~~wage~~ ~~laws;~~ altering the maximum civil penalty
for the knowing failure of an employer to properly classify an individual as an
employee; requiring the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to refer to the
Comptroller, certain State’s Attorneys, and certain federal departments certain
complaints that allege a violation of certain tax laws under certain circumstances;
and generally relating to violations of the workplace fraud and State prevailing wage
laws.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–909 and 3–910
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 17–227
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–909.

(a) An employer found to have knowingly failed to properly classify an individual
in violation of § 3–904 of this subtitle:

(1) shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to $5,000 $10,000 for each
employee who was not properly classified; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 309 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT
TO A FINE NOT TO EXCEED $5,000 OR IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 60 DAYS OR
BOTH FOR EACH EMPLOYEE WHO WAS NOT PROPERLY CLASSIFIED.

(b) In determining the amount of the penalty TO BE ASSESSED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION, the Commissioner or the administrative law judge
shall consider:

(1) the gravity of the violation;

(2) the size of the employer’s business;

(3) the employer’s good faith;

(4) the employer’s history of violations under this subtitle; and

(5) whether the employer:

(i) has been found, by a court or an administrative unit, to have
deprived the employee of any rights to which the employee would have been entitled under
a State protective labor law, including but not limited to:

1. any provision of this article;

2. the State prevailing wage law, under §§ 17–221 and
17–222 of the State Finance and Procurement Article; or

3. the living wage law, under § 18–108 of the State Finance
and Procurement Article; and

(ii) has made restitution and come into compliance with all such
State protective labor laws with respect to the employee.

(c) If the court or an administrative unit determines that an individual or class
of individuals is entitled to restitution as a result of the employer’s violation of § 3–904 of
this subtitle, the court or administrative unit:

(1) shall award each individual any restitution to which the individual may
be entitled; and

(2) may award each individual an additional amount up to three times the
amount of such restitution.

(d) An employer in violation of § 3–904 of this subtitle may be assessed double the
administrative penalties set forth in subsection [(a)] (A)(1) of this section if the employer

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 309

has been found previously to have violated this subtitle by a final order of a court or an
administrative unit.

(e) An employer who has been found by a final order of a court or an
administrative unit to have violated § 3–904 of this subtitle three or more times may be
assessed an administrative penalty of up to $20,000 for each employee.

(f) (1) An employer may be assessed civil penalties under this section or §
8–201.1 or § 9–402.1 of this article by only one final order of a court or administrative unit
for the same actions constituting a violation of this subtitle.

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, an employer may be
ordered to make restitution, pay any interest due, and otherwise comply with all applicable
laws and regulations by orders of a court and all relevant administrative units, including
the Comptroller, the Office of Unemployment Insurance, the Insurance Administration,
and the Workers’ Compensation Commission.

(g) Any penalty issued under SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF this section against an
employer shall be in effect against any successor corporation or business entity that:

(1) has one or more of the same principals or officers as the employer
against whom the penalty was assessed, unless the principal or officer did not or with the
exercise of reasonable diligence could not know of the violation for which the penalty was
imposed; and

(2) is engaged in the same or equivalent trade or activity.

3–910.

(A) As authorized by State and federal law, units within the Maryland
Department of Labor and the Department of Budget and Management, the Secretary of
State, the Comptroller, the Maryland Insurance Administration, and other State agencies
shall cooperate and share information concerning any suspected failure to properly classify
an individual as an employee.

(B) ON A SHOWING BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT A
VIOLATION OF § 3–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE HAS OCCURRED AND AS AUTHORIZED BY
FEDERAL AND STATE LAW, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REFER ANY COMPLAINT
THAT ALLEGES A VIOLATION OF § 13–1007 OR § 13–1024 OF THE TAX – GENERAL
ARTICLE TO THE:

(1) COMPTROLLER;

(2) STATE’S ATTORNEY WITH JURISDICTION OVER THE ALLEGED
VIOLATION;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 309 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE;

(4) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR; AND

(5) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

17–227.

(A) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER PENALTIES AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE, A CONTRACTOR OR SUBCONTRACTOR FOUND TO HAVE KNOWINGLY
~~VIOLATED~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~GUILTY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~MISDEMEANOR~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ON~~ ~~CONVICTION~~ ~~IS~~
SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT TO EXCEED $5,000 OR IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 60
DAYS OR BOTH FOR EACH VIOLATION.

(B) ON A SHOWING BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT A
VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE HAS OCCURRED, THE COMMISSIONER SHALL REFER
ANY COMPLAINT THAT ALLEGES A VIOLATION OF § 13–1007 OR § 13–1024 OF THE
TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE TO THE:

(1) COMPTROLLER;

(2) STATE’S ATTORNEY WITH JURISDICTION OVER THE ALLEGED
VIOLATION;

(3) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE;

(4) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF LABOR; AND

(5) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4