START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 420 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 420 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State and Local Parks - Play Area Accessibility - Recreation Communication 
Boards Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes a Maryland Recreation Communication Boards Pilot Program, 
administered by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR), to provide funding for the 
purchase and installation of “communication boards” in play areas in State and local parks, 
prioritizing newly constructed play areas. DNR may use up to $100,000 from the  
Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund to fund the program. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a net effect on overall State finances, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may increase, primarily due to the receipt 
and spending of grants under the pilot program, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Maryland Recreation Communication Boards Pilot Program 
 
The bill establishes the Maryland Recreation Communication Boards Pilot Program to 
improve play area accessibility by covering the costs of purchasing and installing 
communication boards at State and local parks, subject to the availability of funding. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 420/ Page 2 
“Communication board” means a device that displays photos, symbols, or illustrations with 
words and braille to supplement or replace spoken language as a means of expression and 
communication. 
 
Local governing bodies are authorized to apply to DNR for a grant from the pilot program 
and DNR must prioritize the award of grants to a local governing body that is installing a 
communication board in a newly constructed play area. A grant award must equal the cost 
of purchasing and installing each communication board, up to a maximum of $3,000 for 
each communication board. 
 
“Local governing body” means the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning 
Commission (M-NCPPC) and the governing body of any county or Baltimore City. 
 
Required/Authorized Construction of Communication Boards 
 
DNR must construct a communication board in each newly constructed play area within a 
public park or recreation area under its jurisdiction, subject to the availability of funding 
under the pilot program, and each local governing body responsible for the construction of 
play areas (in public parks or recreation areas under its jurisdiction) that receives a grant 
from the pilot program must construct at least one communication board in each newly 
constructed play area under its jurisdiction. 
 
In addition, DNR and each local governing body responsible for the construction of play 
areas within a public park or recreation area may construct a communication board in an 
existing play area under its jurisdiction when making alterations to that play area. 
 
Pilot Program Funding 
 
The bill (1) alters the purpose of the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition 
Fund so that it includes providing funding for the pilot program and (2) allows for the fund 
to be used to cover the costs of purchasing and installing a communication board under the 
pilot program. The bill also specifically authorizes the use of up to $100,000 of a specified 
portion of the fund (see Current Law) for the pilot program. 
 
Reporting 
 
By July 1, 2025, and July 1, 2026, DNR must submit an interim report to the 
General Assembly that provides an evaluation of the pilot program. By July 1, 2027, DNR 
must submit a final report to the General Assembly on the pilot program, including a 
recommendation on whether it should be continued. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 420/ Page 3 
Current Law:  Chapter 39 of 2022 (the Great Maryland Outdoors Act) established the 
Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund to provide funding for 
(1) completing State park projects related to capital improvements on lands managed by 
DNR for public purposes and (2) acquiring land to be managed by DNR for public purposes 
as a State park. Chapter 39 authorized a transfer of Program Open Space funding to the 
fund and required a general fund appropriation to the fund, which collectively total 
$80.0 million. (DNR indicates that the fund received the authorized transfer and required 
appropriation, totaling $80.0 million, in fiscal 2023 and 2024, respectively.) 
 
Statute specifies uses for the first $70.0 million in the fund, and if the fund receives more 
than $70.0 million, DNR may use up to $10.0 million for any of the purposes specified for 
the first $70 million, including (1) land activation; (2) new structures; and (3) any capital 
improvements necessary to make State parks accessible to people with disabilities, 
including providing adult changing tables. (The bill authorizes the use of up to $100,000, 
of the up to $10.0 million mentioned above, for the pilot program.) 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a net effect on overall State finances, 
assuming the pilot program is funded only through the authorized allocation to the program 
of up to $100,000 from the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund. The 
allocation of funding from the Park System Capital Improvements and Acquisition Fund 
to the pilot program diverts funding from other authorized uses. It is assumed that (1) these 
funds are otherwise spent on the fund’s existing authorized uses, in the absence of the bill, 
and (2) the allocation of funding to the pilot program does not significantly affect the timing 
of the spending of that funding. 
 
DNR can administer the pilot program and comply with the reporting requirements using 
existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may increase to the extent local 
governing bodies (M-NCPPC, counties, and Baltimore City) receive (and spend) grant 
funding under the program. Local governing bodies receive some portion of the up to 
$100,000 of funding over the course of the pilot program (fiscal 2025 through 2028). Local 
expenditures may further increase during that time period to the extent the grants (limited 
to $3,000 each) do not cover the full purchase and installation costs of any communication 
boards constructed by local governing bodies. 
 
At least some local jurisdictions expect to install communication boards as part of play area 
construction or improvement, even in the absence of the bill, using other sources of 
funding. In those jurisdictions, (1) any local expenditures for costs of a communication 
board above the $3,000 pilot program grant limit may occur even in the absence of the bill 
and (2) the pilot program grant funding may take the place of funding that otherwise is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 420/ Page 4 
used to install the communication boards in the absence of the bill, freeing up that other 
funding for other uses. 
 
This analysis assumes that, under the bill, a local governing body is only required to 
construct a communication board in a newly constructed play area under its jurisdiction if 
the local governing body receives grant funding for the communication board. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful positive impact on small 
businesses that sell and/or install communication boards funded by the pilot program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, and Frederick counties; Maryland 
Department of Disabilities; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 24, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4