START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 569 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 569 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Credit Eligibility and Transfer of Credits - English as a 
Second Language Courses (Credit for All Language Learning (CALL) Act) 
 
 
This bill requires English as a Second Language (ESL) or English language learner courses 
taken at a public community college – if those courses are not classified as remedial by the 
community college – to transfer to any public institution of higher education in the State, 
as specified. A public institution of higher education in the State may not deny the transfer 
of such credits for any reason. These credits may also be transferable to a private nonprofit 
institution of higher education in the State; a private nonprofit institution must review and 
consider the transfer credits. A public community college must consider a course or 
program for ESL or English language learner as eligible for either world language or 
humanities credit, or both, toward a student’s associate degree if the course is not classified 
as a remedial course. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Public four-year institutions of higher education can transfer ESL and 
English language learner courses (not classified as remedial) taken at community colleges 
using existing resources. Higher education revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community colleges can consider an ESL or English language learner 
course (not classified as remedial) as either a world language or humanities course using 
existing resources. Local community colleges can transfer ESL and English language 
learner courses (not classified as remedial) taken at another community college using 
existing resources. Local community college revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 569/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Institution of Higher Education 
 
“Institution of higher education” is defined as an institution of postsecondary education 
that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools and awards degrees at 
either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level. It includes public, private nonprofit, 
and for-profit institutions.  
 
Statute – Transfer Requirements 
 
The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) must establish procedures for the 
transfer of students between public segments of postsecondary education. MHEC must 
recommend cooperative programs among segments of postsecondary education to assure 
appropriate flexibility in the higher education system. In conjunction with the governing 
boards of institutions, MHEC must establish standards for articulation agreements. 
 
The procedures established must require a receiving institution that denies the transfer of a 
credit or course to an enrolled student to notify the transfer coordinator or institutional 
designee of the sending institution and the enrolled student about the denial within a time 
period that MHEC determines to be the latest possible time for the notification and specify 
the rationale for the denial. The transfer coordinator or institutional designee of the sending 
institution must conduct a review, in conjunction with the receiving institution’s designee, 
within a time period MHEC determines to be appropriate. Each public institution of higher 
education must submit an annual report to MHEC listing any denials of transfer of a credit 
or a course and the reasons for the denials. 
 
MHEC, in collaboration with the public institutions of higher education, was required to 
develop and implement, by July 1, 2016, a statewide transfer agreement whereby at least 
60 credits of general education, elective, and major courses that a student earns at any 
community college in the State toward an associate of arts or associate of science degree 
must be transferable to any public four-year higher education institution in the State for 
credit toward a bachelor’s degree. 
 
In addition, MHEC, in collaboration with the public institutions of higher education, was 
required to develop and implement, by July 1, 2016, a statewide reverse transfer agreement 
whereby at least 30 credits that a student earns at any public four-year institution in the 
State toward a bachelor’s degree are transferable to any community college in the State for 
credit toward an associate degree. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 569/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  The University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP) 
advises that, under current practice, if a community college course qualifies for general 
education credit at the community college, UMCP qualifies it as a general education course 
in the transfer process. 
 
UMCP advises that Montgomery College (and possibly other community colleges) offers 
an English course for English language learners that satisfies UMCP’s academic writing 
course requirement. It is unclear if, under the bill, this course will still qualify as an English 
course. 
 
A private nonprofit institution of higher education may accept for transfer ESL or English 
language learner courses (not classified as remedial) taken at a public community college. 
Regardless, such institutions are required to review and consider these credits for transfer. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 395 (Senators Augustine and Rosapepe) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Independent College and University 
Association; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3