START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 380

Chapter 380

(House Bill 589)

AN ACT concerning

Dorchester County – County Applicants – Polygraph Examination

FOR the purpose of exempting certain applicants for employment with the Dorchester
County Department of Emergency Services ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~Dorchester~~ ~~County~~ ~~Department~~
~~of~~ ~~Corrections~~ from the prohibition on employers requiring or demanding that an
individual submit to or take a polygraph examination as a condition of prospective
employment; and generally relating to polygraph examinations as a condition of
employment.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–702
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–702.

(a) In this section, “employer” means:

(1) a person engaged in a business, industry, profession, trade, or other
enterprise in the State;

(2) the State;

(3) a county; and

(4) a municipal corporation in the State.

(b) (1) This section does not apply to the federal government or any of its units.

(2) This section does not apply to an individual who is an employee of or
applies for assignment to the Intelligence and Investigative Division of the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services.

(3) This section does not apply to an individual who applies for employment
or is employed:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 380 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) as a law enforcement officer, as defined in § 3–101 of the Public
Safety Article;

(ii) as an employee of a law enforcement agency of the State, a
county, or a municipal corporation;

(iii) as a communications officer of the Calvert County Control
Center;

(iv) as a correctional officer of a State correctional facility;

(v) as an employee of a State correctional facility in any capacity
that involves direct contact with an inmate in a State correctional facility;

(vi) as a correctional officer of the Calvert County Detention Center
or in any other capacity that involves direct personal contact with an inmate in the
Detention Center;

(vii) as a correctional officer of the Carroll County Detention Center
or in any other capacity that involves direct personal contact with an inmate in the
Detention Center;

(viii) as a correctional officer of the Washington County Detention
Center or in any other capacity that involves direct personal contact with an inmate in the
Center; or

(ix) as a correctional officer of:

1. the Baltimore County Detention Center;

2. the Cecil County Detention Center;

3. the Charles County Detention Center;

4. the Frederick County Adult Detention Center;

5. the Harford County Detention Center; or

6. the St. Mary’s County Detention Center.

(4) This section does not apply to an applicant for employment as a
correctional officer of a local correctional facility.

(5) This section does not apply to an applicant for employment with either
the Anne Arundel County Department of Detention Facilities or the Caroline County

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 380

Department of Corrections in any capacity that involves direct contact with an inmate in
either the Anne Arundel County Department of Detention Facilities or the Caroline County
Department of Corrections.

(6) This section does not apply to an applicant for employment with the
Washington County Emergency Communications Center.

(7) This section does not apply to an applicant for employment:

(i) as a paramedic or an emergency medical technician with St.
Mary’s County; or

(ii) with the St. Mary’s County Emergency Communications Center.

(8) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN APPLICANT FOR
EMPLOYMENT:

(I) AS A PARAMEDIC OR AN EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN
WITH THE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES DIVISION WITHIN THE DORCHESTER
COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY SERVICES; OR

(II) AS A 9–1–1 CENTER DISPATCHER SPECIALIST AT THE
DORCHESTER COUNTY 9–1–1 CENTER WITHIN THE DORCHESTER COUNTY
DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY SERVICES; OR

(III) AS A CORRECTIONAL OFFICER AT THE DORCHESTER
COUNTY DETENTION CENTER WITHIN THE DORCHESTER COUNTY DEPARTMENT
OF CORRECTIONS.

(c) An employer may not require or demand, as a condition of employment,
prospective employment, or continued employment, that an individual submit to or take a
polygraph examination or similar test.

(d) (1) Each application for employment shall set out, in bold–faced upper case
type, the following notice:

“Under Maryland law, an employer may not require or demand, as a condition of
employment, prospective employment, or continued employment, that an individual submit
to or take a polygraph examination or similar test. An employer who violates this law is
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not exceeding $100.”

(2) Each application shall provide a space for an applicant to sign an
acknowledgment of the notice required under this subsection.

(e) An applicant shall sign the acknowledgment of the notice required under
subsection (d) of this section.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 380 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) If an employer violates subsection (c) or (d) of this section, an applicant for
employment or prospective employment or an employee may submit to the Commissioner
a written complaint.

(g) (1) Whenever the Commissioner determines that this section has been
violated, the Commissioner may:

(i) try to resolve any issue involved in the violation informally by
mediation; or

(ii) ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the
applicant or employee.

(2) The Attorney General may bring an action under this section in the
county where the violation allegedly occurred, for injunctive relief, damages, or other relief.

(h) An employer who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $100.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4