START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 299

Chapter 299

(House Bill 539)

AN ACT concerning

Public Institutions of Higher Education – Student Withdrawal Policy –
Reimbursement of Tuition and Fees
(Cameron Carden Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of requiring each public institution of higher education to adopt a policy
to authorize a student to withdraw under extenuating circumstances and ~~reimburse~~
refund the student for tuition and fees paid by the student for a certain semester
under certain circumstances; and generally relating to withdrawal policies at public
institutions of higher education.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 15–138
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

15–138.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES” INCLUDES:

(1) ILLNESS;

(2) INJURY;

(3) HOSPITALIZATION; AND

(4) MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS.

(B) (1) EACH PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION SHALL ADOPT
A POLICY THAT AUTHORIZES A STUDENT TO WITHDRAW FOR EXTENUATING
CIRCUMSTANCES.

(2) THE POLICY UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE A PROVISION TO ~~REIMBURSE~~ REFUND A STUDENT FOR TUITION AND FEES
PAID BY THE STUDENT FOR THE SEMESTER IN WHICH THE STUDENT WITHDRAWS IF
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 299 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE EXTENUATING CIRCUMSTANCES INHIBIT THE STUDENT’S ABILITY TO ACQUIRE
AN EDUCATION AT THE PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION, AS DEFINED
IN POLICY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2