START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 542 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 542 
(Delegate Vogel, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Department of Human Services - Children in Foster Care - Luggage 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Human Services (DHS) to provide “new luggage” to 
a child in foster care who is (1) entering foster care; (2) moving from one foster care 
placement to another; or (3) exiting foster care. DHS may not use disposable bags or 
trash bags to transport any items of a child in foster care. By December 1 each year, DHS 
must report to the General Assembly on (1) the number of instances in which a disposable 
bag or trash bag was used to transport the personal belongings of a child in foster care and 
the reason DHS failed to provide the child with new luggage; and (2) the supply and 
inventory management procedures for the new luggage supply. DHS may solicit and accept 
gifts, grants, and donations of any kind and from any source to carry out the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHS general fund expenditures increase by at least $120,500 in FY 2025 to 
purchase new luggage for children in foster care and for one-time costs to update the 
MD THINK (Maryland “Total Human-Services Integrated Network”) reporting platform, 
as discussed below. Future years reflect elimination of one-time costs. To the extent 
donations of luggage are received, expenditures may be reduced. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
120,500 
84,500 
84,500 
84,500 
84,500 
Net Effect 
($120,500) 
($84,500) 
($84,500) 
($84,500) 
($84,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local departments of social services can likely implement the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 542/ Page 2 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “New luggage” means a suitcase, duffel bag, backpack, or similar 
container that is designed to hold an individual’s personal belongings and has not 
previously been used. New luggage does not include a disposable bag or trash bag. 
 
DHS must (1) establish and maintain a decentralized supply of new luggage to be used to 
transport the personal belongings of a child in foster care and (2) develop procedures for 
the storage and distribution of new luggage intended for children in foster care. DHS is not 
required to provide additional new luggage to a child who is changing placement and is in 
possession of new luggage previously provided by the department. 
 
When providing new luggage to a child in foster care, DHS must take into account the 
child’s age, mobility, personal items to be transported, and preferences. New luggage 
provided to a child is the property of the child and may not be reclaimed by DHS or retained 
by the child’s foster parent. 
 
Current Law:  DHS, through its Social Services Administration, has the primary 
responsibility for child welfare services throughout the State, which are provided primarily 
by the local departments of social services. 
 
DHS is required to establish a program of out-of-home placement for minor children 
(1) who are placed in the custody of a local department, for a period of up to 180 days, by 
a parent or legal guardian under a voluntary placement agreement; (2) who are abused, 
abandoned, neglected, or dependent, if a juvenile court has determined that continued 
residence in the child’s home is contrary to the child’s welfare and has committed the child 
to the custody or guardianship of a local department; or (3) who, with the approval of DHS, 
are placed in an out-of-home placement by a local department under a voluntary placement 
agreement regarding a child with a developmental disability or a mental illness, as 
specified. 
 
An out-of-home placement may include family foster care, group and residential care, 
kinship care, and treatment foster care. “Foster care” means continuous 24-hour care and 
supportive services provided for a minor child placed by a child placement agency in an 
approved family home. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 542/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:   
 
Luggage Costs 
 
The bill requires DHS to provide new luggage to a child in foster care who is (1) entering 
foster care; (2) moving from one foster care placement to another; or (3) exiting foster care. 
DHS is not required to provide new luggage to a child who is changing placement and is 
in possession of new luggage previously provided by the department. DHS advises that 
there is an average of 3,800 children in foster care in the State per year. In fiscal 2025, 
approximately 1,389 children are anticipated to enter foster care, approximately 1,163 are 
anticipated to change their foster care placement, and approximately 264 are anticipated to 
exit foster care. Therefore, this analysis assumes that DHS will provide approximately 
2,816 children with new luggage in fiscal 2025. 
 
The total cost to provide new luggage will depend upon the type of luggage provided. 
Under the bill, a suitcase, duffel bag, backpack, or similar container may be provided. This 
estimate assumes:   
 
 
the cost to provide a duffle bag ($30 per bag) to 2,816 children is $84,480; 
 
the cost to provide a backpack ($40 per bag) to 2,816 children is $112,640; 
 
the cost to provide a suitcase ($120 per suitcase) to 2,816 children is $337,920; 
 
the cost of each luggage type may vary depending on size and quality; 
 
DHS must take into account the child’s age, mobility, personal items to be 
transported, and preferences when providing new luggage; and 
 
DHS may solicit and accept gifts, grants, and donations of any kind and from any 
source to provide luggage, which, if received, will offset the overall cost to supply 
new luggage. 
 
This analysis assumes that, at a minimum, a duffle bag is provided to each child at a cost 
of $84,480 in fiscal 2025. In out-years, this analysis assumes that a similar number of 
children enter foster care, change their foster placement, or exit foster care (2,816 annually) 
and require new luggage. Thus, DHS general fund expenditures of at least $84,480 
continue in fiscal 2026 and annually thereafter to provide new luggage. 
 
At some point, nearly all children in the foster care system will receive new luggage under 
the bill, and the number of new children who require new luggage will decrease to those 
entering the system for the first time. However, at what point this will occur cannot be 
reliably estimated at this time. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 542/ Page 4 
Reporting System 
 
DHS advises that, in addition to the cost of new luggage, one-time only programming 
changes are required to update the MD THINK Child, Juvenile, and Adult Management 
System to maintain a record of each instance in which a disposable bag or trash bag is used 
to move the personal belongings of a child in foster care. Thus, DHS general funds increase 
by an additional $36,000 in fiscal 2025 only. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local departments of social services must maintain and store new 
luggage for eligible foster children and maintain a record of each instance in which a 
disposable bag or trash bag is used to move the personal belongings of a child in foster 
care. DHS advises that local departments of social services currently receive luggage 
donations. Therefore, it is likely that some local departments of social services may already 
have an established process to store and distribute luggage to foster children. The 
Department of Legislative Services notes that the number of foster children eligible to 
receive luggage under the bill varies between jurisdictions and that some local departments 
of social services may need to maintain a larger supply of new luggage than others. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 668 (Senator Charles, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4