START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 710

Chapter 710

(House Bill 582)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Entrepreneurial Innovation Programs –
Establishment
(Pava LaPere Legacy of Innovation Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Pava LaPere Innovation Acceleration Grant Program
in the Maryland Technology Development Corporation to provide grants to certain
technology–based start–up companies; establishing the Baltimore Innovation
Initiative Pilot Program within the Maryland Innovation Initiative of the
Corporation; requiring certain appropriations for the programs to be included in the
annual budget bill in certain fiscal years; repealing a mandated appropriation for a
certain telework assistance grant program; and generally relating to development of
entrepreneurial innovation programs.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–1702(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–1702(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–1702(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–462 and 10–462.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 710 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

5–1702.

(a) There is a Business Telework Assistance Grant Program in the Department.

[(f) For each fiscal year, the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an
appropriation of $1,000,000 for the Program.]

[(g)] (F) The Secretary shall adopt regulations necessary to carry out this
section.

10–462.

(A) THERE IS A PAVA LAPERE INNOVATION ACCELERATION GRANT
PROGRAM IN THE CORPORATION.

(B) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO FOSTER GROWTH OF THE
ENTREPRENEURIAL INNOVATION ECOSYSTEM IN THE STATE BY PROVIDING GRANTS
TO TECHNOLOGY–BASED START–UP COMPANIES THAT:

(1) ARE FOUNDED BY STUDENTS OR FACULTY MEMBERS OF
POSTSECONDARY INSTITUTIONS LOCATED IN THE BALTIMORE
BALTIMORE–COLUMBIA–TOWSON METROPOLITAN STATISTICAL AREA; AND

(2) HAVE THEIR PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE BALTIMORE
BALTIMORE–COLUMBIA–TOWSON METROPOLITAN STATISTICAL AREA.

(D) AN APPLICANT SHALL SUBMIT AN APPLICATION FOR A PROGRAM
AWARD AS REQUIRED BY THE CORPORATION.

(E) THE PROGRAM SHALL REVIEW THE APPLICATION AND ALL SUPPORTING
MATERIALS TO EVALUATE WHETHER THE APPLICANT QUALIFIES FOR AN AWARD
FROM THE PROGRAM.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
PROGRAM SHALL AWARD $50,000 TO EACH QUALIFYING APPLICANT.

(2) A QUALIFYING APPLICANT SHALL USE AT LEAST 20% OF THE
AWARD TO HIRE THIRD–PARTY CONSULTANTS FOR PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT,
REGULATORY COMPLIANCE, OR OTHER TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE RELATED TO
ESTABLISHING THE START–UP COMPANY.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 710

(3) THE CORPORATION MAY PROVIDE WAIVERS ON REQUEST BY AN
APPLICANT.

(G) (1) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE AN
APPROPRIATION FOR THE PROGRAM IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL.

(2) THE PROGRAM MAY USE UP TO 10% OF THE ANNUAL
APPROPRIATION FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES, NOT TO EXCEED $50,000 IN A
SINGLE FISCAL YEAR.

(H) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY
OUT THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–462.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY” MEANS A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY LOCATED WITHIN THE BALTIMORE–COLUMBIA–TOWSON
AREA METROPOLITAN STATISTICAL AREA.

(II) “ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY” INCLUDES:

1. ANNE ARUNDEL COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

2. BALTIMORE CITY COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

3. CARROLL COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

4. COMMUNITY COLLEGE OF BALTIMORE COUNTY;

5. COPPIN STATE UNIVERSITY;

6. GOUCHER COLLEGE;

7. HARFORD COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

8. HOWARD COMMUNITY COLLEGE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 710 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9. JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY;

10. LOYOLA UNIVERSITY MARYLAND;

11. MARYLAND INSTITUTE COLLEGE OF ART;

12. MCDANIEL COLLEGE;

13. MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY;

14. NOTRE DAME OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY;

15. ST. JOHN’S COLLEGE;

16. STEVENSON UNIVERSITY;

17. TOWSON UNIVERSITY;

18. UNIVERSITY OF BALTIMORE;

19. UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, BALTIMORE CAMPUS;
AND

20. UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND BALTIMORE COUNTY.

(3) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE BALTIMORE INNOVATION
INITIATIVE PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A BALTIMORE INNOVATION INITIATIVE PILOT PROGRAM.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE INCENTIVES
FOR AND GROW TECHNOLOGY START–UP COMPANIES FOUNDED BY STUDENTS OR
FACULTY AT ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITIES.

(D) THE INITIATIVE SHALL IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER THE PILOT
PROGRAM.

(E) THE INITIATIVE SHALL COLLABORATE WITH EACH PARTICIPATING
ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY TO IDENTIFY AND SUPPORT ENTREPRENEURIAL INITIATIVES,
INDUSTRY PARTNERSHIPS, AND COMMERCIALIZATION OPPORTUNITIES RELATED
TO TECHNOLOGY.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 710

(F) TO QUALIFY FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE PILOT PROGRAM, EACH
ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY SHALL PAY AN ANNUAL CONTRIBUTION OF UP TO $50,000.

(G) (1) ONLY AN ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY MAY SUBMIT PROJECT
PROPOSALS FOR FUNDING UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) TO QUALIFY FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE PILOT PROGRAM, A
PROJECT PROPOSAL MUST:

(I) SUPPORT THE CREATION OF A NEW TECHNOLOGY–BASED
BUSINESS IN THE STATE;

(II) ADVANCE THE TECHNOLOGY TOWARD
COMMERCIALIZATION OF A PRODUCT OR SERVICE, WITH PREFERENCE FOR
PRODUCTS OR SERVICES THAT ALIGN WITH THE GOALS OF INTEGRATING
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE OR MACHINE LEARNING IN HEALTH CARE AND
BIOTECHNOLOGY SECTORS IN THE STATE;

(III) FOSTER EQUITABLE AND INCLUSIVE ENTREPRENEURIAL
DEVELOPMENT AT THE ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY;

(IV) CREATE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC
IMPACT IN THE REGION AROUND THE ELIGIBLE UNIVERSITY; OR

(V) FOSTER COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE ELIGIBLE
UNIVERSITY AND AN INDUSTRY PARTNER, INCLUDING:

1. PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT WITH COMMERCIALIZATION
POTENTIAL; AND

2. MATCHING FUNDS PROVIDED BY THE INDUSTRY
PARTNER.

(H) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) AND (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
INITIATIVE SHALL DEVELOP CRITERIA TO REVIEW, EVALUATE, AND RATE PROJECT
PROPOSALS FOR FUNDING UNDER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE INITIATIVE SHALL
DISTRIBUTE GRANTS TO PROJECTS BASED ON THE CRITERIA DEVELOPED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(3) THE INITIATIVE SHALL GIVE PRIORITY TO PROJECT PROPOSALS
THAT ALIGN WITH THE MISSION OF THE BALTIMORE TECH HUB OR ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE– AND LIFE SCIENCE–ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 710 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) (1) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2025 AND 2026, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $1,500,000 FOR THE
PILOT PROGRAM.

(2) THE FUNDING PROVIDED IN THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE USED TO
SUPPLEMENT, NOT SUPPLANT, ANY FUNDS THAT WOULD OTHERWISE BE PROVIDED
TO THE INITIATIVE.

(J) IN ADDITION TO INFORMATION ON THE INITIATIVE INCLUDED IN THE
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CORPORATION UNDER § 10–415 OF THIS SUBTITLE, ON OR
BEFORE JULY 1, 2027, THE CORPORATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE,
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of
June 30, 2027, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6