START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 956

Chapter 956

(House Bill 565)

AN ACT concerning

~~Maryland~~ ~~Deaths~~ ~~in~~ ~~Custody~~ ~~Oversight~~ ~~Board~~
Correctional Services – Investigation of Suspected Homicide – Reporting

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Deaths~~ ~~in~~ ~~Custody~~ ~~Oversight~~ ~~Board~~ ~~within~~
~~the~~ ~~Governor’s~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Crime~~ ~~Prevention,~~ ~~Youth,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Victim~~ ~~Services~~ ~~to~~ ~~analyze~~
~~and~~ ~~make~~ ~~findings~~ ~~and~~ ~~recommendations~~ ~~related~~ ~~to~~ ~~deaths~~ ~~of~~ ~~incarcerated~~
~~individuals;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Safety~~ ~~and~~ ~~Correctional~~ ~~Services~~ ~~to~~
~~provide~~ ~~specific~~ ~~information~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Deaths~~ ~~in~~ ~~Custody~~ ~~Oversight~~ ~~Board.~~ requiring the Department of State Police to post
certain information relating to certain investigations of deaths of incarcerated
individuals on its website; requiring the Department to report to the Governor and
the General Assembly on certain investigations; and generally relating to
investigations of deaths of incarcerated individuals.

BY ~~adding~~ ~~to~~ repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – ~~State~~ ~~Government~~ Correctional Services
Section ~~9–3801~~ ~~through~~ ~~9–3814~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~38.~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Deaths~~ ~~in~~ ~~Custody~~ ~~Oversight~~ ~~Board”~~ 9–602.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
~~(2021~~ (2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~

SUBTITLE 38. MARYLAND DEATHS IN CUSTODY OVERSIGHT BOARD.

~~9–3801.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE MARYLAND DEATHS IN CUSTODY OVERSIGHT
~~BOARD.~~

(C) “EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR” MEANS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES.

~~9–3802.~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 956 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THERE IS A MARYLAND DEATHS IN CUSTODY OVERSIGHT BOARD IN THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES.

~~9–3803.~~

(A) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) TWO CITIZENS WHO WERE PREVIOUSLY INCARCERATED;

(2) TWO FAMILY MEMBERS OF INDIVIDUALS INCARCERATED IN THE
~~STATE;~~

(3) AT LEAST TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATIONS THAT FOCUS ON JUSTICE REFORM;

(4) AT LEAST ONE LICENSED FORENSIC PATHOLOGIST;

(5) AT LEAST ONE LICENSED PSYCHIATRIST; AND

(6) ANY OTHER MEMBER DETERMINED AS NECESSARY BY THE
~~EXECUTIVE~~ ~~DIRECTOR.~~

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL MAKE APPOINTMENTS TO THE
BOARD AFTER SOLICITING FEEDBACK FROM THE PUBLIC.

(C) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD;
~~BUT~~

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

~~9–3804.~~

THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM
SERVICES SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE BOARD.

~~9–3805.~~

(A) SUBJECT TO AN INVESTIGATION UNDER § 9–602.1 OF THE
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE, FOR EVERY DEATH OF AN INCARCERATED

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 956

INDIVIDUAL IN THE STATE, THE BOARD SHALL CONDUCT AN ADMINISTRATIVE
REVIEW AND A CLINICAL MORTALITY REVIEW.

(B) THE ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW SHALL ASSESS THE QUALITY OF
~~CORRECTIONAL~~ ~~STAFF~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~RESPONSE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEATH~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING:

(1) AN EVALUATION OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE TRAINING
PROTOCOL AND PROCEDURES RELEVANT TO THE INCIDENT;

(2) SUBJECT TO TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 1 OF THE CORRECTIONAL
SERVICES ARTICLE, AN EVALUATION OF THE FACILITY, INCLUDING:

~~(I)~~ ~~CLEANLINESS;~~

(II) ACCESS TO WINDOWS AND OUTDOOR SPACE; AND

(III) AVAILABILITY OF BEDS, FOOD, CLEAN DRINKING WATER,
AND PERSONAL HYGIENE PRODUCTS; AND

(3) A REVIEW OF THE EXISTING CLINICAL INFRASTRUCTURE,
~~INCLUDING:~~

(I) INFIRMARIES AND HEALTH CARE FACILITIES;

(II) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES; AND

(III) MEDICATION SERVICES.

(C) THE CLINICAL MORTALITY REVIEW SHALL ASSESS THE QUALITY OF
~~MEDICAL~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~ADMINISTERED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DECEASED~~ ~~INCARCERATED~~
INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING A REVIEW OF:

(1) THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL;

(2) THE MEDICATIONS PRESCRIBED TO THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL
~~AND~~ ~~WHETHER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MEDICATIONS~~ ~~WERE~~ ~~ADMINISTERED~~ ~~WHILE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DECEASED~~
INDIVIDUAL WAS INCARCERATED;

(3) THE NUMBER OF TIMES THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL RECEIVED
MEDICAL CARE IN THE FACILITY’S HEALTH CARE FACILITY IMMEDIATELY BEFORE
THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S DEATH; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 956 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) WHETHER THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL RECEIVED MEDICAL CARE
~~IN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OUTSIDE~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~FACILITY~~ ~~IMMEDIATELY~~ ~~BEFORE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INCARCERATED~~
~~INDIVIDUAL’S~~ ~~DEATH.~~

~~9–3806.~~

(A) FOR EVERY DEATH OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL IN THE STATE
~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~DETERMINED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUICIDE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~OCCURRED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CONJUNCTION~~ ~~WITH~~
A MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS, THE BOARD SHALL CONDUCT AN INDEPENDENT REVIEW.

(B) THE REVIEW SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A REVIEW OF THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL’S FILE; AND

(2) AN INTERVIEW WITH INDIVIDUALS WHO WERE FAMILIAR WITH
THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL, INCLUDING:

(I) FAMILY MEMBERS AND CLOSE FRIENDS;

(II) STAFF; AND

(III) OTHER INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS.

~~9–3807.~~

(A) THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY WHERE THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL WAS
INCARCERATED SHALL PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENTS TO THE BOARD FOR
THE 6 MONTHS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S
~~DEATH:~~

(1) INCIDENT REPORTS AND ANY RELATED REBUTTALS;

(2) COMPLAINTS, WRITTEN OR SPOKEN, CONCERNING:

(I) MEDICAL ISSUES OR CONCERNS;

(II) MENTAL HEALTH;

(III) DANGER FROM GUARDS, STAFF, OR OTHER INCARCERATED
INDIVIDUALS; AND

(IV) THREATS FROM GUARDS, STAFF, OR OTHER INCARCERATED
INDIVIDUALS; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 956

(3) ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY PROCESS FILINGS.

(B) ALL DOCUMENTS SHALL BE SIGNED BY AN OFFICIAL FROM THE
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.

~~9–3808.~~

(A) THE BOARD SHALL ANALYZE ALL DOCUMENTS RECEIVED FROM THE
~~FACILITY~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INCARCERATED~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~DIED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CONJUNCTION~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~ITS~~
~~FINDINGS~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~ADMINISTRATIVE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CLINICAL~~ ~~MORTALITY~~ ~~REVIEWS~~ ~~UNDER~~
THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) BASED ON ITS ANALYSIS, THE BOARD SHALL DEVELOP
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE FACILITY TO:

(1) PREVENT FUTURE DEATHS; AND

(2) IMPROVE CARE FOR INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS.

(C) (1) THE BOARD SHALL COMPLETE ITS ANALYSIS NOT LATER THAN 30
DAYS AFTER THE INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S DEATH.

(2) NOT LATER THAN 7 DAYS AFTER THE ANALYSIS IS COMPLETED,
THE BOARD SHALL PUBLISH A SUMMARY OF ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
~~ONLINE.~~

(D) THE BOARD SHALL COMMUNICATE THE FINDINGS AND
~~RECOMMENDATIONS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RELEVANT~~ ~~FACILITY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OVERSEE~~ ~~THE~~
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS.

~~9–3809.~~

(A) IF IN ITS INVESTIGATION THE BOARD FINDS THAT THE CORRECTIONAL
FACILITY, OR ANY OF THE STAFF OF THE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY, VIOLATED ANY
LAW OR REGULATION, THE BOARD SHALL CREATE A COMPLIANCE PLAN FOR THE
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.

(B) THE COMPLIANCE PLAN SHALL STATE:

(1) WHICH LAW OR REGULATION WAS VIOLATED; AND

(2) THE TIME PERIOD THAT THE BOARD WILL INSPECT THE FACILITY
TO REEVALUATE COMPLIANCE WITH RELEVANT LAWS OR REGULATIONS.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 956 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~9–3810.~~

THE BOARD SHALL SUBMIT THE FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REQUIRED UNDER § 9–3808 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND THE COMPLIANCE PLAN
REQUIRED UNDER § 9–3809 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO:

(1) THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL’S NEXT OF KIN;

(2) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL;

(3) THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL
~~SERVICES;~~

(4) ANY JUDGE PRESIDING OVER A CASE RELATED TO THE
INCARCERATION OF THE DECEASED INDIVIDUAL; AND

(5) IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE SENATE
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS COMMITTEE AND THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE.

~~9–3811.~~

THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES SHALL
COLLECT AND REPORT INFORMATION TO THE BOARD IN ORDER FOR THE BOARD TO
PERFORM ITS DUTIES UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

~~9–3812.~~

THE BOARD SHALL MAINTAIN THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF MEDICAL RECORDS
RECEIVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

~~9–3813.~~

(A) THE MEDICAL REVIEWS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE APPLY TO HEALTH CARE
FACILITIES AT CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES.

(B) THE MEDICAL REVIEWS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE DO NOT APPLY TO
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES NOT LOCATED AT CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES.

~~9–3814.~~

(A) THE BOARD MAY NOT INTERFERE WITH AN INVESTIGATION BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE UNDER § 9–602.1 OF THE CORRECTIONAL
SERVICES ARTICLE OR THE COMMISSION ON CORRECTIONAL STANDARDS UNDER
TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 1 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 956

(B) THE BOARD SHALL COOPERATE AND COORDINATE WITH:

(1) THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE TO THE EXTENT THE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE REQUESTS COOPERATION AND COORDINATION IN
AN INVESTIGATION UNDER § 9–602.1 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE;
~~AND~~

(2) THE COMMISSION ON CORRECTIONAL STANDARDS TO THE
EXTENT THE COMMISSION REQUESTS COOPERATION AND COORDINATION IN A
REVIEW UNDER TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 1 OF THE CORRECTIONAL SERVICES ARTICLE.

Article – Correctional Services

9–602.1.

(A) The Department of State Police shall investigate any death of an incarcerated
individual suspected to be a homicide that occurs while the incarcerated individual is in
the custody of the Division of Correction whether within or outside a correctional facility.

(B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT OF
STATE POLICE SHALL POST ON ITS WEBSITE AND SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY A REPORT DETAILING FOR THE PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR:

(1) THE NUMBER OF INVESTIGATIONS COMPLETED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(2) THE NUMBER OF CASES REFERRED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
STATE POLICE FOR PROSECUTION FOLLOWING AN INVESTIGATION COMPLETED
UNDER THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7