START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 573 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 573 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Citizens Committee for the Enhancement of Communities Surrounding 
Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport - Membership 
 
 
This bill increases the number of members on the Citizens Committee for the Enhancement 
of Communities Surrounding Baltimore-Washington International (BWI) Thurgood 
Marshall Airport from 11 members to 12 members. Instead of 1 member of the committee 
being recommended to the Secretary of Transportation for appointment by the delegates 
representing district 12, the bill requires 1 member of the committee to be recommended 
by the delegates representing district 12A and 1 member of the committee to be 
recommended by the delegate representing district 12B. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 589 of 2001 established the Citizens Committee for the 
Enhancement of Communities Surrounding BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport to evaluate 
livability issues that affect communities in and near certified airport noise zones (ANZs), 
develop projects to address transportation issues that affect livability in those communities, 
and make recommendations to the Secretary of Transportation for project funding. The 
committee is staffed by the Maryland Department of Transportation. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 573/ Page 2 
The committee consists of 11 members who are appointed by the Secretary after 
recommendation by the members of the legislative delegation from legislative districts 12, 
13, and 32 as follows: 
 
 
two members must be recommended by each of the delegates representing 
district 32; 
 
one member must be recommended by the delegates representing district 12; 
 
one member must be recommended by the delegates representing district 13; and 
 
three members must be recommended by the senator representing district 32. 
 
Committee members must be representatives of community associations that are either 
wholly or partially situated (1) in the certified ANZ that was effective March 23, 1998, for 
BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport or (2) in a border extending two miles outside the certified 
ANZ. 
 
The Secretary must consider the recommendations made by the committee and may make 
grants-in-aid to fund any recommended projects. Moreover, the Secretary must identify in 
the department’s annual budget specific funding for such grants. The amount budgeted 
must include an amount equal to at least $1 for every takeoff and landing of an aircraft that 
occurs at BWI Thurgood Marshall Airport for the most recent available calendar year. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2