START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 544 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 544 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Sexual Extortion, Stalking, and Revenge Porn - Statute of 
Limitations and In Banc Review 
 
 
This bill establishes that (1) the statute of limitations for a prosecution of the crime of 
sexual extortion in violation of § 3-709 of the Criminal Law Article is 5 years; (2) the 
statute of limitations for a prosecution of the crime of stalking in violation of § 3-802 of 
the Criminal Law Article is 10 years; and (3) an individual may be prosecuted at any time 
for a violation of §3-809 of the Criminal Law Article (revenge porn). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures may increase minimally beginning 
in FY 2026 to the extent that the bill’s changes to the statute of limitations for specified 
crimes increase the number of fines imposed in the District Court and incarcerations in 
State facilities, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may increase minimally beginning in 
FY 2026 to the extent that the bill’s changes to the statute of limitations for specified crimes 
increase the number of fines imposed in circuit courts and incarcerations in local 
correctional facilities, as discussed below.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 544/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Statute of Limitations for Misdemeanors  
 
In general, a prosecution for a misdemeanor must be instituted within one year after the 
offense was committed. However, if a statute provides that a misdemeanor is punishable 
by imprisonment in the penitentiary, or that a person is subject to § 5-106(b) of the Courts 
and Judicial Proceedings Article, the State may institute a prosecution for the misdemeanor 
at any time.  
 
Sextortion  
 
Section 3-709 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from causing another to 
engage in sexual activity or causing another to engage as a subject in the production of a 
visual representation performance meeting specified criteria by threatening to (1) accuse 
any person of a crime or of anything that, if true, would bring the person into contempt or 
disrepute; (2) cause physical injury to a person; (3) inflict emotional distress on a person; 
(4) cause economic damage to a person; or (5) cause damage to the property of a person. 
Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years 
and/or a $10,000 fine. A sentence imposed for a violation of this prohibition may be 
separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any crime based on the 
act establishing the violation.  
 
Stalking 
 
Section 3-802 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from engaging in “stalking.” 
“Stalking” means a malicious course of conduct that includes approaching or pursuing 
another where:  
 
 
the person intends to place or knows or reasonably should have known the conduct 
would place another in reasonable fear of serious bodily injury or death, of an assault 
in any degree, of rape or sexual offense as defined by §§ 3-303 through 3-308 of the 
Criminal Law Article or attempted rape or sexual offense in any degree, of false 
imprisonment, or that a third person likely will suffer any of these acts; or 
 
the person intends to cause or knows or reasonably should have known that the 
conduct would cause serious emotional distress to another.  
 
Stalking includes conduct that occurs (1) in person; (2) by electronic communication, as 
defined in § 3-805 of the Criminal Law Article; or (3) through the use of a device that can 
pinpoint or track the location of another without the person’s knowledge or consent. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 544/ Page 3 
The prohibition against stalking does not apply to conduct that is performed to ensure 
compliance with a court order; performed to carry out a specific lawful commercial 
purpose; or authorized, required, or protected by local, State, or federal law. 
 
Stalking is a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to five years and/or a 
$5,000 maximum fine. A sentence imposed for stalking may be separate from and 
consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for any other crime based on the acts 
establishing the stalking violation.  
 
Revenge Porn 
 
Section 3-809 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from knowingly distributing 
a visual representation of another identifiable person that displays the other person with his 
or her intimate parts exposed or while engaged in an act of sexual activity (1) with the 
intent to harm, harass, intimidate, threaten, or coerce the other person; (2) under 
circumstances in which the person knew that the other person did not consent to the 
distribution or with reckless disregard as to whether the person consented to the 
distribution; and (3) under circumstances in which the other person had a reasonable 
expectation that the image would remain private. Violators are guilty of a misdemeanor, 
punishable by imprisonment for up to two years and/or a $5,000 maximum fine. 
 
The prohibition does not apply to (1) lawful and common practices of law enforcement, 
the reporting of unlawful conduct, or legal proceedings or (2) situations involving 
voluntary exposure in public or commercial settings. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the offenses affected by the bill are currently subject 
to a one-year statute of limitations; the bill extends or removes the statute of limitations for 
these crimes. Therefore, general fund revenues may increase minimally beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to the extent that the bill’s changes to the statute of limitations for specified 
offenses leads to more fines being imposed in the District Court. General fund incarceration 
expenditures for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services may increase 
minimally beginning in fiscal 2026, as discussed below. The bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect the Judiciary or the Office of the Public Defender (OPD).  
 
Relevant Offense Data 
 
Exhibit 1 contains information on the number of violations and guilty dispositions for the 
offenses affected by the bill.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 544/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Violations and Guilty Dispositions  
§§ 3-709, 3-802, and 3-809 of the Criminal Law Article 
 
 
Fiscal 2022 
Fiscal 2023 
Criminal Law Article 
Offenses 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
Violations 
Guilty 
Dispositions 
 
 
 
 
 
§ 3-709 – District Court 
8 
1 
7 
0 
§ 3-802 – District Court 
296 
10 
365 
6 
§ 3-809 – District Court 
171 
11 
286 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
§ 3-709 – Circuit Courts 
10 
0 
6 
0 
§ 3-802 – Circuit Courts 
63 
8 
78 
9 
§ 3-809 – Circuit Courts 
86 
10 
62 
0 
 
Source:  Maryland Judiciary 
 
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund revenues may increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 to the extent that 
the bill’s changes to the statute of limitations for specified crimes lead to additional 
individuals being committed to State correctional facilities and increased payments to 
counties for reimbursement of costs for incarcerated individuals. The number of additional 
people sentenced to State facilities as a result of the bill is expected to be minimal.  
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,110 per month. Persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a 
jurisdiction other than Baltimore City are sentenced to local detention facilities. For 
persons sentenced to a term of between 12 and 18 months, the sentencing judge has the 
discretion to order that the sentence be served at a local facility or a State correctional 
facility. The State provides assistance to the counties for locally sentenced incarcerated 
individuals and for (1) incarcerated individuals who are sentenced to and awaiting transfer 
to the State correctional system; (2) sentenced incarcerated individuals confined in a local 
detention center between 12 and 18 months; and (3) incarcerated individuals who have 
been sentenced to the custody of the State but are confined in or who receive reentry or 
other prerelease programming and services from a local facility.   
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 544/ Page 5 
The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a local correctional facility. Persons 
sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated in State correctional facilities. The 
Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial 
detentions. 
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
OPD advises that the bill may result in new cases but is unable to quantify the extent of 
any increase without actual experience under the bill. The Department of Legislative 
Services advises that based on current statistics (see Exhibit 1), any increase in workload 
(beginning in fiscal 2026) is not expected to be significant enough to necessitate additional 
staff. To the extent that current staffing levels prove insufficient, OPD can request 
additional resources through the annual budget process.  
 
Local Revenues:  Revenues may increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 from fines 
imposed in circuit court cases that are allowed to proceed because of the bill’s changes to 
the statute of limitations for specified offenses.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally beginning in fiscal 2026 to 
the extent that the bill’s changes to the statute of limitations for specified offenses increase 
the number of individuals incarcerated in local correctional facilities. Counties pay the full 
cost of incarceration for people in their facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. 
Per diem operating costs of local detention facilities have ranged from approximately 
$90 to $300 per incarcerated individual in recent years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 391 (Senator Kelly, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Maryland State 
Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 544/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6