START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 575 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 575 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Victim Compensation - Alterations (Victim Compensation 
Reform Act of 2024) 
 
 
 
This Administration bill makes numerous changes to statutory provisions regarding victim 
compensation awarded through the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB). The 
bill (1) alters the membership and composition of CICB; (2) alters the duties, powers, and 
procedures for CICB to make awards to victims of crime; (3) alters the statement of 
legislative policy regarding CICB; (4) expands the eligibility for, amount of, and types of 
awards CICB is authorized to make to specified victims of crime; and (5) authorizes 
reconsideration and judicial review of CICB decisions. It also authorizes the Governor, for 
fiscal 2026 and each year thereafter, to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation 
to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund (CICF) that is adequate to ensure a balance in 
the fund. The provision authorizing an appropriation to CICF takes effect 
July 1, 2024; remaining provisions relating to CICB take effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase significantly 
beginning in FY 2026 (including by approximately $1.0 million annually exclusively for 
administrative costs) to reflect the expanded duties of CICB and expanded eligibility for 
grant awards; special fund revenues and expenditures are assumed to increase 
correspondingly. Federal fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2028 from federal 
matching grant funding; federal fund expenditures likely increase as early as FY 2028 to 
reflect additional federal fund spending.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 575/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board 
 
Membership:  The membership of CICB must reflect the racial, ethnic, geographic, and 
gender diversity of the State and is expanded to include seven, instead of five, members. 
Of the seven members, at least one must be a survivor of violence who is a member of a 
community that experiences disproportionately high rates of violence and incarceration and 
at least one must be a representative of an organization that provides assistance to victims 
applying for victim compensation. The bill repeals provisions that (1) prohibit more than 
four CICB members being from the same political party and (2) require at least one member 
to be an attorney, as specified. A member may not serve more than two consecutive terms. 
 
Powers and Duties:  The bill specifically alters the powers and duties for CICB, including 
by:  
 
 
authorizing CICB to request from a “qualified third party” specified information to 
help CICB determine whether a crime or a delinquent act was committed or 
attempted; 
 
repealing the authority for CICB to request from the State’s Attorney, the 
Department of State Police, or county or municipal police departments any 
investigation and information that will help the board determine whether and to 
what extent the victim or claimant was responsible for the victim’s or claimant’s 
own injury; 
 
authorizing CICB to delegate to employees of the board authority to hear claims and 
make initial determinations regarding each claim, as well as any other powers 
necessary for the office within the board to make initial determinations; and 
 
specifying information that must be included in the required annual report of the 
activities of the board to the Governor, the Executive Director of the Governor’s 
Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP), and the General Assembly. 
 
The bill prohibits (1) a claim by a person other than the victim from including narrative 
describing the victim or a photograph of the victim and (2) the board from disclosing the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 575/ Page 3 
identity of, or information that clearly identifies, a victim of sexual assault, child abuse, 
stalking, or elder abuse. If the confidentiality of a record or report that the board obtains is 
protected by law or regulation, the record or report must remain confidential, subject to the 
law or regulation. 
 
Board Decisions on Claims:  Within 30 days after the receipt of a claim, the board must 
(1) notify the claimant by email, phone, or other manner to provide immediate notice if 
additional material is required and (2) document the date and time that the notice is issued. 
Within 30 days (instead of 90 days) after the receipt of a claim and all necessary supporting 
material, the board or its employees must complete the review and evaluation of the claim 
and file with the Executive Director of GOCPP a written report setting forth the decision 
and the reasons in support of the decision. 
 
Within 30 days after the receipt of a written report, the claimant may petition the board for 
reconsideration of a decision made by the board or an employee of the board. Within 
30 days after the receipt of a petition for reconsideration, the board must issue a decision; 
the board must file with the Executive Director a written report setting forth the decision 
and the reasons in support of the decision. 
 
A claimant may appeal the decision of the board on a petition for reconsideration by filing 
a petition for judicial review in accordance with Title 7 of the Maryland Rules. The 
claimant must be given a copy of any report (not only the final report by request) issued by 
the board or an employee of the board. 
 
Provisions Expanding the Eligibility, Volume, and Amounts of Awards 
 
Definitions:  The bill alters several terms that generally result in expanded eligibility for 
CICB awards to additional individuals. Specifically: 
 
 
“crime” is expanded to include acts involving the operation of a vessel or motor 
vehicle when the act is a violation of § 21-706 (overtaking and passing a school 
vehicle), § 21-901.3 (causing serious injury or death), or § 21-1124.3 (texting or 
handheld phone use that causes an accident resulting in death or serious bodily 
injury) of the Transportation Article; 
 
“dependent” is expanded to include a domestic partner; 
 
“qualified third party” is defined as a licensed physician, dentist, or psychologist 
authorized to practice under the Health Occupations Article, a social worker or 
caseworker of any public or private health or social services agency or provider, or 
an advocate or victim service provider from a domestic violence or sexual assault 
prevention or assistance program; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 575/ Page 4 
 
“victim” is expanded to include a person who suffers psychological injury as a result 
of any crime or delinquent act (instead of only a person who suffers such an injury 
as a direct result of the specific crimes of (1) a fourth-degree sexual offense or a 
delinquent act that would be a fourth-degree sexual offense if committed by an 
adult; (2) a felony or a delinquent act that would be a felony if committed by an 
adult; or (3) physical injury or death directly resulting from a crime or delinquent 
act). 
 
Eligibility for an Award:  Persons eligible for awards are expanded to include (1) the 
domestic partner, dependent minor, or adult under legal guardianship of a victim who 
resides with the victim and (2) the domestic partner, dependent minor, or adult under legal 
guardianship of an individual who is incarcerated for abuse, as defined in § 4-501 of the 
Family Law Article, and who, prior to incarceration, resided with the domestic partner, 
dependent minor, or adult under legal guardianship and provided financial support. If a 
victim dies as a direct result of helping an agency that provides emergency medical 
services, eligibility is also extended to a dependent of the victim or any person who paid 
or assumed responsibility for funeral expenses. 
 
Filing of Claim:  The timeframe for filing a claim is increased from three years to four years 
after the later of: 
 
 
the discovery of the occurrence of the crime or delinquent act or the death of the 
victim; or  
 
the earlier of (1) the date the claimant discovered an attempt to obtain a reversal of 
a conviction, a sentence, or an adjudication for the crime or delinquent act or (2) the 
date the claimant, exercising ordinary diligence, should have discovered an attempt 
to obtain a reversal of a conviction, a sentence, or an adjudication for the crime or 
delinquent act. 
 
In a case where the filing of a claim was delayed as the result of a delay in the testing of 
DNA or a delay in DNA profile matching from a sexual assault forensic examination kit 
or biological material relating to a sexual offense, the time period for filing a claim is set 
to within four years after notification of the results of the testing or DNA profile matching. 
 
In addition, the bill expands the authorization for a claimant to file a claim at any time if 
the board determines that there was a good cause for failure to file a claim within the time 
limits provided in statute. 
 
Conditions for Awards on Claims:  The bill repeals the requirement that, in order to make 
an award, the board must find that police, other law enforcement, or judicial records show 
that the crime or delinquent act or the discovery of child abuse was reported to the proper 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 575/ Page 5 
authorities within 48 hours after the occurrence/discovery and that the victim has 
cooperated fully with all law enforcement units. 
 
The bill specifies information that CICB must accept as evidence, including any evidence 
that the board considers probative. Unless total dependency is established, under the bill, 
household members and minors living with a legal guardian are considered to be partly 
dependent on a parent or a legal guardian with whom they reside without regard to actual 
earnings. 
 
The bill expands the circumstances under which CICB may make an award to a claimant 
as a result of the injury on which the claim is based, including if costs have been incurred, 
as specified, for certain relocation, child care, and transportation expenses. In addition, the 
bill repeals (1) the requirement for CICB to make a determination regarding whether the 
victim’s conduct contributed to the infliction of the victim’s injury, and, if so, to reduce the 
amount of the award or reject the claim and (2) the prohibition on a claimant receiving an 
award if the victim initiated, consented to, provoked, or unreasonably failed to avoid a 
physical confrontation with the offender, or the victim was participating in a crime or 
delinquent act when the injury was inflicted. 
 
A victim or dependent may not be denied compensation because the victim is a relative of 
the offender or was living with the offender as a family member or household member at 
the time of the injury or death. (Under current law, a victim/dependent may not be denied 
compensation solely because of these circumstances.) 
 
Amount of Award:  The bill increases the maximum limits on awards as follows:  
 
 
for funeral expenses, from $7,500 to $10,000; 
 
for psychiatric, psychological, or mental health counseling, under specified 
circumstances, from $10,000 to $45,000; and 
 
for repair, replacement, or cleaning of property damaged, soiled, or littered as a 
result of a crime or law enforcement investigation of a crime, as specified, from 
$250 to $2,000. 
 
Emergency Awards:  The maximum amount of an emergency award is increased from 
$5,000 to $10,000. In addition, the bill: 
 
 
repeals the requirement for a claimant to repay CICB the excess of the amount of 
the emergency award over any final award (or if a final award is not made, all of the 
emergency award); 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 575/ Page 6 
 
requires CICB to make emergency awards for funeral expenses, crime scene 
clean-up, and emergency relocation, unless it finds by clear and convincing 
evidence that the application is without merit; and 
 
requires CICB to make a form for victims to apply for emergency awards available 
publicly on its website. 
 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
False Claims:  The penalty for a person who is found guilty of asserting a false claim, 
under CICB provisions, is altered to only include a maximum fine of $500 and not 
imprisonment up to one year. 
 
Legislative Policy:  Finally, the statement of legislative policy is altered to more closely 
conform to CICB operations under the bill and to specify that the need for government 
assistance for crime victims and their loved ones includes financial assistance to address 
the many significant emotional, practical, and financial hurdles that result from crime 
victimization, including lost work, unexpected funeral expenses, and health needs. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board 
 
CICB in the Victim Services Unit of GOCPP administers a compensation program for 
victims of crime, persons who have made efforts to prevent crime, and their dependent 
survivors. After review and evaluation of claims filed, the board awards compensation for 
medical expenses, funeral or death-related expenses, property damage, disability or 
dependency claims, other necessary services, and lost wages under certain circumstances. 
In general, a claim must be filed with CICB within three years after the occurrence of the 
crime or delinquent act or the death of the victim. However, in the case of child abuse, a 
claim may be filed up until the date the child who was the subject of abuse reaches the 
age of 25 or, if the board determines that there was good cause for failure to file a claim by 
that date, at any time. Also, in a case of sexual assault, a claimant is authorized to file a 
claim at any time if the board determines that there was good cause for failure to file a 
claim within the otherwise required time limits. 
 
Compensation awarded by CICB may not exceed: 
 
 
$25,000 for a disability-related or dependency-related claim; however, if the injury 
to the victim results in permanent total disability, an additional $25,000 may be 
awarded after a disability-related claim has been awarded to the victim; 
 
$45,000 for a medical claim; 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 575/ Page 7 
 
$10,000 for each claimant for psychiatric, psychological, or mental health 
counseling, as specified; 
 
except for a specified disability-related or dependency-related claim, a total of 
$45,000, including any subsequent and supplemental awards; 
 
$250 for each claimant for repair, replacement, or cleaning of property damaged, 
soiled, or littered as a result of a crime or law enforcement investigation of a crime; 
 
for an award for psychiatric, psychological, or mental health counseling:  
(1) $10,000 for each claimant and (2) $20,000 for each incident; or 
 
$2,000 for lost average weekly wage claims, as specified. 
 
An award made by CICB must be reduced by the amount of any payments received or to 
be received as a result of the injury (1) from or on behalf of the offender; (2) except from 
any proceeds of life insurance, as specified, from any other public or private source, 
including an award of the State Workers’ Compensation Commission under the Maryland 
Workers’ Compensation Act; (3) from any proceeds of life insurance in excess of $25,000; 
or (4) as an emergency award, as specified. 
 
Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund 
 
CICF is a special, nonlapsing fund that receives funding from several sources, including 
investment earnings and federal matching funds received by the State for criminal injuries 
compensation. A small portion of the funding is from restitution paid by a defendant to the 
fund for reimbursement of money already paid by the fund to a victim. However, CICF’s 
principal source of money has traditionally been from costs imposed in criminal and traffic 
cases in the circuit courts and District Court. Victim compensation is also awarded from 
federal matching funds made available from the federal Crime Victims Fund. CICF may 
be used for administrative costs incurred in carrying out the State’s victim compensation 
program. 
 
Background:  In its fiscal 2023 annual report, CICB advised there is a dire need for 
additional resources to ensure that all crime victims are effectively and efficiently served. 
Traditionally, victim compensation has been provided through offender‐based revenues 
from fees imposed in State court cases and federal matching funding made available 
through the federal Crime Victims Fund (which is also composed of fees levied on 
offenders in the (federal) criminal justice system). However, the number of criminal and 
traffic cases for which costs are imposed has declined significantly over the past decade, 
generally resulting in a corresponding decrease in CICF revenues. For example, according 
to the Judiciary, annual CICF revenues in fiscal 2020 through 2023 ranged from 
$1.5 million to $1.9 million. In contrast, annual CICF revenues in fiscal 2012 through 2015 
exceeded $3.1 million. In fiscal 2023, CICB received 1,062 applications for new claims, 
processed 905 claims, and paid $1.6 million for 322 unique claims (the majority of denied 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 575/ Page 8 
claims are considered technical denials, with most being denied due to incomplete 
information). 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase significantly beginning in 
fiscal 2026 to provide additional funding to CICF to support the expanded operations of 
CICB and eligibility for compensation effective July 1, 2025, as discussed below. Special 
fund revenues and expenditures are assumed to increase correspondingly as the funding is 
used for authorized purposes. Federal fund revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2028 to 
the extent that the additional compensation expected to be awarded under the bill is eligible 
for federal matching funds; federal fund expenditures likely increase as early as fiscal 2028 
to reflect additional federal spending through CICF. 
 
Claims Activity 
 
The bill’s changes are anticipated to significantly increase the volume of claims CICB 
receives, in part due to the expansion of eligible crimes and types of expenses and the 
removal of certain disqualifiers that result in substantive denials under current statute. 
Without experience under the bill, the full scope of the bill’s impact on claim activity – and 
the associated fiscal impact – cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
However, some available data on recent claims activity is informative. GOCPP advises that 
CICB processed 905 claims during fiscal 2023. According to its annual report, the claims 
resulted in 358 awards totaling approximately $1.6 million, an average of $4,576 per award 
(an approved claim may include awards for multiple service types). According to GOCPP, 
approximately 124 of the denied claims in fiscal 2023 would likely have been eligible for 
awards under the bill (10 applications not filed within time limit, 65 applications denied 
for contributory misconduct, 7 denied for failure to cooperate, and 42 denied for ineligible 
crimes). For illustrative purposes only, based on the current average payment per award 
from CICB, if all 124 previously denied claims resulted in awards, CICF expenditures 
increase by approximately $567,424 annually. Because the average amounts of awards 
across all service categories in fiscal 2023 (e.g., funeral expenses, medical costs, etc.) 
appear to be lower than those currently authorized by statute, the example does not account 
for the higher maximum thresholds established in the bill. 
 
Further, DLS notes that the information above neither factors in the impact of additional 
eligible crimes, claimants, and expenses, nor the impact on the requirement for CICB to 
make emergency awards, including for relocation expenses. Although a precise estimate 
cannot be reliably made beforehand, these factors are expected to significantly increase 
annual CICB expenditures. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 575/ Page 9 
Administrative Expenditures 
 
Due to the expanded scope of CICB under the bill, GOCPP advises of the need for 
additional staff and resources. It specifically notes that due to the removal of certain 
barriers to applying for compensation, a closer review of applications is critical. Thus, 
GOCPP’s administrative expenditures increase by $975,585 beginning in fiscal 2026, 
which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2025 effective date for the bill’s numerous expansions 
that affect CICB duties. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring five administrative 
specialists, five administrative officers, and one lead fiscal accounts clerk to assist and 
serve the increased number of victims eligible for awards, to manage and oversee the 
additional types of services covered, and to manage the finances of the expanded program. 
It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, board member expenses, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
11.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$810,129 
Board Member Expenses 
50,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
115,456 
Total FY 2026 GOCPP Administrative Expenditures 
$975,585 
 
Future year expenditures reflect annual salary increases and employee turnover, ongoing 
board member expenses, and annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. DLS notes 
that GOCPP indicated in its fiscal 2023 annual report that additional staffing resources are 
already needed based on existing CICB activity. However, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly does not include new positions, and DLS acknowledges that, 
without an additional funding source, administrative costs cannot be meaningfully 
increased without diverting funding that is available for crime victim compensation. 
Accordingly, while the need for all the additional staff as accounted for above cannot be 
attributed solely to the bill, DLS agrees that significant personnel resources are required to 
implement the bill’s provisions. 
 
General Fund Appropriation to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2026, the Governor may include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation adequate to ensure a balance in CICF. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly authorizes CICB expenditures of $3.1 million in special funds and 
$3.3 million in federal funds; the fiscal 2025 budget also includes a $1.1 million fiscal 2024 
deficiency appropriation (general funds) to address revenue shortfalls in CICF. According 
to GOCPP, as of March 2024, it had received $464,000 in revenues from the Judiciary but 
processed claims valued in excess of $800,000. Because existing funding streams are not 
adequate to support expanded CICB operations and eligibility, significant general funds 
are assumed to be required once the bill’s substantive provisions take effect July 1, 2025. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 575/ Page 10 
The amount of funding needed each year to ensure a fund balance depends on a multitude 
of factors that cannot be reliably projected at this time, including how the expanded 
eligibility for claims under the bill (and the volume and type of claims received each year) 
will impact overall amounts awarded. Although a comprehensive estimate is not possible 
without experience under the bill, as noted above, the impact exclusively based on 
estimated increased administrative expenses is anticipated to be almost $1.0 million 
annually. DLS also advises that if significant additional funding is not made available for 
awards, the average award size will need to be decreased – likely significantly – contrary 
to the higher award amounts authorized in the bill. 
 
As previously noted, the State also receives federal funding to support the operations of 
CICB. According to GOCPP, the State must spend the federal funding within three years 
of its receipt and federal funds may only be used once other funding has been exhausted. 
The compensation allocation is currently calculated at 75% of the amount of compensation 
awarded by CICB/CICF during the preceding fiscal year. Accordingly, federal fund 
revenues increase beginning in fiscal 2028 to the extent that the additional compensation 
awards expected under the bill are eligible for federal matching funds. The exclusive 
reliance on general funds to support the bill is mitigated somewhat over time as the State 
receives and spends additional federal funds; however, an estimate on this impact is not 
feasible at this time. 
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary can handle any judicial review necessary as a result of the bill with existing 
resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 861 and SB 788 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 471 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 575/ Page 11 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 575/ Page 12 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Criminal Procedure - Victim Compensation - Alterations 
(Victim Compensation Reform Act of 2024) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 575 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12