START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 541 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 541 
(Delegate Henson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Anne Arundel County - Student Loan Assistance Repayment Program for 
Educators - Established 
 
 
This bill authorizes Anne Arundel County to establish a Student Loan Assistance 
Repayment Program for Educators employed by Anne Arundel County Public Schools 
(AACPS). The purpose of the program is to attract, recruit, and retain a diverse cadre of 
qualified educators in AACPS that reflects the student population within county schools. 
For purposes of the program, an “educator” includes classroom teachers, education support 
professionals, education-related service providers, and specialists eligible for certification 
from the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). The program must be 
administered by AACPS. Funds for the program must be as provided on an annual basis in 
the county budget in an appropriation separate from the county’s appropriation to the 
operating budget of the Anne Arundel County Board of Education. Funds for the program 
may be used to cover administrative expenses of the program.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is directed at Anne Arundel County.  
  
Local Effect:  Authorizing the governing body of Anne Arundel County to establish an 
educator loan assistance repayment program (LARP) does not affect local finances. 
However, implementing an educator LARP increases expenditures, as provided in the 
Anne Arundel County budget. Revenues are likely not materially affected, even if a 
program is implemented.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 541/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Anne Arundel County must assist in the repayment of higher education 
loans owed by an individual who (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate 
degree from an accredited college or university; (2) obtains employment as an educator in 
AACPS; (3) commits to serve in AACPS for at least five years; (4) receives an income that 
is less than the maximum eligible total income levels established by the county, including 
any additional sources of income the individual may earn; (5) is not in default on any 
student loan; and (6) satisfies any other criteria established by the county for the program. 
Loan assistance provided under the program must be in the amount and on the terms and 
conditions established by the county. An applicant for assistance in the repayment of a 
commercial loan must demonstrate to the county that the loan was used for tuition, 
educational expenses, or living expenses for graduate or undergraduate study. For purposes 
of the program, “higher education loan” means any loan for undergraduate or graduate 
study that is obtained for tuition, educational expenses, or living expenses from a variety 
of specified sources.   
 
Current Law:   
 
Loan Assistance Repayment Program – Generally  
 
LARP provides loan repayment assistance in exchange for certain service commitments to 
help ensure that underserved areas of the State have sufficient numbers of primary care 
physicians, physician assistants, dentists, lawyers, and other professionals serving those 
areas or low-income families. LARP also provides loan repayment assistance in exchange 
for service commitments to serve as a police officer or probation agent anywhere in the 
State. The program is subdivided into the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, the Maryland 
Dent-Care LARP, the Maryland LARP for Physicians and Physician Assistants, and the 
Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation Agents. Individuals must have received 
a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college or university in the State 
or a school of law or have received a Resident Teacher Certificate from MSDE after 
completing an approved alternative teaching preparation program. Except for the Maryland 
LARP for Police Officers and Probation Agents, they must also be employed full-time in 
State or local government or in a nonprofit organization that assists low-income, 
underserved residents or underserved areas in the State. For the Maryland LARP for Police 
Officers and Probation Agents, individuals must obtain employment as a police officer or 
probation agent in the State for at least two years and satisfy any other criteria the Office 
of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) establishes.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 541/ Page 3 
Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
 
The Janet L. Hoffman LARP is administered by OSFA to assist in the repayment of any 
higher education loan owed by an individual who:   
 
 
either (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college 
or university in the State, a law school, or, for mental health professionals only, any 
accredited college or university or (2) receives a Resident Teacher Certificate from 
MSDE after completing an approved alternative teaching preparation program; 
 
obtains eligible employment; 
 
receives an income less than the maximum eligible total income levels established 
by the office, including any additional sources of income; and 
 
satisfies any other criteria established. 
 
Eligible employment fields include lawyers, degree- or diploma-holding registered nurses, 
licensed clinical therapists, physical and occupational therapists, social workers, speech 
pathologists, and teachers. A licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed 
clinical marriage and family therapy counselor, or a licensed clinical professional 
counselor whose practice is located in a high-need geographic area of the State as 
determined by the Maryland Department of Health may receive assistance under the 
program. 
 
For the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, awards are determined by an applicant’s overall reported 
educational debt at the time of application. Award funds are distributed annually over a 
three-year period as long as the recipient remains eligible and continues to submit the 
required annual employment, lender, and tax documentation by the deadline.  
 
Howard County Student Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Teachers 
 
Chapter 140 of 2018 authorized Howard County to establish a Student Loan Assistance 
Repayment Program for Teachers employed by the Howard County Public School System 
(HCPSS). The purpose of the program is to attract, recruit, and retain a diverse cadre of 
qualified teachers in HCPSS that reflects the student population within the county schools. 
The program must be administered by HCPSS. Funds for the program must be as provided 
on an annual basis in the county budget in an appropriation separate from the county’s 
appropriation to the operating budget of the Howard County Board of Education. Funds 
for the program may be used to cover administrative expenses of the program. 
 
Under the program, Howard County must assist in the repayment of higher education loans 
owed by an individual who (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree 
from an accredited college or university; (2) obtains employment as a full-time teacher in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 541/ Page 4 
HCPSS; (3) commits to teach in HCPSS for at least five years; (4) receives an income that 
is less than the maximum eligible total income levels established by the county, including 
any additional sources of income; (5) is not in default on any student loan; and (6) satisfies 
any other criteria established by the county for the program. Loan assistance provided 
under the program must be in the amount and on the terms and conditions established by 
the county. For purposes of the program, “higher education loan” means any loan for 
undergraduate or graduate study that is obtained for tuition, educational expenses, or living 
expenses from a variety of specified sources.   
 
Local Expenditures:  It is unknown whether Anne Arundel County will exercise the 
authorization under the bill to establish an educator LARP. Further, if it does establish a 
program, the program parameters are unclear – including the amount of funding it might 
provide the program, additional eligibility criteria it would establish, and whether there 
would be repayment provisions for incomplete service obligations. The bill specifies that 
funds appropriated for the program must be separate from the county’s appropriation to the 
operating budget of the Anne Arundel County Board of Education. The bill also specifies 
that funds for the program may be used to cover administrative expenses. 
 
For context, in June 2023, the Howard County Council passed legislation to implement a 
substantially similar program of loan assistance repayment for teachers (in accordance with 
Chapter 140 as described above) and included $300,000 in its fiscal 2024 budget to support 
the first year of awards.  
 
For additional context at the State level, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General 
Assembly includes approximately $7.0 million in funding for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, 
which reflects an additional $750,000 to expand the Nancy Gramick Public School 
Processional Award to include certain school nurses. Approximately $6.4 million was 
allocated to the program in fiscal 2024. In fiscal 2023, the program received $1.3 million 
and had an average award amount of approximately $6,500. For the 2023-2024 award 
cycle, OSFA set the award amounts for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP at the amounts shown 
in Exhibit 1. The Janet L. Hoffman LARP awards are determined by an applicant’s overall 
reported educational debt at the time of application, and they lock into an award level that 
contains set award amounts. Awards are distributed annually over a three-year period as 
long as the recipient remains eligible and continues to submit the required annual 
employment, lender, and tax documentation by the deadline. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 541/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1  
Janet L. Hoffman LARP Award Amounts Schedule 
2023-2024 Award Cycle 
 
Total Debt 
 Overall Award Limit Yearly Payment 
$75,001 or More  
$30,000  
$10,000  
$40,001-$75,000  
18,000  
6,000  
$15,001-$40,000  
9,000  
3,000  
$15,000 or Less 
 
4,500* 
1,500* 
 
LARP:  loan assistance repayment program 
 
* Payment amount cannot exceed total debt; amount will be adjusted. 
 
Source:  Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 657 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Howard County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5