START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 531 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 531 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Correctional Services – Parole Supervision Fees and Drug and Alcohol Abuse 
Test Payment – Repeal 
 
 
This bill repeals (1) the requirement for the Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) to assess 
a monthly $50 fee as a condition of supervision for each individual on parole and 
supervised by the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP); (2) the authorization for DPP 
to require an individual on parole and supervised by DPP to pay for drug and alcohol abuse 
testing ordered by MPC; and (3) all requirements relating to the supervision fee and 
payment for drug and alcohol abuse testing. The bill does not repeal the monthly 
supervision fee of $50 that individuals placed under the supervision of DPP by the court 
are required to pay. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by at least $53,900 in FY 2025 and by at 
least $71,900 annually thereafter due to the repeal of the MPC supervision fee, as discussed 
below. General fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly, beginning in FY 2025 
to offset the cost of the drug and alcohol abuse testing contract that would otherwise be 
paid for by supervisees, as discussed below. Special fund revenues and expenditures for 
the Central Collection Unit (CCU) decrease beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 531/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Supervision Fee:  Unless a supervisee is exempted by MPC, MPC must assess a monthly 
fee of $50 as a condition of supervision for each supervisee to be paid to DPP. The fee is 
in addition to court costs and fines. DPP must pay all supervision fees collected into the 
general fund. MPC may exempt a supervisee wholly or partly from the fee if:  
 
 
the supervisee has diligently attempted but has been unable to obtain employment 
that provides sufficient income for the supervisee to pay the fee; 
 
the supervisee is a student in a school, college, or university or is enrolled in a course 
of vocational or technical training designed to prepare the supervisee for gainful 
employment and the institution in which the supervisee is enrolled supplies 
certification of student status to MPC, as applicable; 
 
the supervisee has a disability that limits possible employment, as determined by a 
physical or psychological examination that MPC (as applicable) accepts or orders; 
 
the supervisee is responsible for the support of dependents and the payment of the 
fee constitutes an undue hardship on the supervisee; or 
 
other extenuating circumstances exist. 
 
If a supervisee does not comply with the fee requirement, DPP must notify MPC. MPC 
may revoke parole or mandatory supervision for failure to make the required payment. 
MPC must conduct a hearing to determine if there are sufficient grounds to find the 
supervisee in violation of the fee requirement, as specified.  
 
Similar to individuals supervised by DPP for MPC, individuals placed under the 
supervision of DPP by the court are required to pay a monthly supervision fee of $50, 
unless exempted, in addition to court costs and fines. If a supervisee does not comply with 
the fee requirement, DPP must notify the court and the court may revoke probation. Fees 
are paid to DPP and deposited into the general fund. (The bill does not repeal these 
provisions.) 
 
Drug and Alcohol Abuse Testing:  In addition to the supervision fee discussed above, DPP 
may require a supervisee to pay for drug or alcohol abuse testing that MPC orders. If DPP 
determines that any of the criteria for exemption from the supervision fee are applicable, 
DPP may exempt a supervisee wholly or partly from a payment for drug or alcohol abuse 
testing. If a supervisee fails to pay for drug or alcohol abuse testing as required, MPC may 
revoke parole or mandatory supervision. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 531/ Page 3 
Similar to drug and alcohol abuse testing ordered by MPC, the court may order testing for 
which DPP may require a supervisee to pay. If DPP determines that any of the criteria for 
exemption from the supervision fee are applicable, DPP may exempt a supervisee as a 
whole or in part from a payment for drug or alcohol abuse testing. (The bill does not repeal 
these provisions.) 
 
Other Related Requirements:  DPP must (1) investigate requests for an exemption from 
payment, if MPC requests an investigation and (2) keep records of all payments by each 
supervisee and report delinquencies to MPC. 
 
On release of a supervisee, the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) and the appropriate local detention center must provide the supervisee with a 
specified oral and written notice that relates to supervision fee exemptions. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by at least $53,931 in fiscal 2025 (due 
to the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date) and by at least $71,908 annually thereafter due 
to the repeal of the MPC supervision fee. This estimate is based on the average annual 
supervision fees collected by MPC from fiscal 2021 through 2023, as reported by DPSCS 
and shown in Exhibit 1. The Department of Legislative Services advises that while the 
average annual supervision fees imposed by MPC over this same time period was 
approximately $1.3 million, a significant amount of the fees imposed are not actually 
collected by MPC. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Supervision Fees Imposed by MPC and Amounts Collected and Uncollected 
Fiscal 2021-2023 
 
 
Fiscal 2021 
Fiscal 2022 
Fiscal 2023 
Fees Imposed 
$756,112 
$1,484,885 
$1,520,250 
Fees Collected 
$83,241 
$59,182 
$73,301 
Fees Uncollected 
$672,871 
$1,425,703 
$1,446,949 
 
MPC:  Maryland Parole Commission 
 
Source:  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
 
Unpaid fees are referred to CCU for collection. Neither CCU nor DPSCS could provide 
any historical data regarding the actual amount of unpaid MPC supervision fees ultimately 
collected by CCU under current law. Because the total amount of fees collected by DPSCS 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 531/ Page 4 
varies from year to year, and the extent to which CCU would have been successful in 
collecting any unpaid fees in the absence of the bill is unknown, the actual loss in general 
fund revenues in any given year may be significantly higher than the above estimate. 
 
CCU recovers its operating expenses by assessing and collecting a 17% fee in addition to 
and for the debts that it is assigned. Thus, by repealing the MPC supervision fee (and 
ultimately reducing the amount of debt referred to CCU for collection), the bill also 
decreases special fund revenues for CCU. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in fiscal 2025 as a result of the repeal of the authorization for DPP to require an 
individual on parole and supervised by DPP to pay for drug and alcohol abuse testing 
ordered by MPC. DPSCS advises that the department has a vendor contract in place to 
ensure that (1) the equipment used for drug and alcohol testing is adequate; (2) if testing is 
positive for drug use but the individual denies use, test results are confirmed; and (3) a 
chemist is available to testify, if needed, at violation of parole hearings. The testing fee 
paid by individuals on parole and probation and supervised by DPP is used to offset the 
cost of the contract. As the testing requirement remains in place for individuals on 
probation and supervised by DPP, DPSCS intends to keep the contract in place under the 
bill; therefore, this analysis assumes that the State must pay to cover the costs currently 
covered by the testing payment provisions repealed by the bill. 
 
In recent years, the caseloads of individuals under supervision by DPP has fluctuated 
between approximately 32,000 and 35,000 annually. DPSCS did not provide any 
information regarding the number of individuals under supervision of MPC who are 
required to pay for drug and alcohol abuse testing under current law each year; however, 
DPSCS advises that if MPC requires testing as a condition of parole, individuals under 
supervision are charged a one-time fee of $100 to offset the cost of the testing. For 
illustrative purposes, if 5,000 individuals currently pay the $100 fee that is repealed by the 
bill each year, general fund expenditures increase by $375,000 in fiscal 2025 (due to the 
bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date) and by $500,000 annually thereafter to cover the 
contract costs. 
 
In addition, special fund expenditures for CCU decrease, as fewer accounts are referred 
from DPSCS to CCU for collection. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 531/ Page 5 
Designated Cross File:  SB 728 (Senator Carter) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Carroll, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 2, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5