START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 592 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 592 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Prince George's County - Judgeships - Circuit Courts 
 
 
This bill alters the number of resident judges of the circuit court by adding one additional 
judgeship in Prince George’s County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $361,500 in FY 2025 
for one additional judge and associated staff; the FY 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes funding for this purpose. Future year expenditures reflect 
annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
361,500 
471,800 
478,900 
486,000 
493,400 
Net Effect 
($361,500) 
($471,800) 
($478,900) 
($486,000) 
($493,400)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase beginning in FY 2025. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  There are 175 circuit court judges in the State, including 
24 in Prince George’s County. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 592/ Page 2 
To support the General Assembly’s role in establishing new judgeships, the Chief Judge 
of the Supreme Court of Maryland annually certifies to the General Assembly the need for 
additional judges in the State. The Judiciary uses best practices developed by the National 
Center for State Courts (NCSC) to calculate judicial need, which take into account the 
amount of judicial work generated on average per case filing within each distinct case type. 
Using the model developed by NCSC, judicial need for fiscal 2025 was primarily based on 
new case filings mostly unaffected by the COVID pandemic (fiscal 2018, 2019, and 2023). 
Although certification of judicial workloads indicates a projected need of six additional 
judges throughout the State (three in circuit courts (including the judgeship added by the 
bill)/three in the District Court), the Judiciary is requesting one judge position for 
Prince George’s County, as it is deemed to be in most critical need of additional judicial 
resources. An additional judgeship was last created by Chapters 656 and 657 of 2023, 
which added one circuit court judge in Baltimore County. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $361,459 in fiscal 2025, 
which assumes a 90-day start-up delay. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes funding for this purpose. This estimate reflects the cost of 
creating one circuit court judgeship in Prince George’s County and the associated positions 
of one courtroom clerk and one law clerk with the judgeship (a total of three positions). It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, one‐time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$339,691 
Operating Expenses 
21,768 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$361,459 
 
Future year expenditures generally reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. However, pursuant to 
Joint Resolutions 2 and 3 of 2022, judicial salaries have been set in statute through 
fiscal 2026. Because future increases in judicial salaries depend on any recommendations 
proposed by the Judicial Compensation Commission and subsequent action by the 
General Assembly, judicial salaries beyond fiscal 2026 do not account for additional 
increases.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The counties are responsible for funding certain operating expenses 
of the circuit courts, including the salaries and operating expenses of administrative 
assistants for circuit court judges. Therefore, Prince George’s County expenditures 
increase beginning in fiscal 2025 to reflect the addition of the new judgeship, including 
costs associated with an administrative assistant for the judge. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 592/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 688 (Senator Smith)(By Request - Maryland Judicial 
Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3