START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 539 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 539 
(Delegate Henson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Institutions of Higher Education - Student Withdrawal Policy - 
Reimbursement of Tuition and Fees (Cameron Carden Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill requires each public institution of higher education to adopt a policy that 
authorizes a student to withdraw for “extenuating circumstances” (which specifically 
includes illness, injury, hospitalization, and mental health and wellness). The policy must 
include a provision to refund tuition and fees paid by the student for the semester in which 
a student withdraws if the extenuating circumstances inhibit the student’s ability to acquire 
an education at the public institution of higher education, as defined in the policy. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  University System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM), and Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC) higher education revenues decrease, potentially significantly, due to refunding 
tuition and fees paid by the students who withdraw under the policy developed for 
extenuating circumstances. While the impact cannot be reliably estimated, significantly 
more students qualify for a refund. Expenditures are not materially affected; institutions 
can develop policies using existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community college revenues decrease, potentially significantly, due 
to refunding tuition and fees paid by the students who withdraw under the policy developed 
for extenuating circumstances. While the impact cannot be reliably estimated, significantly 
more students qualify for a refund. Expenditures are not materially affected; colleges can 
develop policies using existing resources. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of 
local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 539/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Policies for withdrawing from classes and receiving tuition refunds vary 
considerably across public institutions of higher education. 
 
Public Four-year Institutions 
 
University System of Maryland and Constituent Institutions:  USM does not have a uniform 
policy regarding withdrawing from classes or tuition refunds; however, all USM 
institutions have policies related to a student’s withdrawal based on a health issue or an 
extenuating circumstance. For example, at the University of Maryland, College Park 
Campus (UMCP), a student may request a withdrawal from all classes at any time between 
the first and last day of classes for the semester. In exceptional cases, a retroactive 
withdrawal may be granted based on documented requests in which extenuating 
circumstances significantly impaired the student’s ability to complete the semester and 
officially withdraw by the established semester deadlines. Such circumstances include, but 
are not limited to, medical or psychological causes. To be readmitted, a student who has 
earned at least a 2.0 cumulative grade point average with no previous withdrawals may 
apply for readmission. All other students who find it necessary to leave UMCP are required 
to petition the Faculty Petition Board to be reinstated. 
 
Further, at UMCP, undergraduate students can adjust their schedule (add, drop, etc.) until 
the close of business on the last day of the schedule adjustment period. After the end of 
schedule adjustment, students are limited to dropping a maximum of four credits during 
the drop period. Any tuition refund depends on when a course was dropped and whether 
the student is a full-time or part-time student. In general, there is no tuition refund after the 
first five days of classes; however, UMCP advises that its retroactive withdrawal 
procedures allow a student to appeal for the extenuating circumstances listed in the bill. 
 
Morgan State University:  MSU advises that its policy allows a student to withdraw during 
a semester at a prorated tuition rate depending on the withdrawal date. MSU does have a 
closing date that prohibits withdrawals afterward. If the student withdraws after the closing 
date, the student does not receive a refund unless special documented circumstances apply. 
 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland:  SMCM advised in response to a prior introduction of the 
bill that its policy allows a student to withdraw for any reason, and a refund schedule allows 
for an amount of tuition and fees to be refunded, which declines over time. However, a 
student who has been suspended or expelled may not withdraw. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 539/ Page 3 
Community Colleges 
 
Baltimore City Community College:  BCCC advised in response to a prior introduction of 
the bill that it allows a student to receive a refund of 100% tuition and fees if the student 
withdraws before the first class meeting. Refunds are not allowed after the first class 
meeting, as BCCC advised that tuition and fees are a large revenue source for the institution 
and are needed to serve their student population. 
 
Local Community Colleges:  Local community colleges do not have a uniform policy 
regarding withdrawing from classes or tuition refunds. However, for example, at 
Anne Arundel Community College, for credit courses scheduled for eight weeks or more, 
a student may drop a class for five calendar days after the first scheduled class meeting and 
receive a full refund. Students have five additional calendar days to withdraw from the 
class and receive a 60% reduction of the tuition, general student fees, and lab fees charged 
for the class. If a student withdraws more than 10 calendar days after the date of the 
first scheduled class meeting, no refunds are issued. Also, at Montgomery College, to 
obtain a refund, a course must be officially dropped by the refund deadline for the course. 
For specified documented involuntary withdrawals, including call to active military duty 
or illness that made it impossible for the student to continue classes, a student may receive 
a prorated refund of tuition depending on the specific student circumstances. Fees are 
nonrefundable. 
 
Federal Student Aid 
 
When a student applies for federal financial aid, the student agrees that financial aid funds 
will be used for educational purposes only. Therefore, if a student withdraws before 
completing his or her program, a portion of the funds may need to be returned. Institutions 
are required to follow federal laws and regulations regarding federal student aid. In general, 
up through the 60% point in a period of enrollment, an institution may use a pro rata 
schedule to determine the amount of Title IV funds the student has earned at the time of 
withdrawal. After the 60% point in the period of enrollment, a student has earned 100% of 
the Title IV funds. If the amount disbursed to the student is greater than the amount the 
student earned, the unearned funds must be returned. If the amount disbursed to the student 
is less than the amount the student earned, and for which the student is otherwise eligible, 
he or she is eligible to receive a post-withdrawal disbursement of the earned aid that was 
not received. 
 
State/Local Revenues:  Due to refunding tuition and fees paid by students who withdraw 
under their required policies for extenuating circumstances, USM, MSU, SMCM, BCCC, 
and local community college higher education revenues decrease, potentially significantly. 
The impact cannot be reliably estimated as it is unknown how many additional students 
may request and receive a refund of tuition and fees paid by students for the semester under 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 539/ Page 4 
the bill than under the institutions’ existing policies. The policy adopted by each institution 
must define the extenuating circumstances that inhibit the student’s ability to acquire an 
education at the public institution of higher education and, thus, qualify for a tuition and 
fee refund under the bill. 
 
Several institutions have advised that they have a policy allowing for tuition and fee 
refunds under extraordinary circumstances that require documentation. Likewise, 
institutions generally have a period at the beginning of each term during which a student 
may withdraw for any reason. These institutions did not provide information on the number 
of students that currently withdraw or the number of students that receive tuition refunds 
when they withdraw. Nevertheless, significantly more students qualify for a refund under 
the bill. 
 
Other institutions’ policies allow for a prorated refund under specified circumstances or a 
refund for just tuition (not fees). It is assumed that institutions that offer a prorated tuition 
and/or fees reimbursement must offer a full tuition and fees reimbursement for specified 
students under the bill. Thus, higher education revenues decrease for institutions that 
currently provide prorated refunds or do not refund fees. However, it is assumed that room 
and board are not considered fees eligible for reimbursement. 
 
It is assumed that any financial aid, including federal financial aid, would not be refunded 
under the bill as it only requires tuition and fees paid by the student to be refunded. 
However, financial aid is not directly addressed in the bill; even so, it is assumed that 
institutions follow federal law and regulations. Failure to follow federal student aid laws 
and regulations could result in penalties and restrictions in participating in the Title IV 
federal student aid program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 295 of 2023 and HB 872 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 567 (Senator Muse, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Anne Arundel Community College; Montgomery 
College; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 539/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5