START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 7

Chapter 7

(House Bill 580)

AN ACT concerning

Time to Serve Act of 2024

FOR the purpose of increasing the maximum number of days of disaster service leave for
employees in the Executive Branch of State government; increasing the maximum
number of days of paid leave the Secretary of Budget and Management may provide
for uniformed services training or active uniformed services duty in a reserve unit of
the armed forces or organized militia; and generally relating to disaster service leave
and paid leave for State employees.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 9–1102 and 9–1104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

9–1102.

(a) This section applies to all employees, including temporary employees, of all
units in the Executive, Judicial, and Legislative branches of State government, including
any unit with an independent personnel system.

(b) On request, an employee subject to this section may be entitled to disaster
service leave with pay if:

(1) (i) the employee is certified by the American Red Cross as a disaster
service volunteer; and

(ii) the American Red Cross requests the services of the employee
during a disaster that is designated at Level II or above in the regulations and procedures
of the National Office of the American Red Cross; or

(2) the employee is a member of:

(i) the Civil Air Patrol;

(ii) the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 7 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) Maryland Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster;

(iv) a volunteer emergency medical services department;

(v) a volunteer fire department;

(vi) a volunteer rescue company or volunteer rescue squad; or

(vii) a Community Emergency Response Team.

(c) (1) [An] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN employee may use up to 15 days of disaster service leave in any
12–month period only after obtaining approval from the employee’s appointing authority.

(2) AN EMPLOYEE IN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH OF STATE
GOVERNMENT MAY USE UP TO 30 DAYS OF DISASTER SERVICE LEAVE IN ANY
12–MONTH PERIOD ONLY AFTER OBTAINING APPROVAL FROM THE EMPLOYEE’S
APPOINTING AUTHORITY.

(d) During a prolonged or recurrent disaster, the employee’s appointing authority
may:

(1) waive the requirements under subsections (b) and (c) of this section that
an employee must request and obtain approval before the employee may use disaster
service leave, if waiving the requirement would be in the best interest of the citizens of the
State; and

(2) increase the number of days of disaster service leave under subsection
(c) of this section that an employee may use, if an increase would be in the best interest of
the citizens of the State.

(e) For purposes of workers’ compensation and the Maryland Tort Claims Act,
while an employee is using disaster service leave, the employee is deemed not to be a State
employee.

9–1104.

(a) In this section, “uniformed services” has the meaning stated in 38 U.S.C. §
4303 and 20 C.F.R. § 1002.5(o).

(b) The Secretary may provide by regulation for leave with pay:

(1) for jury service;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 7

(2) to attend employee organization events approved for this purpose by
the Secretary;

(3) up to [15] 30 days for uniformed services training or active uniformed
services duty in a reserve unit of the armed forces or in the organized militia;

(4) unless the employee is a party to the action or a paid witness, to appear
in compliance with a subpoena:

(i) in court;

(ii) before a grand jury;

(iii) before an administrative unit; or

(iv) for a deposition;

(5) for administrative leave for the purpose of immediately removing an
employee from the work site, if the employee:

(i) poses a threat to self, another individual, or State property; or

(ii) is incapable of properly performing the employee’s duties
because of extraordinary circumstances; and

(6) any other paid leave the Secretary deems necessary.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3