START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 957

Chapter 957

(House Bill 557)

AN ACT concerning

Sales and Use Tax Exemption – Aircraft Parts and Equipment – Repeal of
Reporting Requirement and Extension of Sunset

FOR the purpose of repealing a certain reporting requirement relating to an exemption
from the sales and use tax for certain materials, parts, and equipment used to repair,
maintain, or upgrade aircraft or certain aircraft systems; ~~repealing~~ extending the
termination date of the exemption; and generally relating to an exemption from the
sales and use tax for materials, parts, and equipment used to repair, maintain, or
upgrade aircraft or aircraft systems.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – General
Section 11–237
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 638 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2020
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – General

11–237.

[(a)] The sales and use tax does not apply to the sale of materials, parts, or
equipment used to repair, maintain, or upgrade aircraft or the avionics systems of aircraft
if the materials, parts, or equipment are installed on an aircraft that:

(1) has a maximum gross takeoff weight of less than 12,500 pounds; or

(2) (i) has a maximum gross takeoff weight of 12,500 pounds or more;
and

(ii) is primarily used in interstate or foreign commerce.

[(b) On or before December 31 each year, the Comptroller shall report to the
General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, on:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 957 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) the amount of sales and use tax revenue lost from the exemption under
this section; and

(2) any change to the number of aviation technicians employed in the State
as a result of the exemption under this section.]

Chapter 638 of the Acts of 2020

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2020. [It shall remain effective for a period of 5 10 years and, at the end of June 30, 2025
2030, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated
and of no further force and effect.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2