START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 520 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 520 
(Delegate A. Johnson) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Real Estate Commission - Complaints - Advertising Violations 
 
 
This bill establishes that a complaint filed with the State Real Estate Commission alleging 
an advertising violation may be made anonymously and not under oath (but must be 
accompanied by documentary or other evidence). 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
However, to the extent a meaningful number of additional complaints are received because 
of the bill, the State Real Estate Commission may require additional staff.    
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Real Estate Commission must commence proceedings on a 
complaint made to the commission (by a member of the commission or any other person). 
A complaint must be in writing and state specifically the facts on which the complaint is 
based. If a complaint is made by any person other than a member of the commission, the 
complaint must be made under oath by the person who submits the complaint. A complaint 
may be accompanied by documentary or other evidence. 
 
The commission (or its designee) must review each complaint received. A complaint must 
be referred for investigation if, after a review, it is determined that the complaint (1) alleges 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 520/ Page 2 
facts that establish a prima facie case that is grounds for disciplinary action and (2) meets 
the other requirements noted above. 
 
A complaint not referred for investigation must be dismissed. If a complaint is dismissed, 
any member of the commission may file an exception to the decision within 30 days from 
the date of dismissal. If an exception is filed, the commission must set a hearing on the 
matter by the full commission on whether the complaint satisfies the relevant requirements. 
If the commission determines that the complaint is satisfactory, the matter must be referred 
for an investigation. 
 
If an exception is not filed within the required timeframe, the decision of the commission 
is final and any party aggrieved by the decision may take a judicial appeal under specified 
provisions of State law. 
 
On completion, an investigation must be referred directly to the commission or its designee. 
If the commission or its designee determines there is reasonable basis to believe any 
grounds exist for disciplinary action, the investigation must be referred for a hearing, as 
specified. A complaint not referred for a hearing by the commission or its designee must 
be dismissed, and any party aggrieved by the decision may take a judicial appeal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 461 (Senator Watson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2