START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 561 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 561 
(Delegate Watson) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Tree Expert Licenses - Application and Renewal Fee Alterations and Insurance 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill allows the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to set fees for licensed tree 
experts that, instead of being limited to the costs of processing an application, may be up 
to $45 for an examination, $55 for initial licensure, and $100 for license renewal. A related 
annual report required under current law must also be submitted to the General Assembly. 
The bill also authorizes DNR to permanently revoke or temporarily suspend a tree expert 
license if the license holder fails to maintain liability, property, or workers’ compensation 
insurance as required by law. Finally, the bill explicitly authorizes DNR to adopt 
regulations to implement the statutory provisions related to tree experts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues likely increase minimally – beginning as early as 
FY 2025 – as DNR advises that it intends to increase fees as a result of the bill, as discussed 
below. The bill does not require additional expenditures, but DNR advises that it intends 
to use the additional special fund revenues to partially fund an additional position, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 561/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Licensed Tree Experts 
 
State law prohibits a person from engaging in the work or business of a tree expert without 
a license. “Tree expert” is defined as a person who represents to the public that the person 
is skilled in the science of tree care or removal and who, whether in the business of the 
person or as the employee of another person and whether under the title of arborist, tree 
specialist, tree surgeon, tree expert, or otherwise, engages in the business or work of the 
treatment, care, or removal of trees taller than 20 feet for compensation by (1) making 
diagnoses, prescribing, and supervising the treatment for trees or (2) trimming, pruning, 
thinning, cabling, shaping, removing, or reducing the crown of trees. There are several 
exclusions, most notably a person engaged in commercial logging or timber operations. 
 
In addition to meeting other requirements, an applicant for an initial or renewal tree expert 
license must pay to DNR a fee set by the department in regulation, in an amount not to 
exceed the costs of processing the application. Under current regulations, an applicant pays 
a $30 fee as part of the examination application for licensure. If the applicant fails an 
examination, an additional $20 fee must be paid for each subsequent examination 
application. Every two years, there is a $20 fee for license renewal. 
 
Every license must also, within a time period established by DNR, notify the department 
electronically of the liability and property damage insurance and workers’ compensation 
insurance carried by any company that engages or works under the tree expert’s license, 
and any changes to the insurance. 
 
The Secretary of Natural Resources must prepare an annual report on the number of 
tree expert licenses issued and the related revenues and expenditures during each 
fiscal year. 
 
Licensee Insurance Requirements 
 
Every licensee must carry and show proof of liability and property damage insurance, in 
the form and amount required by DNR at the time it issues the license. The licensee must 
maintain the insurance protection for the period the license is in effect. 
 
Pursuant to § 1-401 of the Natural Resources Article, before a license or permit may be 
issued under the Natural Resources Article to an employer to engage in an activity in which 
the employer may employ a covered employee, as defined under the Maryland Workers’ 
Compensation Act (MWCA), the employer must file with the issuing authority (1) a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 561/ Page 3 
certificate of compliance with MWCA or (2) the number of a workers’ compensation 
insurance policy binder. Sole proprietors are not required to be covered by insurance under 
MWCA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DNR advises that it intends to use the authority provided by the bill 
to increase fees by 30% to 50% from their current levels. Associated fees are deposited in 
the Forest and Park Reserve Fund. Therefore, special fund revenues increase beginning as 
early as fiscal 2025 to the extent DNR increases fees through regulation. While the actual 
special fund revenue increase depends on the fee levels set by DNR through regulation, 
because there are only approximately 1,200 licensed tree experts, the annual increase in 
special fund revenues is likely minimal. 
 
Although the bill does not require additional expenditures, DNR advises that it plans to use 
the additional fee revenues to partially fund a third position responsible for the licensing 
and regulation of tree experts.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 683 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
Enrolled - April 10, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3