START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 471

Chapter 471

(House Bill 573)

AN ACT concerning

Citizens Committee for the Enhancement of Communities Surrounding
Baltimore–Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport – Membership

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Citizens Committee for the
Enhancement of Communities Surrounding Baltimore–Washington International
Thurgood Marshall Airport; and generally relating to the Citizens Committee for the
Enhancement of Communities Surrounding Baltimore–Washington International
Thurgood Marshall Airport.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 5–414(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 5–414(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

5–414.

(a) There is a Citizens Committee for the Enhancement of Communities
Surrounding Baltimore–Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport.

(b) (1) The Citizens Committee consists of [11] 12 members who are appointed
by the Secretary after recommendation by the members of the legislative delegation from
legislative districts [12] 12A, 12B, 13, and 32 as follows:

(i) Two members of the Citizens Committee shall be recommended
by each of the delegates representing district 32;

(ii) One member of the Citizens Committee shall be recommended
by the delegates representing district [12] 12A;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 471 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) ONE MEMBER OF THE CITIZENS COMMITTEE SHALL BE
RECOMMENDED BY THE DELEGATE REPRESENTING DISTRICT 12B;

[(iii)] (IV) One member of the Citizens Committee shall be
recommended by the delegates representing district 13; and

[(iv)] (V) Three members of the Citizens Committee shall be
recommended by the senator representing district 32.

(2) The members shall be representatives of community associations that
are either wholly or partially situated:

(i) In the certified noise zone that was adopted under § 5–806 of this
title and effective March 23, 1998, for Baltimore–Washington International Thurgood
Marshall Airport; or

(ii) In a border extending 2 miles outside of the certified noise zone.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2