START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 506 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 506 
(Delegates Boyce and Embry) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Sexual Harassment Prevention Training - Morgan State University and St. 
Mary's College of Maryland - Training Format 
 
 
This bill authorizes Morgan State University and St. Mary’s College of Maryland, for the 
sexual harassment prevention training that is required under current law for State 
employees, to provide training that consists of webinar, computer-based, or online training. 
If the training is delivered using one of these methods, it must also include an evaluative 
component that ensures employee engagement in the training and assesses employee 
comprehension of training objectives. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes can be handled with existing budgeted resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 791 of 2018 requires sexual harassment prevention training for all 
State employees. Each State employee must complete at least a cumulative two hours of 
in-person or virtual, interactive training on sexual harassment prevention within six months 
after the employee’s initial appointment and every two-year period thereafter. The training 
must address specified items, including additional training for supervisors. For the 
University System of Maryland, the required training may consist of webinar, 
computer-based, or online training, and if the training is delivered using one of these 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 506/ Page 2 
methods, it must include an evaluative component that ensures employee engagement in 
the training and assesses employee comprehension of training objectives. 
 
Each unit must designate a representative to coordinate with the Maryland Commission on 
Civil Rights to implement the required training and may incorporate the training into 
existing employment training for new employees and supervisors.  
 
If determined to be necessary by the appointing authority, a unit may require an employee 
to retake any part or all of the training or to participate in additional classes or training. For 
Executive Branch units, the Equal Employment Opportunity Coordinator must enforce the 
training requirements and may recommend that the Office of Legislative Audits conduct a 
performance audit or review of a unit, if the coordinator determines that the unit has not 
complied with the requirements. A person may not bring an action against the State for any 
act or omission resulting from any training or lack of training of a State employee unless 
the acts or omissions of the employee are willful, wanton, or grossly negligent.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2