START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 565 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 565 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Correctional Services - Investigation of Suspected Homicide - Reporting 
 
   
This bill requires the Department of State Police (DSP), by December 31 each year, to post 
on its website and submit to the Governor and the General Assembly a report detailing the 
following information for the preceding calendar year:  (1) the number of investigations 
completed by DSP – pursuant to current law – relating to the death of an incarcerated 
individual suspected to be a homicide that occurs while the incarcerated individual is in the 
custody of the Division of Correction (DOC) whether within or outside a correctional 
facility; and (2) the number of cases referred by DSP for prosecution following a completed 
investigation. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DSP can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None. Local government finances and operations are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DSP must investigate any death of an incarcerated individual suspected to 
be a homicide that occurs while the incarcerated individual is in the custody of DOC 
whether within or outside a correctional facility. DSP may act within the limits of a 
municipal corporation that maintains a police force when conducting such an investigation. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 565/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 36 (Senator Benson) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Office of the Attorney General; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2