START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 504 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 504 
(Delegate Watson) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Department of Planning - Maryland Humanities Council - Appropriation to the 
Marilyn Hatza Memorial Strengthening the Humanities Investment in 
Nonprofits for Equity (SHINE) Grantmaking Initiative 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of 
$1.0 million to the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP) to provide a grant to the 
Maryland Humanities Council (MHC) to be used for the Marilyn Hatza Memorial 
Strengthening The Humanities Investment in Nonprofits for Equity (MHM-SHINE) 
Grantmaking Initiative. The funds must be used by the council to provide general operating 
grants to small and mid-size humanities, arts, cultural, and educational nonprofit 
organizations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDP increase by $1.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2025. MDP can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
Net Effect 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 504/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  During the grant selection and award process, MHC must consider the 
geographic and racial diversity of potential recipients and award grants on a one-time or 
multi-year basis. By December 31, 2024, and annually thereafter, MHC must submit a 
report to MDP that includes for the calendar year (1) the names of grant recipients; (2) the 
number of grant recipients by jurisdiction; (3) the amount of each grant awarded; and 
(4) specified information from each grant recipient regarding the purposes for which the 
funds were used.  
 
Current Law/State Expenditures:  MHM-SHINE is a grantmaking initiative associated 
with MHC to provide operating resources to humanities organizations in the State. The 
enacted fiscal 2023 operating budget included $500,000 in general funds for 
MHM-SHINE, and the fiscal 2024 budget, as enacted, included $1.0 million in general 
funds for MHM-SHINE. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced does not include any 
funding for MHM-SHINE. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 928 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 596 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2