START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 567 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 567 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Maryland Online Data Privacy Act of 2024 
 
 
This bill establishes numerous consumer protections and regulatory requirements related 
to online data. Certain requirements and obligations for a “controller” or “processor” apply 
only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on (or 
application to) any personal data processing activities before April 1, 2026. Violation of 
the bill is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer 
Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
However, a violator is not subject to specified MCPA penalty provisions related to private 
causes of actions for damages. The bill contains a severability clause. The bill takes effect 
October 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures likely increase, at least minimally, for the Office 
of the Attorney General (OAG), Consumer Protection Division beginning in FY 2026, as 
discussed below. The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to 
have a material impact on State revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 567/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions and Applicability 
 
The bill defines several terms related to online and biometric data privacy. Notably, a 
“controller” is person that determines the purpose and means of processing personal 
data – either alone or jointly with others. A “processor” is a person that processes personal 
data on behalf of a controller. 
 
The bill specifies the types of data and entities to which its requirements apply. 
Specifically, the bill applies to a person that conducts business in the State or provides 
products or services that are targeted to residents of the State, and that during the preceding 
calendar year did any of the following:   
 
 
controlled or processed the personal data of at least 35,000 consumers (excluding 
personal data controlled or processed solely for the purpose of completing a 
payment transaction); or 
 
controlled or processed the personal data of at least 10,000 consumers and derived 
more than 20% of its gross revenue from the sale of personal data. 
 
The bill specifies several entities to which its requirements do not apply, including State 
and local agencies, courts, and certain types of businesses subject to related federal laws. 
Additionally, certain data is also exempt from the bill’s requirements, including specified 
health and financial data. 
 
Consumer Rights and Controller Responsibilities 
 
The bill defines the rights a consumer may exercise to protect the consumer’s personal 
data, including, among other things, the right to require the deletion of personal data 
provided by (or obtained about) the consumer (unless retention of the personal data is 
required by law) and to opt out of the processing of personal data (e.g., targeted 
advertising). 
 
The bill establishes a number of consumer protections, including:   
 
 
requiring a controller of data to establish a secure and reliable method for a 
consumer to exercise a right; 
 
establishing a timeframe and related requirements for a controller to respond to 
and/or comply with a request from a consumer; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 567/ Page 3 
 
requiring the controller to notify the consumer in a specified manner if the controller 
chooses not to take action on a request; 
 
requiring a controller to provide a consumer, free of charge, with the information a 
consumer requests, subject to certain limitations; and 
 
requiring a controller to establish a process that a consumer may use to appeal a 
controller decision. 
 
Limitations 
 
The bill specifies limitations on the requirements established for controllers and processors. 
Among other things, the bill may not be construed to prohibit a controller or processor 
from (1) complying with federal, State, or local laws or authorities; (2) preserving the 
integrity or security of a system; or (3) assisting another controller, processor, or third party 
with an obligation under the bill. 
 
Additionally, the bill’s requirements may not restrict a controller’s or processor’s ability to 
collect, use, or retain data for internal use to effectuate a product recall, identify and repair 
technical errors, or perform internal operations, as specified. 
 
Designation of Authorized Agent 
 
A consumer may designate an authorized agent to act on the consumer’s behalf to opt out 
of the consumer’s personal data processing, as specified, and certain individuals, such as 
the parent or legal guardian of a known child, may exercise the consumer rights directly on 
behalf of another individual. 
 
Other Rules, Procedures, and Prohibitions 
 
The bill establishes numerous rules, procedures, and prohibitions related to controllers and 
processors. For instance, the bill:   
 
 
requires a controller to limit the collection of personal data to what is reasonably 
necessary and proportionate to provide or maintain a specific product or service 
requested by the consumer to whom the data pertains; 
 
requires a controller to provide an effective mechanism for a consumer to revoke 
the consumer’s consent and to stop processing the data no later than 30 days after 
the receipt of the request; 
 
prohibits discrimination against any consumer for exercising a right granted by the 
bill, as specified; 
 
requires a controller to disclose specified information when it sells personal data to 
third parties or processes personal data for targeted advertising; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 567/ Page 4 
 
requires a controller to provide a consumer with a reasonably accessible, clear, and 
meaningful privacy notice that includes specified information about the controller’s 
data processing practices and information about how a consumer can exercise a right 
granted by the bill; 
 
requires a controller and processor to enter into a contract that includes specified 
requirements if a controller uses a processor to process the personal data of 
consumers; 
 
defines the responsibilities of both the controller and processor in the event that such 
a contract is entered into; and 
 
establishes more stringent procedures and requirements for processing activities that 
present heightened risk of harm to a consumer (e.g., the processing of sensitive 
data). 
 
The bill authorizes OAG to require a controller to make available a data protection 
assessment for compliance with the responsibilities established by the bill. The assessment 
is confidential and exempt from disclosure requirements under the Maryland Public 
Information Act. A data protection assessment conducted under these provisions must 
apply to processing activities that occur on or after October 1, 2025, and is not required for 
processing activities that occur prior to that date.  
 
The bill establishes procedures and requirements related to enforcement actions by OAG. 
Specifically, before initiating an enforcement action pursuant to the bill, OAG may issue a 
notice of violation to the controller or the processor if OAG determines a cure is possible. 
If such a notice is issued, the controller or processor must have at least 60 days to cure the 
violation after receipt of the notice. However, if the violation is not cured within the 
required time period (specified by OAG), then OAG may bring an enforcement action 
pursuant to the bill’s authorization. In determining whether to grant a controller or 
processor an opportunity to cure an alleged violation, OAG may consider specified factors 
(e.g., the number of violations, the size and complexity of the controller or processor, the 
likelihood of injury to the public, etc.). These provisions are applicable to enforcement 
actions for alleged violations that occur on or before April 1, 2027. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Personal Information Protection Act (MPIPA) defines 
“personal information” as, among other things, biometric data of an individual generated 
by automatic measurements of an individual’s biological characteristics such as a 
fingerprint, voice print, genetic print, retina or iris image, or other unique biological 
characteristic, that can be used to uniquely authenticate the individual’s identity when the 
individual accesses a system or account in combination with an individual’s first name or 
first initial and last name, when the name or data elements are not encrypted, redacted, or 
otherwise protected by another method that renders the information unreadable or 
unusable. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 567/ Page 5 
MPIPA imposes certain duties on a business to protect an individual’s personal 
information. A business in possession of personal information must implement and 
maintain reasonable security procedures and practices to protect the information from 
unauthorized access, use, modification, or disclosure. If a data breach occurs, the business 
must conduct, in good faith, a reasonable and prompt investigation to determine the 
likelihood that personal information of the individual has been (or will be) misused. If the 
business determines that personal information likely has been (or will be) misused, the 
owner or licensee of the computerized data must notify an affected individual as soon as 
practicable but not later than 45 days after the business discovers or is notified of the 
breach. For a business that only maintains personal data, the business must notify the owner 
or licensee of the breach as soon as practicable but not later than 10 days after the business 
discovers or is notified of the breach. Notification may be delayed if a law enforcement 
agency determines that the notification will impede a criminal investigation or jeopardize 
homeland or national security. 
 
When a breach occurs, a business must also provide notice to OAG that includes (1) the 
number of Maryland residents affected by the breach; (2) a description of the breach, 
including when and how the breach occurred; (3) any steps the business has taken or plans 
to take relating to the breach; and (4) the form of notice and a sample of the notice that will 
be sent to individuals affected by the breach. The Act also establishes a specific notification 
process for breaches involving email account information. 
 
Violation of MPIPA is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA, subject 
to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 567/ Page 6 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures likely increase, at least minimally, for 
OAG to handle enforcement under the bill. OAG advises that it may require as many as 
four additional positions (one full-time assistant Attorney General, two investigators, and  
one mediator) with corresponding general fund expenditures of up to $390,900 in 
fiscal 2026, accounting for the bill’s October 1, 2025 effective date, and $539,200 by 
fiscal 2030. 
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the extent of resources 
potentially needed by OAG is dependent on the number of complaints filed under the bill 
and the level of effort involved in each case. While generally acknowledging that 
expenditures likely increase at least minimally for enforcement efforts, without experience 
under the bill, the need for additional staff is unclear. To the extent that additional staffing 
resources are required, OAG may request them through the annual budget process. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill establishes a significant regulatory framework related to 
online and biometric data. Thus, to the extent any small businesses in the State qualify as 
a controller and/or processor, they may be meaningfully affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 807 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 541 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Office of the Attorney General 
(Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 567/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - May 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7