START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1002

Chapter 1002

(House Bill 586)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Weinberg Center/New Spires Arts
Stages Beer, Wine, and Liquor License

FOR the purpose of altering the Class C (Weinberg Center) beer, wine, and liquor license
in Frederick County to be the Class C (Weinberg Center/New Spires Arts Stages)
beer, wine, and liquor license; expanding the licensed premises to include the New
Spires Arts Stages; altering the officials who may sign a certain license application;
authorizing the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at an event held by a
certain group that has rented a certain facility; and generally relating to alcoholic
beverages in Frederick County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–1015
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

20–1015.

(a) There is a Class C (Weinberg Center/NEW SPIRES ARTS STAGES) beer,
wine, and liquor license.

(b) The [president and two other officers] MANAGER of the Weinberg Center for
the Arts OR THE NEW SPIRES ARTS STAGES, OR ANOTHER MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL
DESIGNATED BY THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF FREDERICK, shall sign the application

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1002 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

for the license.

(c) The Board may issue the license for use by the nonprofit Weinberg Center for
the Arts AT THE CENTER AND AT THE NEW SPIRES ARTS STAGES.

(d) (1) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
at retail to a customer on the licensed premises.

(2) Beer, wine, and liquor may be consumed anywhere on the licensed
premises.

(e) The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor from 1 hour before to 1 hour
after:

(1) a performance; [or]

(2) a fund–raiser that benefits the Weinberg Center for the Arts OR THE
NEW SPIRES ARTS STAGES; OR

(3) AN EVENT HOSTED BY AN OUTSIDE GROUP THAT HAS RENTED
EITHER FACILITY.

(f) The annual license fee is $325.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2