START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1004

Chapter 1004

(House Bill 587)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Manufacturer’s Limited Beer, Wine,
and Liquor Permit

FOR the purpose of establishing a manufacturer’s limited beer, wine, and liquor permit in
Frederick County; authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Frederick
County to issue a permit to holders of certain manufacturer’s licenses; requiring the
Board to adopt certain regulations; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages in
Frederick County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–401
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–402.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

20–401.

(a) The following sections of Title 2, Subtitle 2 (“Manufacturer’s Licenses”) of
Division I of this article apply in the county without exception or variation:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1004 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) § 2–201 (“Issuance by Comptroller”);

(2) [§ 2–202 (“Class 1 distillery license”);

(3)] § 2–203 (“Class 9 limited distillery license”);

[(4)] (3) § 2–204 (“Class 2 rectifying license”);

[(5) § 2–207 (“Class 5 brewery license”);

(6)] (4) § 2–210 (“Class 8 farm brewery license”);

[(7)] (5) § 2–211 (“Residency requirement”);

[(8)] (6) § 2–212 (“Additional licenses”);

[(9)] (7) § 2–213 (“Additional fees”);

[(10)] (8) § 2–214 (“Sale or delivery restricted”);

[(11)] (9) § 2–215 (“Beer sale on credit to retail dealer prohibited”);

[(12)] (10) § 2–216 (“Interaction between manufacturing entities and
retailers”);

[(13)] (11) § 2–217 (“Distribution of alcoholic beverages — Prohibited
practices”); and

[(14)] (12) § 2–218 (“Restrictive agreements between producers and
retailers — Prohibited”).

(b) The following sections of Title 2, Subtitle 2 (“Manufacturer’s Licenses”) of
Division I of this article apply in the county:

(1) § 2–202 (“CLASS 1 DISTILLERY LICENSE”), SUBJECT TO §
20–402.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(1)] (2) § 2–205 (“Class 3 winery license”), subject to § 20–403 of this
subtitle;

[(2)] (3) § 2–206 (“Class 4 limited winery license”), subject to § 20–404 of
this subtitle;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1004

(4) § 2–207 (“CLASS 5 BREWERY LICENSE”), SUBJECT TO § 20–402.1
OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(3)] (5) § 2–208 (“Class 6 pub–brewery license”), subject to § 20–405 of
this subtitle; and

[(4)] (6) § 2–209 (“Class 7 micro–brewery license”), subject to § 20–406 of
this subtitle.

20–402.1.

(A) THERE IS A MANUFACTURER’S LIMITED BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
PERMIT.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE PERMIT TO A HOLDER OF A
MANUFACTURER’S LICENSE WITH A LOCAL ON–SITE CONSUMPTION PERMIT UNDER
§ 2–202 OR § 2–207 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(C) (1) (I) THE SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
THE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO ALLOW A LICENSED CATERER OR OTHER
CONTRACTED PARTY TO PROVIDE SEALED BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR PRODUCTS NOT
MANUFACTURED BY THE HOLDER DURING PRIVATE EVENTS FOR ON–PREMISES
CONSUMPTION AT THE PREMISES LICENSED FOR THE MANUFACTURER’S LICENSE.

(II) THE HOLDER MAY NOT HAVE A DIRECT OR INDIRECT
PECUNIARY INTEREST IN THE LICENSED CATERER OR OTHER CONTRACTED PARTY.

(2) THE HOLDER MAY NOT ALLOW PATRONS WHO ARE VISITING ANY
PART OF THE MANUFACTURER’S LICENSED PREMISES THAT IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC
TO ENTER THE PRIVATE EVENT AREA WHILE THE PRIVATE EVENT IS BEING HELD.

(D) THE HOLDER SHALL REQUEST APPROVAL FROM THE BOARD BEFORE
EACH EVENT.

(E) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION,
INCLUDING:

(1) CRITERIA FOR APPROVING EVENTS; AND

(2) SETTING THE ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 1004 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4