START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 412

Chapter 412

(House Bill 581)

AN ACT concerning

State Government – Permits, Licenses, and Certificates – Processing
(Transparent Government Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of requiring each principal department and independent unit to create a
certain catalog of information relating to permits, licenses, and certificates issued by
the department or independent unit and submit the catalog to the Governor on or
before a certain date; requiring each principal department and independent unit to
post certain information relating to permits, licenses, and certificates on the website
of the department or independent unit on or before a certain date; establishing the
Government Efficiency Commission; and generally relating to the processing of State
permits, licenses, and certificates.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 8–506; and 9–3801 and 9–3802 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 38.
Government Efficiency Commission”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

8–506.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS A PRINCIPAL DEPARTMENT
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–201 OF THIS TITLE.

(3) “INDEPENDENT UNIT” MEANS A UNIT IN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH
OF STATE GOVERNMENT THAT IS NOT A DEPARTMENT.

(B) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER OCTOBER 1, 2024, EACH DEPARTMENT AND
INDEPENDENT UNIT SHALL:

(1) CREATE A CATALOG OF EACH TYPE OF PERMIT, LICENSE, OR
CERTIFICATE THAT IT ISSUES; AND
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 412 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) SUBMIT THE CATALOG REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION TO THE GOVERNOR.

(C) A CATALOG CREATED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION SHALL
INCLUDE:

(1) A DESCRIPTION OF EACH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CERTIFICATE;

(2) THE TERM FOR WHICH EACH ISSUED PERMIT, LICENSE, OR
CERTIFICATE IS VALID;

(3) THE STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY THAT:

(I) AUTHORIZES OR REQUIRES THE DEPARTMENT OR
INDEPENDENT UNIT TO ISSUE THE PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CERTIFICATE; AND

(II) ESTABLISHES A TIMELINE WITHIN WHICH A DEPARTMENT
OR INDEPENDENT UNIT MUST PROCESS AND ISSUE THE PERMIT, LICENSE, OR
CERTIFICATE, IF ANY;

(4) THE METHOD AND PROCESS USED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR
INDEPENDENT UNIT TO ACCEPT APPLICATIONS FOR EACH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR
CERTIFICATE, INCLUDING A LIST OF:

(I) PRIOR SIGNIFICANT UPDATES TO THE METHOD AND
PROCESS; AND

(II) THE CURRENT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM USED,
AND ANY REMAINING ASSOCIATED TASKS STILL PERFORMED MANUALLY WITH THE
SYSTEM;

(5) AN ESTIMATE OF THE LENGTH OF TIME TO:

(I) REVIEW AN APPLICATION FOR INITIAL COMPLETION
DETERMINE IF AN APPLICATION IS COMPLETE; AND

(II) MAKE A FINAL DETERMINATION FOR A COMPLETED
APPLICATION TO ISSUE, WAIVE, OR DENY THE PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CERTIFICATE;

(6) THE APPLICATION FEE CHARGED FOR EACH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR
CERTIFICATE AND HOW THE REVENUE COLLECTED FROM APPLICATION FEES IS
ALLOCATED;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 412

(7) ANY STATUTORY OR REGULATORY AUTHORITY THAT MAY IMPACT
AN APPLICANT’S ABILITY TO RECEIVE A PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CERTIFICATE BASED
ON THE CRIMINAL HISTORY OF THE APPLICANT;

(8) AN ANALYSIS AND ANY RECOMMENDATIONS BY THE DEPARTMENT
OR INDEPENDENT UNIT ON THE APPROPRIATE LENGTH OF TIME TO PROMPTLY
PROCESS COMPLETED APPLICATIONS FOR EACH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CERTIFICATE
AND FACTORS IMPEDING THE TIMELY PROCESSING OF EACH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR
CERTIFICATE; AND

(9) STATUTORY OR REGULATORY CHANGES AND RESOURCES THAT
COULD EXPEDITE THE PROCESSING TIMELINE.

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER,
EACH DEPARTMENT AND INDEPENDENT UNIT SHALL POST ON ITS WEBSITE ~~A~~
DESCRIPTION OF AN INTERIM DESCRIPTION, TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, OF THE
APPLICATION PROCESS FOR EACH PERMIT, LICENSE, OR CERTIFICATE IT ISSUES,
INCLUDING:

(1) ANY UPDATES TO THE APPLICATION PROCESS IN THE PRECEDING
12–MONTH PERIOD; AND

(2) THE TIME TO PROCESS EACH APPLICATION TYPE.

(E) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, EACH
DEPARTMENT AND INDEPENDENT UNIT SHALL POST ON ITS WEBSITE A COMPLETED
UPDATE OF THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION
APPLICABLE TO THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING 12–MONTH PERIOD.

SUBTITLE 38. GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY COMMISSION.

9–3801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY COMMISSION.

(C) “DEPARTMENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–506 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(D) “INDEPENDENT UNIT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–506 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 412 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9–3802.

(A) (1) THERE IS A GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY COMMISSION.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO ENHANCE
GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY AND ECONOMIC COMPETITIVENESS BY MONITORING
EFFICIENCY IN THE PROCESSING OF PERMITS, LICENSES, AND CERTIFICATES.

(B) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE SENATE;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(3) THE SECRETARY OF PLANNING, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT,
OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE SECRETARY OF THE ENVIRONMENT, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(6) THE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION,
OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(6) THE SPECIAL SECRETARY OF SMALL, MINORITY, AND WOMEN
BUSINESS AFFAIRS, OR THE SPECIAL SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(7) THE SECRETARY OF COMMERCE, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(8) THE SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION, OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE;

(9) THE SECRETARY OF LABOR, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(10) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(11) THE SECRETARY OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, OR THE
SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(11) (12) THE CHIEF PERFORMANCE OFFICER; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 412

(12) (13) TWO THREE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE’S BUSINESS
COMMUNITY, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR.

(C) THE GOVERNOR SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION.

(D) THE OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE
COMMISSION.

(E) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(F) THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(1) COMPILE AND INDEX THE REPORTS SUBMITTED UNDER § 8–506
OF THIS ARTICLE;

(2) REVIEW STATUTORY AND REGULATORY PROVISIONS THAT MAY
IMPACT THE EFFICIENCY OF PROCESSING PERMITS, LICENSES, AND CERTIFICATES;
AND

(3) MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON:

(I) ANY FACTORS IMPEDING PROMPT AND FAIR PROCESSING
OF PERMITS, LICENSES, AND CERTIFICATES;

(II) STRATEGIES FOR HOW DEPARTMENTS AND INDEPENDENT
UNITS CAN IMPROVE PERMITTING AND LICENSING EFFICIENCY; AND

(III) REMOVING BARRIERS THAT HINDER INDIVIDUALS AND
BUSINESSES FROM RECEIVING PERMITS, LICENSES, AND CERTIFICATES.

(G) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EACH YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT ON ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 412 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6