START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 706

Chapter 706

(House Bill 583)

AN ACT concerning

Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and
Intervention in the Maryland Department of Health to reduce firearm violence, harm
from firearm violence, and misuse of firearms in the State; and generally relating to
the Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 13–5201 through 13–5205 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 52. Center
for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 52. CENTER FOR FIREARM VIOLENCE PREVENTION AND
INTERVENTION.

13–5201.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “CENTER” MEANS THE CENTER FOR FIREARM VIOLENCE
PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION.

13–5202.

(A) THERE IS A CENTER FOR FIREARM VIOLENCE PREVENTION AND
INTERVENTION IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE CENTER IS TO REDUCE FIREARM VIOLENCE,
HARM FROM FIREARM VIOLENCE, AND MISUSE OF FIREARMS IN THE STATE BY
PARTNERING WITH FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL AGENCIES AND AFFECTED
COMMUNITIES TO IMPLEMENT A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH TO FIREARM VIOLENCE
REDUCTION.

13–5203.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 706 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THE SECRETARY SHALL APPOINT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE
CENTER.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL APPOINT AND REMOVE ALL STAFF IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL COORDINATE AND DIRECT ANY
PLANNING RELATED TO THE CENTER INITIATED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(D) THE CENTER MAY APPLY FOR, RECEIVE, AND SPEND FEDERAL
GRANTS–IN–AID OR ANY OTHER FEDERAL FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE
DEPARTMENT FOR USE IN CARRYING OUT THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE
SECRETARY OR THE DEPARTMENT.

13–5204.

(A) THE CENTER SHALL:

(1) WORK IN CONSULTATION WITH THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF
CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES OR ANY SUCCESSOR AGENCY,
THE MARYLAND STATE POLICE, AND ANY OTHER RELEVANT STATE OR LOCAL
AGENCY TO ENSURE A WHOLE–OF–GOVERNMENT MULTIDEPARTMENTAL APPROACH
TO REDUCING FIREARM VIOLENCE;

(2) SOLICIT AND CONSIDER RECOMMENDATIONS FROM, AT A
~~MINIMUM:~~

(I) COMMUNITIES DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTED BY
FIREARM VIOLENCE; AND

(II) PUBLIC HEALTH EXPERTS; AND

(III) INDIVIDUALS OR ORGANIZATIONS WITH EXPERTISE IN
FIREARM SAFETY AND TRAINING; AND

(III) (IV) ANY OTHER EXPERTS, GROUPS, OR ORGANIZATIONS
AS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR DETERMINES APPROPRIATE AND NECESSARY; AND

(3) (I) ON OR BEFORE MAY 1, 2025, SUBMIT A PRELIMINARY
STATE PLAN FOR A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH TO REDUCING FIREARM VIOLENCE
TO GUIDE THE WORK OF THE CENTER TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 706

WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY;
AND

(II) ON OR BEFORE MAY 1, 2029, AND EVERY 4 YEARS
THEREAFTER, SUBMIT A STATE STRATEGIC PLAN FOR FIREARM VIOLENCE
REDUCTION USING PUBLIC HEALTH STRATEGIES TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY.

(B) THE CENTER MAY:

(1) OFFER TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO STATE AND
LOCAL AGENCIES, HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS, AND COMMUNITY AND
FAITH–BASED ORGANIZATIONS TO INCREASE CAPACITY TO IMPLEMENT
EVIDENCE–BASED FIREARM VIOLENCE PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION
STRATEGIES;

(2) ISSUE BEST PRACTICE GUIDANCE AND MODEL PROCESSES IN
CONSULTATION WITH AFFECTED COMMUNITIES REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION OF
EVIDENCE–BASED FIREARM VIOLENCE PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION
STRATEGIES;

(3) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME
PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES OR ANY SUCCESSOR AGENCY,
FACILITATE CROSS–JURISDICTIONAL DATA AND INFORMATION SHARING;

(4) CONDUCT PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGNS;

(5) SHARE DATA AND COLLABORATE WITH HIGHER EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS REGARDING THE PREVENTION OF FIREARM VIOLENCE;

(6) PROMOTE THE DEVELOPMENT OF EVIDENCE–BASED FIREARM
VIOLENCE PREVENTION INITIATIVES IN AFFECTED COMMUNITIES THROUGHOUT
THE STATE; AND

(7) ENGAGE IN ANY OTHER ACTIVITY CONSISTENT WITH THE
CENTER’S MISSION.

13–5205.

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
SUFFICIENT TO FUND THE CENTER.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 706 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4