START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 21

Chapter 21

(House Bill 585)

AN ACT concerning

Protecting Election Officials Act of 2024

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from knowingly and willfully making a threat to
harm an election official or an immediate family member of an election official
because of the election official’s role in administering the election process; and
generally relating to prohibiting threats against election officials and their
immediate family members.

BY adding to
Article – Election Law
Section 16–904
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

16–904.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “ELECTION OFFICIAL” MEANS:

(I) 1. THE STATE ADMINISTRATOR;

(II) 2. A MEMBER OF THE STATE BOARD;

(III) 3. AN EMPLOYEE OF THE STATE BOARD;

(IV) 4. COUNSEL TO THE STATE BOARD;

(IV) (V) 5. A COUNTY ELECTION DIRECTOR APPOINTED
UNDER § 2–202 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(V) (VI) 6. A MEMBER OF A LOCAL BOARD;

(VI) (VII) 7. AN EMPLOYEE OF A LOCAL BOARD; OR
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 21 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(VIII) 8. COUNSEL TO A LOCAL BOARD; OR

(VII) (IX) 9. AN ELECTION JUDGE.

(II) “ELECTION OFFICIAL” INCLUDES:

1. AN INDIVIDUAL WHO TAKES THE OATH PRESCRIBED IN
ARTICLE I, § 9 OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION TO ASSIST IN ADMINISTERING AN
ELECTION; AND

2. A PAGE AS DEFINED IN § 10–401 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(3) “ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
3–805 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

(4) “HARM” INCLUDES:

(I) SERIOUS INJURY; AND

(II) SERIOUS EMOTIONAL DISTRESS.

(5) “IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER” INCLUDES:

(I) A PARENT;

(II) A SPOUSE; AND

(III) A CHILD.

(6) “THREAT” INCLUDES:

(I) AN ORAL THREAT;

(II) A THREAT MADE BY ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION; AND

(III) A THREAT IN ANY WRITTEN FORM, WHETHER OR NOT THE
WRITING IS SIGNED, OR IF THE WRITING IS SIGNED, WHETHER OR NOT IT IS SIGNED
WITH A FICTITIOUS NAME OR ANY OTHER MARK.

(B) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY AND WILLFULLY MAKE A THREAT TO
HARM AN ELECTION OFFICIAL OR AN IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER OF AN ELECTION
OFFICIAL BECAUSE OF THE ELECTION OFFICIAL’S ROLE IN ADMINISTERING THE
ELECTION PROCESS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 21

(C) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY SEND, DELIVER, PART WITH, OR MAKE
FOR THE PURPOSE OF SENDING OR DELIVERING A THREAT PROHIBITED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR
AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 3 YEARS OR A
FINE NOT EXCEEDING $2,500 OR BOTH.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~June~~
~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ is an emergency measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
health or safety, has been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the
members elected to each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect
from the date it is enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3