START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 580 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 580 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Time to Serve Act of 2024 
 
   
This Administration bill increases, from 15 days to 30 days, the amount of disaster service 
leave that an Executive Branch employee may use in any 12-month period after obtaining 
approval from the employee’s appointing authority. Additionally, the bill increases, from 
15 days to 30 days, the amount of paid leave that the Secretary of Budget and Management 
may provide by regulation for uniformed services training or active uniformed services 
duty in a reserve unit of the armed forces or in the organized militia. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or 
finances; however, in limited circumstances, agency expenditures may increase minimally 
to provide coverage for employees on leave, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 580/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Disaster Service Leave  
 
On request, a State employee in the Executive, Judicial, and Legislative branches, 
including temporary employees, may be entitled to disaster service leave with pay if (1) the 
employee is certified by the American Red Cross as a disaster service volunteer and the 
American Red Cross requests the services of the employee during certain disasters or 
(2) the employee is a member of the Civil Air Patrol, U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary, 
Maryland voluntary organizations active in a disaster, a volunteer emergency medical 
services department, a volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue company or volunteer 
rescue squad, or a community emergency response team.  
 
An employee may use up to 15 days of disaster service leave in any 12-month period after 
obtaining approval from the employee’s appointing authority. During a prolonged or 
recurrent disaster, and if doing so would be in the best interest of the State, an employee’s 
appointing authority may (1) waive the eligibility requirements for disaster service leave, 
including the requirement that the employee obtain approval before using the leave and 
(2) increase the number of days of disaster service leave that an employee may use. 
 
For purposes of workers’ compensation and the Maryland Tort Claims Act, an employee 
on disaster service leave is not considered a State employee.  
 
Uniformed Services Administrative Leave  
 
The Secretary of Budget and Management may provide, by regulation, for leave with pay 
for up to 15 days for uniformed services training or active uniformed services duty in a 
reserve unit of the armed forces or in the organized militia.  
 
For all State employees, uniformed services administrative leave may be provided to an 
employee who is activated for uniformed services duty. Such an employee is entitled to 
leave in an amount sufficient to compensate the employee, during each pay period for 
which the employee is eligible to receive the uniformed services administrative leave, for 
the difference between the employee’s active-duty base salary and the employee’s State 
base salary or direct wages. This compensation may not exceed an employee’s State base 
salary or direct wages. An employee eligible to receive uniformed services administrative 
leave who is activated must elect to use either uniformed services administrative leave or 
the paid leave provided in regulation by the Secretary of Budget and Management for 
uniformed services training or active uniformed services duty. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 580/ Page 3 
Pension Credit for Military Service That Interrupts Employment 
 
In general, a member of a State or local retirement or pension system must receive service 
credit for a period of absence from employment while in military service if (1) the member 
returns to active employment and (2) membership in a State or local retirement or pension 
system is a requirement of employment. Service credit awarded for an absence due to 
military service cannot exceed five years. For a member of a State system, the service credit 
applies to the individual’s retirement allowance using the accrual rate in effect at the time 
the individual retires. 
 
In addition, a member of the Maryland National Guard or of a reserve component of the 
Armed Forces who has been activated for duty or who is on inactive duty for training that 
interrupts the member’s State service receives service credit at the rate of 4 months for 
each full year of military service, not to exceed 36 months.   
 
Background:  The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) notes that the use of 
disaster service leave by State employees to date has been minimal and variable, and 
dependent on the frequency of qualifying events. From calendar 2017 through 2021, 
95 employees in the State Personnel Management System used disaster leave for a total of 
404 hours, with the highest usage being in calendar 2021, with 31 employees using disaster 
leave that year.         
 
DBM also advises that 184 employees recorded military leave in Workday (a benefits and 
time-tracking system) in fiscal 2023 totaling 18,229 hours of military leave (military leave 
became uniformed services leave in fiscal 2024). On average, these employees used 
99 hours of the 120 hours of available military leave. 
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding the State’s uniformed services leave policy and disaster 
service leave policy does not directly affect State expenditures for most State agencies, 
since regular employee salaries are already budgeted. Additionally, State agencies do not 
generally hire temporary employees when employees are on leave.  
 
However, in limited circumstances, an affected agency may incur overtime costs for 
necessary coverage or realize a loss in productivity. DBM notes the Maryland State Police 
and the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services are likely to experience an 
increase in overtime costs based on uniformed services leave usage in fiscal 2023. Even 
so, any such cost, if realized, can likely be covered with agencies’ existing resources.  
 
Additionally, the bill may increase the amount of service credit awarded to members of the 
State Retirement and Pension System whose employment is interrupted by uniformed 
service, but it is not expected to have a discernible effect on State pension liabilities or 
contribution rates. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 580/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 477 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Military Department; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 580/ Page 5 
  
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Time to Serve Act of 2024 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 580 
  
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
June Chung 
  
 
   
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The Time To Serve Act expands military leave for State employees in the National Guard and military 
reserves by increasing military leave to 30 days. In addition, all State employees will receive 30 days of 
disaster service leave. The legislation has no impact on small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5