START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 585 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 585 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Judiciary 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Protecting Election Officials Act of 2024 
 
 
This emergency Administration bill prohibits a person from threatening to harm an election 
official or an immediate family member of an election official because of the election 
official’s role in administering the election process, with violations subject to penalties of 
imprisonment for up to three years and/or a fine of up to $2,500.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.)  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill prohibits a person from (1) knowingly and willfully making a 
threat to harm an election official or an immediate family member of an election official 
because of the election official’s role in administering the election process or (2) knowingly 
sending, delivering, parting with, or making for the purpose of sending or delivering a 
threat to harm an election official or an immediate family member of an election official 
because of the election official’s role in administering the election process. 
 
A person who violates these prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
imprisonment for up to three years and/or a fine of up to $2,500. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 585/ Page 2 
“Threat” includes (1) an oral threat; (2) a threat made by electronic communication; and 
(3) a threat in any written form, whether or not the writing is signed, or if the writing is 
signed, whether or not it is signed with a fictitious name or any other mark.  
 
“Electronic communication” is defined (in the same manner as it is defined under 
provisions of the Criminal Law Article relating to malicious use of electronic 
communications) as the act of transmitting any information, data, writing, image, or 
communication by the use of a computer or any other electronic means, including a 
communication that involves the use of email, an instant messaging service, an Internet 
website, a social media application, a network call, a facsimile machine, or any other 
Internet-based communication tool.  
 
“Harm” includes (1) serious injury and (2) serious emotional distress.  
 
“Election official” means: 
 
 
the State Administrator of Elections; 
 
a member of the State Board of Elections (SBE); 
 
an employee of SBE; 
 
counsel to SBE; 
 
a county election director; 
 
a member of a local board of elections; 
 
an employee of a local board of elections; 
 
counsel to a local board of elections; or 
 
an election judge. 
 
“Election official” includes (1) an individual who takes the oath prescribed in Article I, § 9 
of the Maryland Constitution to assist in administering an election and (2) a page serving 
under the Election Day Page Program. (See Current Law, below.) 
 
“Immediate family member” includes (1) a parent; (2) a spouse; and (3) a child. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Election Law Article 
 
Title 16 of the Election Law Article (to which the bill’s prohibitions are added) prohibits a 
person from (1) interfering with an election official in the performance of their official 
duties or (2) hindering or impeding the conduct of official electoral activities by breach of 
the peace, disorder, violence, or threat of violence. A person who violates either prohibition 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 585/ Page 3 
is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of $50 to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for 
three months to one year. 
 
Criminal Law Article 
 
 
Threats Against Certain State and Local Officials 
 
Section 3-708 of the Criminal Law Article prohibits a person from (1) knowingly and 
willfully making a threat to take the life of, kidnap, or cause physical injury to a State 
official, a local official, a deputy State’s Attorney, an assistant State’s Attorney, or an 
assistant Public Defender or (2) knowingly sending, delivering, parting with, or making for 
the purpose of sending or delivering a threat to take the life of, kidnap, or cause physical 
injury to any of those officials. A person who violates the prohibition is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to three years and/or a fine of up to 
$2,500. 
 
“Threat” includes (1) an oral threat and (2) a threat in any written form, whether or not the 
writing is signed, or if the writing is signed, whether or not it is signed with a fictitious 
name or any other mark.  
 
“State official” means (1) the Governor, Governor-elect, Lieutenant Governor, and 
Lieutenant Governor-elect; (2)  a constitutional officer or officer-elect in an executive unit; 
(3) a member or member-elect of the General Assembly; (4) a judge or judge-elect;  
(5) specified judicial appointees; (6) a State’s Attorney; (7) a clerk of the circuit court;  
(8) a register of wills; or (9) a sheriff. 
 
“Local official” means an individual serving in a publicly elected office of a local 
government unit. 
 
 
Malicious Use of Electronic Communications 
 
Section 3-805 of the Criminal Law Article contains specified prohibitions against 
(1) malicious use of electronic communications after receiving a reasonable warning or 
request to stop and (2) malicious use of electronic communications intended to cause 
physical injury or serious emotional distress to a minor. A person who violates those 
prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to imprisonment for up to three years 
and/or a fine of up to $10,000. 
 
Article I, Section 9 of the Maryland Constitution (Referred to in the Bill) 
 
Under Article I, § 9 of the Maryland Constitution, every person elected or appointed to any 
office of profit or trust under the constitution, or under the laws made pursuant to the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 585/ Page 4 
constitution, must, before the person enters upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe 
to a specified oath or affirmation. 
 
Election Day Page Program (Referred to in the Bill) 
 
The Election Day Page Program, enacted under Chapter 468 of 2019, has the purpose of 
(1) stimulating the interest of students in the election process; (2) providing assistance to 
election judges in polling places on Election Day; and (3) ensuring the safe entry and exit 
of elderly voters and voters with disabilities from polling places. SBE must develop a 
specified page training program for use by participating local boards of elections. A local 
board (1) may participate in the Election Day Page Program; (2) is responsible for the 
staffing of and implementation of a page training program; and (3) must ensure that each 
page receives the required training before Election Day. 
 
To qualify as a page, an individual must (1) be at least 14 years old; (2) apply to the local 
board in the individual’s county of residence; (3) be available to work at least one full 
four-hour shift on Election Day; and (4) complete the required training before  
Election Day. A page may work up to two four-hour shifts at a polling place on  
Election Day and must (1) serve under the direct supervision of the chief election judges 
for the assigned polling place and (2) assist election judges with Election Day duties, as 
directed. 
 
Background:  The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) indicates that in 
recent years election officials, staff, and poll workers have been subjected to threats, 
accusations of crime, and leaked private information (“doxing”) at much higher rates than 
usual. According to information updated by NCSL in April 2024, 16 states (other than 
Maryland) – Arizona, California, Colorado, Indiana, Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, 
Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, Vermont, Virginia, 
and Washington – and the District of Columbia have enacted laws specifically addressing 
protections for election officials and poll workers since 2020. 
 
For additional information, see Issue Papers, 2024 Legislative Session, Department of 
Legislative Services, p. 180 (“Protections for Election Workers”) (December 2023).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 480 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 585/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  State Board of Elections; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; State Prosecutor’s Office; National Conference of 
State Legislatures; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 585/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Protecting Election Officials Act of 2024   
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0585 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 6