START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 510 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 510 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Business Facade Improvement Program - Eligible Funding Recipients 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for funding under the Business Facade Improvement Program 
in the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to include 
community development organizations that (1) serve at least one sustainable community 
and (2) apply for the funds. The bill also makes conforming changes. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall finances of the Business Facade Improvement Program are not 
affected. DHCD can handle any administrative changes with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent eligible community development organizations apply for and 
receive funds from the Business Facade Improvement Program, fewer funds are available 
for local governments (currently the only eligible funding recipients). 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A corporation, foundation, or other legal entity qualifies as a “community 
development organization” if (1) its purpose is to improve the physical, economic, or social 
environment of the area where it operates and (2) no part of its net earnings inures to the 
benefit of a private shareholder or individual holding an interest in that entity.  
 
Chapter 437 of 2023 established the Business Facade Improvement Program within 
DHCD. The purpose of the program is to assist qualified businesses with improving the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 510/ Page 2 
outside appearance of the businesses’ buildings and facilities. DHCD must distribute funds 
from the program to political subdivisions that have at least one sustainable community 
and apply for the funds. In addition, DHCD must develop (1) an application process for 
political subdivisions seeking to participate in the program and (2) criteria for rating 
political subdivisions that apply for funds and awarding funds to political subdivisions. 
Each political subdivision that receives funds under the program must distribute grants to 
qualified businesses that apply for a grant. Each political subdivision must develop (1) a 
grant application process for qualified businesses seeking to participate in the program and 
(2) criteria for rating qualified businesses that apply for grants and awarding grants to 
qualified businesses. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must include in the annual 
budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million to the program. The fiscal 2025 capital budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million in general obligation bond 
proceeds for the program. 
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas  
 
A sustainable community is defined as a part of a priority funding area that (1) is designated 
by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the Secretary of Housing and 
Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base Realignment and Closure 
Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a transit-oriented development.  
 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 510/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; 
City of Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3