START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 507 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 507 
(Delegates Buckel and Hinebaugh) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Allegany and Garrett Counties - Property Tax - Credit for Construction of 
Housing 
 
 
This bill authorizes Allegany and Garrett counties and municipalities within those counties 
to grant, by law, a property tax credit of up to $10,000 against the property tax imposed on 
an eligible dwelling for up to five years if the eligible dwelling meets specified 
requirements. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years beginning 
after June 30, 2024. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
   
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues for Allegany and Garrett counties and eligible 
municipalities decrease beginning as early as FY 2025 to the extent local property tax 
credits are granted in accordance with the bill’s authorization. Local expenditures are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Eligible dwelling” is defined as newly constructed residential real 
property (1) that has not been previously occupied since its construction; (2) for which the 
building permit for construction was issued on or after June 1, 2024; and (3) is occupied 
by the purchaser of the dwelling as the purchaser’s principal residence. To be eligible for 
the local property tax credit, an eligible dwelling must be constructed or equipped with a 
sprinkler system installed in accordance with State or local law, an on-site sewage disposal 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 507/ Page 2 
system installed in accordance with State or local law, or fixed broadband Internet access 
service connectivity. 
 
The governing body of an eligible county or municipality that grants a property tax credit 
under the bill may provide, by law, for (1) the amount of the credit; (2) additional eligibility 
criteria for the credit; (3) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform 
processing of requests for the tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out 
the tax credit. 
 
Current Law:  Allegany County or the City of Cumberland may grant, by law, a property 
tax credit against the county and municipal corporation tax imposed on property that is 
rehabilitated or newly constructed under regulations adopted by the governing body. The 
credit may not extend beyond the first 10 years after the rehabilitation or new construction 
is completed, and the credit may not exceed the initial valuation of the rehabilitation or 
new construction and the resulting phase-in of the valuation. 
 
Local Revenues:  Property tax revenues for Allegany and Garrett counties and eligible 
municipalities decrease beginning as early as fiscal 2025 to the extent these jurisdictions 
grant local property tax credits in accordance with the bill’s authorization. The precise 
effect on local revenues depends on local policy decisions and cannot be reliably estimated. 
For illustrative purposes only, should all newly constructed single-family homes in 
Allegany and Garrett counties be eligible for a county property tax credit of up to $10,000 
beginning in fiscal 2025, (1) Allegany County property tax revenues may decrease by 
$95,000 in fiscal 2025 and by $690,000 in fiscal 2029 and (2) Garrett County property tax 
revenues may decrease by $715,000 in fiscal 2025 and by $3.6 million in fiscal 2029. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 765 of 2023 and SB 675 and HB 843 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Allegany and Garrett counties; City of Frostburg; Town of Bel Air; Moody’s 
Analytics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 507/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3