START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 577 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 577 
(Delegate Grossman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Study on the Establishment of a 
Homeless Shelter Licensing Program 
 
 
This bill establishes a Study on the Establishment of a Homeless Shelter Licensing Program 
in the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). The study must 
(1) review current habitability and admission standards of homeless shelters in the State; 
(2) recommend a basic habitability and admission standard for homeless shelters in the 
State; and (3) recommend a plan to establish a program within DHCD to license homeless 
shelters in the State. DHCD must hire one new full-time permanent employee to conduct 
the study, in consultation with political subdivisions. By July 1, 2025, the study must report 
its findings and recommendations to the Assistant Secretary of the Homeless Solutions 
Division within DHCD and to specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates July 31, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $77,900 in FY 2025; future years 
reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
77,900 
92,700 
96,800 
101,100 
105,500 
Net Effect 
($77,900) 
($92,700) 
($96,800) 
($101,100) 
($105,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 577/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Oversight of Homeless Shelters and Continuums of Care – Generally 
 
There is no State entity charged with the licensure or regulation of homeless shelters. 
Recipients of federal Continuum of Care (CoC) grants provide services for homeless 
individuals within a specified geographic area, including shelter operations, street 
outreach, rapid rehousing, and homelessness prevention. There are 10 CoCs in the State, 
with DHCD administering 3 that offer consolidated services to the Eastern Shore and 
Western Maryland. 
 
Generally, each CoC geographic area has a lead agency that is responsible for applying to 
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for federal funding and 
then distributing the funding to eligible recipients, which includes homeless shelters. By 
accepting HUD funding, CoCs and subsequent grant recipients must follow specified 
federal requirements generally related to the quality of shelter provided. 
 
Homelessness Solutions Program 
 
The Division of Homeless Solutions within DHCD administers the Homelessness 
Solutions Program (HSP), which serves as a statewide response to homelessness in 
Maryland, providing technical support and funding to CoCs and local homeless coalitions, 
which coordinate funding and resources for service providers across the State. The goals 
of HSP are to (1) reduce the number of individuals/households who become homeless or 
return to homelessness and (2) shorten the length of time an individual or household is 
homeless. HSP funds can be used for rapid rehousing, homelessness prevention, and other 
related services. Homeless shelters that accept HSP funds must comply with specified 
minimum habitability standards. 
 
Shelter and Transitional Housing Facilities Grant Program 
 
DHCD also operates the Shelter and Transitional Housing Facilities Grant Program, which 
provides capital financing for local governments and nonprofit organizations to develop 
shelter, transitional, or other housing facilities for homeless individuals and families. 
Grantees use the funds to acquire, design, construct, renovate, and equip projects for which 
loan financing is not feasible. Funding is generally limited to 50% of a project’s cost. 
 
Eligible projects include apartments, condominiums, townhouses, single-family detached 
homes, single-room occupancy facilities, and group or shared housing that provide housing 
for homeless households and support services. A project may include uses other than 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 577/ Page 3 
housing for the homeless, such as traditional rental housing or nonresidential uses; 
however, program funds are only provided to the extent allowed for those units identified 
as transitional housing units and the necessary space and facilities required to operate the 
program-assisted units. Projects involving new construction or substantial rehabilitation 
are subject to a thorough review by DHCD. All financing offered under the program is in 
the form of grants. The Governor must include $3.0 million in the annual budget bill or the 
capital budget bill for the grant program, and the fiscal 2025 capital budget as passed by 
the General Assembly includes $3.0 million in general obligation bonds for the grant 
program. 
 
State Expenditures:  Even though the bill requires the study to report its findings and 
recommendations by July 1, 2025 – and even though the bill terminates July 31, 2025 – the 
bill nevertheless requires DHCD to hire a permanent full-time employee. Therefore, this 
analysis includes a permanent position that is assumed to be maintained by DHCD in the 
out-years, with duties – once the study has been completed – to be determined by the 
department. Thus, costs continue in the out-years even though the bill’s requirement for a 
one-time study could otherwise be completed by hiring temporary contractual staff that 
would no longer be needed once the study has been completed and the bill terminates. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $77,933 in fiscal 2025, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one program officer to conduct the required study and submit the required 
report. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$70,677 
Operating Expenses 
7,256 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$77,933 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. As noted above, it is assumed 
that, given the bill’s requirement to hire a permanent employee, the program officer is 
retained in the out-years and assigned to other duties as DHCD sees fit. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 577/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1107 (Senator M. Washington, et al.) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City, Carroll, Harford, Queen Anne’s, and 
St. Mary’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Human Services; 
Office of Administrative Hearings; Harford Family House; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4