START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 216

Chapter 216

(House Bill 569)

AN ACT concerning

Higher Education – Credit Eligibility and Transfer of Credits – English as a
Second Language Courses
(Credit for All Language Learning (CALL) Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring a public community college to consider certain language
courses as eligible for certain credits toward an associate’s degree under certain
circumstances; requiring that certain credits for certain language or humanities
courses earned by students who transfer from certain community colleges to certain
institutions of higher education be transferable; ~~prohibiting~~ requiring certain
institutions of higher education ~~from~~ ~~denying~~ to review and consider the transfer of
certain credits for certain language or humanities courses ~~for~~ ~~any~~ ~~reason;~~ and
generally relating to the transfer of credits from community colleges to institutions
of higher education.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 10–101(c) and (h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 11–207(c) and 15–117(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 11–207.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

10–101.

(c) “Commission” means the Maryland Higher Education Commission.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 216 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(h) (1) “Institution of higher education” means an institution of postsecondary
education that generally limits enrollment to graduates of secondary schools, and awards
degrees at either the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate level.

(2) “Institution of higher education” includes public, private nonprofit, and
for–profit institutions of higher education.

11–207.

(c) (1) The Commission, in collaboration with the public institutions of higher
education, shall develop and implement a statewide transfer agreement whereby at least
60 credits of general education, elective, and major courses that a student earns at any
community college in the State toward an associate of arts or associate of science degree
shall be transferable to any public senior higher education institution in the State for credit
toward a bachelor’s degree by July 1, 2016.

(2) (I) THE AGREEMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL REQUIRE THAT ANY CREDITS EARNED FOR A COURSE AT A
COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN THE STATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–117(B)(3) OF THIS
ARTICLE BE TRANSFERABLE TO ANY PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION
IN THE STATE.

(II) AN A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE
STATE MAY NOT DENY THE TRANSFER OF CREDITS IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH FOR ANY REASON.

11–207.1.

(A) ANY CREDITS EARNED FOR A COURSE AT A COMMUNITY COLLEGE IN
THE STATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–117(B)(3) OF THIS ARTICLE SHALL MAY BE
TRANSFERABLE TO ANY PRIVATE NONPROFIT INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION
IN THE STATE.

(B) A PRIVATE NONPROFIT INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE
STATE MAY NOT DENY SHALL REVIEW AND CONSIDER THE TRANSFER OF CREDITS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR ANY REASON.

15–117.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, beginning with
fall 2015, the standard number of credits required for an associate’s degree from a public
community college is 60 credit hours.

(2) The standard number of credits required under paragraph (1) of this
subsection does not apply if:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 216

(i) The degree program is defined as more than a 2–year associate’s
degree;

(ii) Professional accreditation requires a higher number of credit
hours or requires course work that cannot be completed in 60 credits; or

(iii) Certification requirements result in a need for credit hours in
excess of 60.

(3) A PUBLIC COMMUNITY COLLEGE SHALL CONSIDER A COURSE OR
PROGRAM FOR ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE OR ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNER
AS ELIGIBLE FOR EITHER WORLD LANGUAGE OR HUMANITIES ELECTIVES CREDIT,
OR BOTH, TOWARD A STUDENT’S ASSOCIATE’S DEGREE IF THE COURSE IS NOT
CLASSIFIED BY THE PUBLIC COMMUNITY COLLEGE AS A REMEDIAL COURSE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3