START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 238

Chapter 238

(House Bill 515)

AN ACT concerning

Workgroup to Study the Fiscal and Operational Viability of Public–Private
Partnerships for Calvert County Public Schools

FOR the purpose of establishing a Workgroup to Study the Fiscal and Operational Viability
of Public–Private Partnerships for Calvert County Public Schools; and generally
relating to the Workgroup to Study the Fiscal and Operational Viability of
Public–Private Partnerships for Calvert County Public Schools.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Workgroup to Study the Fiscal and Operational Viability of
Public–Private Partnerships for Calvert County Public Schools.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(1) two Senators appointed by the President of the Senate, based on the
recommendation of the chair of the Calvert County Senate Delegation;

(2) two Delegates appointed by the Speaker of the House, based on the
recommendation of the chair of the Calvert County House Delegation;

(3) two members of the Board of Calvert County Commissioners, appointed
by the Board of Calvert County Commissioners;

(4) two members of the Calvert County Board of Education, appointed by
the Chair of the Calvert County Board of Education;

(5) the Chair of the Interagency Commission on School Construction, or the
Chair’s designee; and

(6) the Executive Director of the Maryland Stadium Authority, or the
Executive Director’s designee.

(c) The Workgroup members shall elect the chair of the Workgroup.

(d) The Calvert County Board of Education shall provide staff for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 238 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall:

(1) study:

(i) the fiscal and operational viability of using a public–private
partnership for financing, constructing, maintaining, and operating schools in Calvert
County;

(ii) implementation of a public–private partnership by Calvert
County Public Schools; and

(iii) how a public–private partnership may relieve the significant
burden for funding new school construction and renovations for Calvert County Public
Schools; and

(2) make recommendations regarding using a public–private partnership
for:

(i) new school construction; and

(ii) maintenance and rehabilitation of schools to meet the identified
needs at lower cost.

(g) On or before December 31, 2024, the Workgroup shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Board of Calvert County Commissioners, the Calvert County
Board of Education, the Interagency Commission on School Construction, and, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the members of the Calvert
County Delegation to the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
30, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2