START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 974

Chapter 974

(House Bill 507)

AN ACT concerning

Allegany and Garrett Counties – Property ~~and~~ ~~Income~~ ~~Taxes~~ ~~–~~ ~~Credits~~ Tax –
Credit for Construction ~~and~~ ~~Purchase~~ of Housing

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ authorizing the governing bodies of Allegany County and
Garrett County and municipal corporations located in Allegany County and Garrett
County to grant, by law, a property tax credit on certain newly constructed dwellings;
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~reimburse~~ ~~each~~ ~~county~~ ~~and~~ ~~municipal~~ ~~corporation~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~portion~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~revenue~~ ~~that~~ ~~would~~ ~~have~~ ~~been~~ ~~collected~~ ~~but~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~credit~~
~~required~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act;~~ ~~allowing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~persons~~ ~~who~~ ~~construct~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~
~~middle–income~~ ~~homes~~ ~~in~~ ~~Allegany~~ ~~County~~ ~~and~~ ~~Garrett~~ ~~County~~ ~~to~~ ~~claim~~ ~~a~~ ~~credit~~
~~against~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~income~~ ~~tax;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~
~~Development~~ ~~to~~ ~~administer~~ ~~the~~ ~~credit;~~ ~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~carryforward~~ ~~and~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~credit~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ and generally relating to ~~tax~~ ~~incentives~~ a
property tax credit for ~~the~~ ~~construction~~ ~~and~~ ~~purchase~~ ~~of~~ newly constructed housing
in Allegany County and Garrett County.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–327
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~10–758~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

9–327.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “ELIGIBLE COUNTY” MEANS ALLEGANY COUNTY AND GARRETT
COUNTY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 974 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “ELIGIBLE DWELLING” MEANS NEWLY CONSTRUCTED
RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY:

(I) THAT HAS NOT BEEN PREVIOUSLY OCCUPIED SINCE ITS
CONSTRUCTION;

(II) FOR WHICH THE BUILDING PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION
WAS ISSUED ON OR AFTER JUNE 1, 2024; AND

(III) OCCUPIED BY THE PURCHASER OF THE DWELLING AS THE
PURCHASER’S PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

(B) THE GOVERNING BODY OF AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION SHALL LOCATED IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY MAY GRANT, BY LAW, A
PROPERTY TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON AN ELIGIBLE
DWELLING IF THE ELIGIBLE DWELLING IS CONSTRUCTED OR EQUIPPED WITH:

(1) A SPRINKLER SYSTEM INSTALLED IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 9,
SUBTITLE 2 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE OR LOCAL LAW;

(2) AN ON–SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM INSTALLED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 9 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE OR LOCAL LAW; OR

(3) FIXED BROADBAND INTERNET ACCESS SERVICE CONNECTIVITY.

(C) THE CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION:

(1) MAY NOT EXCEED $10,000; AND

(2) MAY BE CLAIMED IN THE TAXABLE YEAR THAT THE PROPERTY
QUALIFIES FOR THE CREDIT AND THE 4 TAXABLE YEARS FOLLOWING THE TAXABLE
YEAR IN WHICH THE PROPERTY QUALIFIES FOR THE CREDIT.

(D) (1) AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET, THE STATE SHALL REMIT
~~TO~~ ~~EACH~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~AN~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~EQUAL~~ ~~TO~~
50% OF THE FUNDS THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN COLLECTED IF THE PROPERTY TAX
CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION HAD NOT BEEN GRANTED.

(2) (I) FOR AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
TO RECEIVE A REIMBURSEMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BY
AUGUST 31 IN ANY CALENDAR YEAR, THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
SHALL SUBMIT AN ANNUAL REQUEST TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR THE AMOUNT

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 974

REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30
THAT YEAR.

(II) ON RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST FROM AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY
OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CERTIFY TO THE COMPTROLLER, ON OR BEFORE JULY 31,
THE REIMBURSEMENT DUE TO EACH COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.

(III) ON RECEIPT OF THE CERTIFICATION FROM THE
DEPARTMENT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
COMPTROLLER SHALL REIMBURSE EACH COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ON
OR BEFORE AUGUST 31.

(3) IF AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION SUBMITS
ITS REQUEST FOR THE AMOUNT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION AFTER JUNE 30:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ISSUE ITS CERTIFICATION TO THE
COMPTROLLER WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST; AND

(II) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL REIMBURSE THE COUNTY OR
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE
~~CERTIFICATION.~~

(E) (D) THE GOVERNING BODY OF AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION LOCATED IN AN ELIGIBLE COUNTY THAT GRANTS A PROPERTY TAX
CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION MAY PROVIDE, BY LAW, FOR:

(1) SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATION UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(1) OF THIS
SECTION, THE AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT;

(2) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE CREDIT;

(1) (3) REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE APPLICATION
AND UNIFORM PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR THE TAX CREDIT; AND

(2) (4) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE TAX
CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~
~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 974 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~10–758.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
~~COMMUNITY~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT.~~

(3) (I) “MIDDLE–INCOME HOME” MEANS A RESIDENTIAL REAL
~~PROPERTY:~~

1. FOR WHICH THE BUILDING PERMIT FOR
~~CONSTRUCTION~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~ISSUED~~ ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TAXABLE~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~A~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~CREDIT~~
CERTIFICATE IS ISSUED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION; AND

2. WITH A PURCHASE PRICE OF AT LEAST $130,000 BUT
NOT MORE THAN $250,000 AND THAT IS PAID BY AN INDIVIDUAL THAT INTENDS TO
OCCUPY THE RESIDENCE AS THE INDIVIDUAL’S PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.

(II) “MIDDLE–INCOME HOME” DOES NOT INCLUDE A
~~RESIDENTIAL~~ ~~REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BUILDING~~ ~~PERMIT~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~CONSTRUCTION~~ ~~WAS~~
ISSUED BEFORE JUNE 1, 2024.

(B) A TAXPAYER MAY CLAIM A CREDIT AGAINST THE STATE INCOME TAX IN
~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~STATED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TAX~~ ~~CREDIT~~ ~~CERTIFICATE~~ ~~APPROVED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) A DEVELOPER OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY MAY SUBMIT AN
APPLICATION TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION IN A
TAXABLE YEAR IN WHICH THE DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTS MORE THAN 10
MIDDLE–INCOME HOMES IN ALLEGANY COUNTY OR GARRETT COUNTY.

(2) ON APPROVAL OF THE APPLICATION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
ISSUE THE APPLICANT A TAX CREDIT CERTIFICATE IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO $7,500.

(D) IF THE TAX CREDIT EXCEEDS THE STATE INCOME TAX OF THE TAXPAYER
IN ANY TAXABLE YEAR, THE TAXPAYER MAY APPLY THE EXCESS AS A CREDIT FOR
SUCCEEDING TAXABLE YEARS UNTIL THE EARLIER OF:

(1) THE DATE ON WHICH THE FULL AMOUNT OF THE EXCESS IS USED;
~~OR~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 974

(2) THE DATE OF THE EXPIRATION OF THE 5TH TAXABLE YEAR AFTER
~~THE~~ ~~TAXABLE~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CREDIT~~ ~~CERTIFICATE~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~ISSUED~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) (1) THE TAX CREDIT ALLOWED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE
ALLOCATED AMONG THE PARTNERS, MEMBERS, OR SHAREHOLDERS OF AN ENTITY
IN ANY MANNER AGREED TO BY THOSE PERSONS IN WRITING.

(2) IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE
DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS SECTION, THE AMOUNT OF THE TAX CREDIT ALLOWED
~~BUT~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~USED~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~TRANSFERRED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WHOLE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~PART~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~OR~~
BUSINESS ENTITY.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE COMPTROLLER,
SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~
~~applicable~~ ~~to~~ ~~all~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~years~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~after~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2024.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~4.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~
~~applicable~~ ~~to~~ ~~all~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~years~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~after~~ ~~December~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2023.~~

SECTION ~~5.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
June 1, 2024, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5