START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 545 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 545 
(Delegate Mireku-North) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program - Nancy Grasmick 
Public School Professional Award - Public School Nurses 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award to 
public school nurses who (1) have two years of experience in providing health services in 
a public school and (2) are employed by a local school system or local health department 
(LHD) to provide health services through an agreement with a local board of education. 
Requirements for the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to publicize the 
program are expanded to include eligible public school nurses in an effort to recruit and 
retain nurses working in public schools in the State. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The FY 2025 budget, as passed by the General Assembly and contingent on 
this bill (or its cross file), appropriates $750,000 in general funds to the Janet L. Hoffman 
Loan Assistance Repayment Program (LARP) to encompass certain school nurses under 
the Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award. This analysis assumes additional 
Grasmick awards fully expend the general fund appropriation in FY 2025, as further 
discussed below. In addition, MHEC expenditures minimally increase for software 
upgrades and to alter program publicity as discussed below. Otherwise, expanding 
eligibility for the Grasmick award does not necessarily require additional spending in the 
out-years. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
753,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($753,000) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None, but the bill may help mitigate nursing shortages in public schools.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 545/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Loan Assistance Repayment Program – Generally 
 
LARP provides loan repayment assistance in exchange for certain service commitments to 
help ensure that underserved areas of the State have sufficient numbers of primary care 
physicians, physician assistants, dentists, lawyers, and other professionals serving those 
areas or low-income families. LARP also provides loan repayment assistance in exchange 
for service commitments to serve as a police officer or probation agent anywhere in the 
State. The program is subdivided into the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, the Maryland 
Dent-Care LARP, the Maryland LARP for Physicians and Physician Assistants, and the 
Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation Agents. Individuals must have received 
a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college or university in the State 
or a school of law or have received a Resident Teacher Certificate from the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE) after completing an approved alternative teaching 
preparation program. Except for the Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation 
Agents, they must also be employed full-time in State or local government or in a nonprofit 
organization that assists low-income, underserved residents or underserved areas in the 
State. For the Maryland LARP for Police Officers and Probation Agents, individuals must 
obtain employment as a police officer or probation agent in the State for at least two years 
and satisfy any other criteria the Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) 
establishes.  
 
Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program 
 
The Janet L. Hoffman LARP is administered by OSFA to assist in the repayment of any 
higher education loan owed by an individual who:   
 
 
either (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from a college 
or university in the State, a law school, or, for mental health professionals only, any 
accredited college or university or (2) receives a Resident Teacher Certificate from 
MSDE after completing an approved alternative teaching preparation program; 
 
obtains eligible employment; 
 
receives an income less than the maximum eligible total income levels established 
by the office, including any additional sources of income; and 
 
satisfies any other criteria established. 
 
Eligible employment fields include lawyers, degree- or diploma-holding registered nurses, 
licensed clinical therapists, physical and occupational therapists, social workers, speech 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 545/ Page 3 
pathologists, and teachers. A licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed 
clinical marriage and family therapy counselor, or a licensed clinical professional 
counselor whose practice is located in a high-need geographic area of the State as 
determined by the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) may receive assistance under 
the program. 
 
Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award 
 
Chapter 496 of 2012 established the Nancy Grasmick Teacher Award within 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP for Maryland. Chapter 627 of 2023 expanded eligibility to include 
mental health professionals (including school psychologists, resource psychologists, 
psychologist coordinators, social workers, social worker supervisors, school counselors, or 
mental health coordinators) and renamed the program the Nancy Grasmick Public School 
Professional Award.  
 
Accordingly, the award is available to public school teachers and mental health 
professionals who have taught or provided mental health services in Maryland for at least 
two years. For teachers, this service must include teaching in (1) science, technology, 
engineering, or mathematics subjects or (2) a school in which at least 75% of the students 
are enrolled in the free and reduced-price meal program. For mental health professionals 
this may include time as an employee of either a local school system or an LHD through 
an agreement with a local board of education. A teacher must also have received a 
performance evaluation rating for the most recent year available. Eligible loans for 
repayment include the loans of an individual who (1) receives a graduate, professional, or 
undergraduate degree from a college or university in the State or a school of law; (2) for 
mental health professionals only, receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate 
degree from any accredited college or university; or (3) receives a resident teacher 
certificate from MSDE after completing an alternative teaching preparation program 
approved by the State Superintendent of Schools.  
 
State Expenditures:  Expanding eligibility does not necessarily require additional 
spending; however, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a 
$750,000 contingent appropriation for awards to school nurses under this bill or its 
cross file. This analysis assumes additional awards fully expend the contingent 
appropriation in fiscal 2025, with no additional spending required in fiscal 2026 and 
beyond. However, to make any awards beyond those covered by appropriated funds, 
including the contingent appropriation in fiscal 2025, an estimated $6,500 per award is 
necessary as explained below.  
 
In fiscal 2023, 103 awards totaling $547,999 were made under the Janet L. Hoffman LARP. 
Thus, average awards were approximately $5,300 per individual. However, MHEC advises 
that, although allocations across programs within the Janet L. Hoffman LARP are not 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 545/ Page 4 
mandated in statute, the agency has worked with MDH to ensure funding levels for 
15 full-time dentists each year under the Maryland Dent-Care Program. As a result of this 
allocation, the average award amount for non-Maryland Dent-Care LARP programs was 
$6,500 for the past two fiscal years.  
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes approximately 
$7.1 million in total funding for the Janet L. Hoffman LARP, which encompasses the 
$750,000 general fund contingent appropriation effectuated by the bill (or its cross file). 
Approximately $6.4 million was allocated in fiscal 2024. In fiscal 2023, the program 
received $1.3 million.  
 
The $750,000 in funding effectuated by the bill is sufficient to cover awards for 
approximately 115 school nurses (based on an average award amount of $6,500). Although 
this analysis assumes sufficient demand to fully expend that appropriation, to the extent 
Grasmick awards made to school nurses in fiscal 2025 total less than $750,000, fiscal 2025 
expenditures are reduced accordingly, with excess funds reverting to the general fund. 
Awards made beyond the 115 assumed to be covered by the contingent appropriation in  
fiscal 2025 and any additional awards made beginning in fiscal 2026 are assumed to 
increase expenditures by approximately $6,500 per individual should existing appropriated 
funds be insufficient to cover them. Otherwise, individuals can be added to the 
Janet L. Hoffman LARP waiting list with no additional resources.  
 
MHEC advises that enhancing the existing Maryland College Aid Processing System 
(MDCAPS) to include school nurses under the Nancy Grasmick Public School 
Professional Award requires approximately $3,000 in one-time costs in fiscal 2025. MHEC 
may also incur additional minimal administrative costs to adapt existing information to 
target nurses as specified in the bill. However, given that MHEC already works to publicize 
the program, such costs are likely absorbable within existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 441 (Senator Beidle) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public 
Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Maryland Department of Health; 
Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 545/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 9, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5