START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 507

Chapter 507

(House Bill 504)

AN ACT concerning

Department of Planning – Maryland Humanities Council – Appropriation to the
Marilyn Hatza Memorial Strengthening the Humanities Investment in
Nonprofits for Equity (SHINE) Grantmaking Initiative

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ authorizing the Governor to include a certain appropriation
in the annual budget bill each year to the Department of Planning to provide to the
Maryland Humanities Council for the Marilyn Hatza Memorial Strengthening the
Humanities Investment in Nonprofits for Equity (SHINE) Grantmaking Initiative;
requiring the Council to select, award, and report on grants to qualifying nonprofit
organizations under the SHINE Grantmaking Initiative; and generally relating to
the Maryland Humanities Council and the SHINE Grantmaking Initiative.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5–205
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Department” means the Department of Planning.

5–205.

(A) FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR SHALL MAY INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $1,000,000 TO THE DEPARTMENT TO
PROVIDE A GRANT TO THE MARYLAND HUMANITIES COUNCIL TO BE USED FOR THE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 507 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

MARILYN HATZA MEMORIAL STRENGTHENING THE HUMANITIES INVESTMENT IN
NONPROFITS FOR EQUITY (SHINE) GRANTMAKING INITIATIVE.

(B) THE FUNDS PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL
BE USED BY THE MARYLAND HUMANITIES COUNCIL TO PROVIDE GENERAL
OPERATING GRANTS TO SMALL AND MID–SIZE HUMANITIES, ARTS, CULTURAL, AND
EDUCATIONAL NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.

(C) DURING THE GRANT SELECTION AND AWARD PROCESS, THE MARYLAND
HUMANITIES COUNCIL SHALL:

(1) CONSIDER THE GEOGRAPHIC AND RACIAL DIVERSITY OF
POTENTIAL RECIPIENTS; AND

(2) AWARD GRANTS ON A ONE–TIME OR MULTIYEAR BASIS.

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, THE MARYLAND
HUMANITIES COUNCIL SHALL SUBMIT AN ANNUAL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT
THAT INCLUDES THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION FOR THE CALENDAR YEAR:

(1) THE NAMES OF THE GRANT RECIPIENTS;

(2) THE NUMBER OF GRANT RECIPIENTS BY JURISDICTION;

(3) THE AMOUNTS OF EACH GRANT AWARDED; AND

(4) INFORMATION FROM EACH GRANT RECIPIENT REGARDING THE
PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE FUNDS WERE EXPENDED, INCLUDING HOW THE
RECIPIENT USED THE FUNDS TO:

(I) CREATE OR PRESERVE JOBS;

(II) SUPPORT OR MAINTAIN GENERAL OPERATIONS; AND

(III) CREATE OR SUSTAIN HUMANITIES PROGRAMS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2