START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 508 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 508 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Children - Labor Trafficking 
    
This bill alters, in statutory provisions that govern child in need of assistance (CINA) 
proceedings and the reporting and investigation of suspected child abuse and neglect, the 
definition of “abuse” to include “labor trafficking” of a child by any individual. The bill 
also expands statutory provisions related to the Safe Harbor Regional Navigator Grant 
Program to apply to child victims of labor trafficking. “Labor trafficking” means 
knowingly (1) taking, placing, harboring, persuading, inducing, or enticing a child by force, 
fraud, or coercion to provide services or labor or (2) receiving a benefit or thing of value 
from the provision of services or labor by a child that was induced by force, fraud, or 
coercion. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:           
 
Child In Need of Assistance Proceedings – Generally  
 
Under current law, a CINA is a child who requires court intervention because (1) the child 
has been abused or neglected, has a developmental disability, or has a mental disorder and 
(2) the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian are unable or unwilling to give proper care 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 508/ Page 2 
and attention to the child and the child’s needs. Statutory provisions outline numerous 
requirements for CINA proceedings.  
 
Under current law, for purposes of CINA-related matters, “abuse” means (1) sexual abuse 
of a child, whether a physical injury is sustained or not or (2) physical or mental injury of 
a child under circumstances that indicate that the child’s health or welfare is harmed or is 
at substantial risk of being harmed by either a household or family member or a parent or 
other individual who has permanent or temporary care or custody or responsibility for 
supervision of the child. The bill alters the definition of abuse as it relates to CINA 
proceedings to include labor trafficking of a child by any individual.  
 
Definition of “Abuse” in Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article generally defines abuse as the physical or 
mental injury of a child under circumstances that indicate that the child’s health or welfare 
is harmed or at substantial risk of being harmed by a parent; household member or family 
member; person who has permanent or temporary care or custody of the child; person who 
has responsibility for supervision of the child; or person who, because of the person’s 
position or occupation, exercises authority over the child. Abuse also means the sexual 
abuse of a child, whether or not physical injuries are sustained. The bill adds labor 
trafficking to the definition of abuse, thereby extending applicability of the provisions 
discussed below to suspected labor trafficking of a child.  
 
Mandatory Reporting of Suspected Child Abuse and Neglect – Generally  
 
Mandatory Reporters:  Under Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article, health care 
practitioners, police officers, educators, and human service workers who are acting in a 
professional capacity, and who have reason to believe that a child has been subjected to 
abuse or neglect must notify the local department of social services or the appropriate law 
enforcement agency. An “educator or human service worker” includes any teacher, 
counselor, social worker, caseworker, and parole or probation officer. If the worker is 
acting as a staff member of a hospital, public health agency, child care institution, juvenile 
detention center, school, or similar institution, then the individual must notify the head of 
the institution or the designee.   
 
Reporting by Other Individuals:  Although the term “mandatory reporters” refers only to 
individuals who must report suspected child abuse or neglect because of their professional 
capacity, State law generally requires all individuals to report suspected child abuse and 
neglect. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 508/ Page 3 
Child Abuse and Neglect Investigations – Generally 
 
Generally, under current law, after receiving a report of suspected abuse or neglect of a 
child who lives in Maryland that is alleged to have occurred in the State, the local 
department of social services and/or the appropriate law enforcement agency must 
promptly and thoroughly investigate the report to protect the health, safety, and welfare of 
the child or children. Within 24 hours after receiving a report of suspected physical or 
sexual child abuse, and within five days after receiving a report of suspected child neglect 
or mental injury, the local department or law enforcement agency must (1) see the child; 
(2) attempt to have an on-site interview with the child’s caretaker; (3) decide on the safety 
of the child and of other children in the household; and (4) decide on the safety of the other 
children in the care or custody of the alleged abuser. The determinations and assessments 
that are required during an abuse or neglect investigation are specified in statute. The local 
State’s Attorney must assist in the investigations if requested to do so by a local department 
of social services. 
 
Statute includes additional requirements in regard to the investigations, including the 
timeframe by which investigations must be completed and findings reported to the local 
State’s Attorney. Reports of child abuse and neglect may also be referred for an alternative 
response in specified circumstances. An “alternative response” means a component of the 
child protective services program that provides for a comprehensive assessment of (1) risk 
of harm to the child; (2) risk of subsequent child abuse or neglect; (3) family strengths and 
needs; and (4) the provision of or referral for necessary services. An alternative response 
does not include an investigation or a formal determination as to whether child abuse or 
neglect has occurred. Only a low-risk report of abuse or neglect may be considered for an 
alternative response. Statutory provisions also set forth procedures for an alternative 
response, including timeframes by which assessments and written reports must be 
completed. 
 
Safe Harbor Regional Navigator Grant Program 
 
Referrals:  Under current law, a local department that receives a report of suspected abuse 
or neglect involving a child who is a suspected victim of sex trafficking must refer the child 
to any appropriate regional navigator, as defined by the Safe Harbor Regional Navigator 
Grant Program.   
 
Under the bill, local departments must make the same referral for a child who is a suspected 
victim of labor trafficking.  
 
Program Operations:  The Safe Harbor Regional Navigator Grant Program supports 
services for youth victims of sex trafficking by (1) creating and sustaining projects to 
provide services for youth victims of sex trafficking that are victim‐centered and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 508/ Page 4 
trauma-informed; (2) facilitating and coordinating among specified entities that respond to 
youth victims of sex trafficking; (3) ensuring that youth victims of sex trafficking have 
access to specified services; (4) increasing the State’s capacity to respond to youth sex 
trafficking; and (5) training providers to appropriately identify and serve youth victims of 
sex trafficking.  
 
The bill generally expands the purpose of the program to incorporate serving youth victims 
of labor trafficking and makes conforming changes in statutory provisions regarding 
program operations and evaluation/reporting requirements. The bill also establishes that 
services coordinated and provided by program grantees must include housing. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the operations or 
finances of the Judiciary, the Department of Human Services, or the Office of the Public 
Defender. Although the bill expands the purposes of the Safe Harbor Regional Navigator 
Grant Program to include serving victims of labor trafficking, the bill does not directly 
require additional State grant funding to be provided specifically for this purpose.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 550 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Governor’s Office; Governor’s Office of 
Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of 
the Public Defender; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4