START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 562 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 562 
(Delegates Hornberger and D. Jones) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Special Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Fishing License - Nonresidents - 
License Fee 
 
 
This bill increases the annual fee for a special Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing 
license, for nonresident applicants, from $50 to $100. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by $359,500 in FY 2025 and by $460,900 
annually thereafter. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$359,500 
$460,900 
$460,900 
$460,900 
$460,900 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$359,500 
$460,900 
$460,900 
$460,900 
$460,900  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is authorized to provide by 
regulation for the issuance of an annual special Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing 
license (which DNR calls a “consolidated Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license”), 
which when permanently affixed to a boat registered in any state (other than a boat hired 
to take persons fishing) authorizes any person on the boat to fish under the license, provided 
the person registers with DNR. The annual license fee is $50, and revenues from the fee 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 562/ Page 2 
are deposited in the Fisheries Research and Development Fund to be used for specified 
purposes related to recreational fishing. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (Fisheries Research and Development Fund) revenues 
increase by $359,463 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective 
date, and by $460,850 annually thereafter. DNR indicates that 9,217 nonresidents currently 
hold the consolidated Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license. This estimate 
assumes that (1) the same number of nonresidents are issued licenses in fiscal 2025 and 
future years and (2) the fee increase only applies to 78% of applicants in fiscal 2025 due to 
the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date (based on data provided by DNR on the timing of 
the purchase of licenses in calendar 2023). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 507 (Senators Bailey and Hester) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2