START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 151

Chapter 151

(House Bill 577)

AN ACT concerning

~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Development~~ ~~–~~ ~~Homeless~~ ~~Shelter~~
~~Licensing~~ ~~Program~~ ~~–~~ ~~Establishment~~
Housing and Community Development – Study on the Establishment of a
Homeless Shelter Licensing Program

FOR the purpose of establishing ~~a~~ ~~homeless~~ ~~shelter~~ ~~licensing~~ ~~program~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~
~~of~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Development;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~
~~certain~~ ~~operational~~ ~~and~~ ~~building~~ ~~standards~~ ~~for~~ ~~homeless~~ ~~shelters~~ ~~and~~ ~~minimum~~
~~standards~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~protection~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~rights~~ ~~of~~ ~~shelter~~ ~~residents;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~
~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~licensing~~ ~~of~~ ~~homeless~~ ~~shelters~~ the Study on the Establishment of a Homeless
Shelter Licensing Program in the Department of Housing and Community
Development; and generally relating to the Study on the Establishment of a
Homeless Shelter Licensing Program in the Department of Housing and Community
Development.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Development~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–1201~~ ~~through~~ ~~6–1207~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~12.~~ ~~Homeless~~
~~Shelter~~ ~~Licensing~~ ~~Program”~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2019~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~1.~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~ENACTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ASSEMBLY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND,~~
~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Development~~

~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~12.~~ ~~HOMELESS~~ ~~SHELTER~~ ~~LICENSING~~ ~~PROGRAM.~~

~~6–1201.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “HOMELESS INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL MEETING THE
DEFINITION UNDER 42 U.S.C. § 11302.

(C) (1) “HOMELESS SHELTER” MEANS A FACILITY ESTABLISHED AND
OPERATED FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING TEMPORARY SHELTER, RESIDENTIAL
CARE, SUPERVISION, INFORMATION, AND REFERRAL SERVICES TO HOMELESS
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 151 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE IN NEED OF TEMPORARY ACCOMMODATIONS, SUPERVISION,
AND SERVICES.

(2) “HOMELESS SHELTER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A TEMPORARY
SHELTER CREATED TO RESPOND TO A DISASTER OR OTHER LARGE–SCALE,
EMERGENCY SHELTERING NEED.

(D) “LICENSE” MEANS A HOMELESS SHELTER LICENSE ISSUED BY THE
DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) “SHELTER RESIDENT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS COMPLETED
~~INTAKE~~ ~~PROCEDURES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~RESIDING~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~HOMELESS~~ ~~SHELTER~~
OVERNIGHT FOR ONE OR MORE NIGHTS.

~~6–1202.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL OPERATE A LICENSING PROGRAM FOR
HOMELESS SHELTERS.

(B) A BUILDING MAY NOT BE USED AS A HOMELESS SHELTER UNLESS THE
~~OWNER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~OPERATOR~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BUILDING~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~BEEN~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~IN~~
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) AN OWNER AND ANY OPERATOR OF A HOMELESS SHELTER SHALL APPLY
TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR A LICENSE TO USE A BUILDING AS A HOMELESS SHELTER
ON A FORM THAT THE DEPARTMENT PROVIDES.

(D) ON REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT, A LICENSE HOLDER SHALL ALLOW
THE DEPARTMENT IMMEDIATE ACCESS TO INSPECT THE PREMISES AND INTERIOR
OF A BUILDING USED AS A HOMELESS SHELTER, BOTH FOR ROUTINE MONITORING
AND UNSCHEDULED INSPECTIONS.

(E) LICENSE HOLDERS SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A RELICENSING PROCESS
EVERY 2 YEARS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE
~~DEPARTMENT.~~

~~6–1203.~~

THE APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A DEMONSTRATION OF ADHERENCE BY THE OWNER AND ANY
~~OPERATOR~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOMELESS~~ ~~SHELTER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OPERATIONAL~~ ~~STANDARDS~~ ~~AND~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 151

BUILDING STANDARDS ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 6–1204 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

(2) ANY OTHER INFORMATION OR DOCUMENTATION REQUIRED BY
THE DEPARTMENT IN REGULATION.

~~6–1204.~~

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP OPERATIONAL STANDARDS FOR
HOMELESS SHELTERS THAT INCLUDE, AT A MINIMUM, STANDARDS FOR:

(1) ORGANIZATIONAL INCORPORATION AND GOVERNANCE
~~DOCUMENTS;~~

(2) FISCAL, ADMINISTRATIVE, AND LEGAL DOCUMENTS;

(3) THE NUMBER AND DUTIES OF PAID STAFF MEMBERS;

(4) PROCEDURES FOR VETTING VOLUNTEERS AND PAID STAFF
~~MEMBERS;~~

(5) STAFF TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT PLANS;

(6) CLIENT INFORMATION COLLECTION AND TRACKING PROCESSES;

(7) ADMISSIONS POLICIES AND PROCEDURES;

(8) DISCHARGE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES;

(9) GRIEVANCE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES;

(10) THE PROTECTION OF SHELTER RESIDENTS’ RIGHTS AS DEFINED
BY THE DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION;

(11) THE PROVISION OF OR ACCESS TO SUPPORTIVE SERVICES;

(12) THE VISITATION OF RESIDENTS BY GUESTS AND EXTERNAL
SERVICE PROVIDERS AT DESIGNATED TIMES;

(13) RULES AND REGULATIONS THAT RESIDENTS MUST COMPLY WITH;

(14) EMERGENCY PROCEDURES;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 151 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(15) INFECTION CONTROL AND PREVENTION POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES; AND

(16) POLICIES THAT AFFIRM THAT THE HOMELESS SHELTER MAY NOT
DISCRIMINATE ON THE BASIS OF RACE, COLOR, RELIGION, ANCESTRY OR NATIONAL
ORIGIN, SEX, AGE, MARITAL STATUS, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY,
DISABILITY, OR GENETIC INFORMATION.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT BUILDING STANDARDS FOR
HOMELESS SHELTERS THAT INCLUDE, AT A MINIMUM, STANDARDS FOR:

(1) THE MINIMUM SQUARE FOOTAGE PER BED;

(2) ACCESS TO SECURE STORAGE;

(3) SUFFICIENT NUMBERS AND LOCATIONS OF POINTS OF EGRESS;

(4) SUFFICIENT FIRE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS AND FIRE
SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS;

(5) ADEQUATE HEATING AND COOLING SYSTEMS;

(6) STRUCTURAL MATERIALS AND BUILDING STABILITY;

(7) SUFFICIENT ACCESS AND ACCESSIBILITY FEATURES FOR
DISABLED INDIVIDUALS;

(8) ADEQUATE SLEEPING AREAS AND FURNISHINGS;

(9) A CONTAMINANT–FREE WATER SUPPLY;

(10) SUFFICIENT SANITARY AND PERSONAL HYGIENE FACILITIES;

(11) ILLUMINATION AND ELECTRICITY SYSTEMS;

(12) FOOD PREPARATION FACILITIES OR AREAS;

(13) LEAD–BASED PAINT AND ASBESTOS;

(14) SUFFICIENT SPACES AND MATERIALS NECESSARY FOR INFANT
AND TODDLER CARE, INCLUDING DESIGNATED LACTATION ROOMS;

(15) COMPLIANCE WITH LOCAL BUILDING AND PROPERTY
MAINTENANCE CODES, WHERE APPLICABLE; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 151

(16) COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL AMERICANS WITH
~~DISABILITIES~~ ~~ACT.~~

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR THE
PROTECTION OF THE RIGHTS OF SHELTER RESIDENTS.

~~6–1205.~~

(A) FOR CAUSE, THE DEPARTMENT MAY DENY, SUSPEND, OR REVOKE A
LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) GROUNDS FOR A DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION
~~INCLUDE:~~

(I) VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(II) VIOLATION OF A REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS
~~SUBTITLE;~~

(III) MISREPRESENTATION; AND

(IV) SUBMISSION OF A FALSE STATEMENT ON A LICENSE
~~APPLICATION.~~

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET FORTH IN WRITING ITS REASONS
FOR A DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.

(C) TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE GOVERNS
THE APPEAL OF A DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION.

~~6–1206.~~

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

~~6–1207.~~

(A) (1) IN ADDITION TO THE PENALTIES PROVIDED IN § 6–1205 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, A PERSON THAT OPERATES A HOMELESS SHELTER WITHOUT A LICENSE
~~OR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~REGULATIONS~~ ~~ADOPTED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~
AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY NOT TO EXCEED $10,000 FOR EACH VIOLATION.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 151 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IN SETTING THE AMOUNT OF AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY
UNDER THIS SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER FACTORS INCLUDING
THE NATURE, NUMBER, AND SERIOUSNESS OF THE VIOLATIONS.

(B) (1) IF AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY IS IMPOSED UNDER THIS
SECTION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ISSUE AN ORDER THAT STATES:

(I) THE BASIS ON WHICH THE ORDER IS MADE;

(II) THE AMOUNT OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY IMPOSED;
~~AND~~

(III) THE MANNER IN WHICH THE AMOUNT OF THE
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY WAS CALCULATED.

(2) A PERSON SUBJECT TO AN ORDER IMPOSING AN ADMINISTRATIVE
~~PENALTY~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~HAVE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RIGHT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~APPEAL~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORDER~~ ~~IN~~
ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 10, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~July~~
~~1,~~ ~~2024.~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Study on the Establishment of a Homeless Shelter Licensing
Program in the Department of Housing and Community Development.

(b) The Department of Housing and Community Development shall hire one new
full–time permanent employee to conduct the Study, in consultation with political
subdivisions.

(c) The Study shall:

(1) review current habitability and admissions standards of homeless
shelters in the State;

(2) recommend a basic habitability and admission standard for homeless
shelters in the State; and

(3) recommend a plan to establish a program within the Department of
Housing and Community Development to license homeless shelters in the State.

(d) On or before July 1, 2025, the Study shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Assistant Secretary of the Homeless Solutions Division of the

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 151

Department of Housing and Community Development and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article, the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the
Environment and the House Environment and Transportation Committee.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of July
31, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7