START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 599 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 599 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Community Investment Corporation - Establishment (Housing and 
Community Development Financing Act of 2024) 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes the Maryland Community Investment Corporation as 
a body politic and corporate and as an instrumentality of the State. Generally, the purposes 
of the corporation are to (1) do all things necessary to qualify as a Community 
Development Entity (CDE) and apply for designation as such; (2) apply for an allocation 
of federal New Markets Tax Credits (NMTCs); and (3) make investments and financial 
assistance available to low-income communities in the State. The bill also expands the 
eligible uses of the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund in the Department 
of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to include credit enhancement. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$0.8 million in general funds for the corporation, contingent on legislation establishing the 
corporation. Thus, general fund expenditures increase by $0.8 million in FY 2025. 
Future year expenditures assume continued funding at that level through FY 2029, under 
the assumptions discussed below; general fund expenditures may be less in future years to 
the extent that the corporation becomes self-sustaining. Nonbudgeted revenues and 
expenditures for the corporation increase significantly beginning as early as FY 2026.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
NonBud Rev. 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0.8 
$0.8 
$0.8 
$0.8 
$0.8 
NonBud Exp. 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
$0 
Net Effect 
($0.8) 
($0.8) 
($0.8) 
($0.8) 
($0.8)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 599/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments benefit from greater flexibility in the use of Strategic 
Demolition and Smart Growth Impact funding. The bill does not otherwise directly affect 
local government finances or operations, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with 
this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Maryland Community Investment Corporation is established as a 
body politic and corporate and an instrumentality of the State, subject to specified 
conditions and requirements. The purposes of the corporation are to: 
 
 
do all things necessary to qualify as a CDE; 
 
apply to the U.S. Department of the Treasury to be designated as a CDE, as that 
term is defined in federal law; 
 
apply to the U.S. Department of the Treasury for an allocation of NMTCs; 
 
receive, make, and facilitate qualified equity investments and financial assistance 
available in low-income communities, as defined, in the State; 
 
allocate any NMTCs received by the corporation; 
 
coordinate with other qualified CDEs in the State to help ensure that low-income 
communities are receiving the maximum benefit of qualified equity investments in 
the State; 
 
make investments and financial assistance available to low-income communities in 
the State from the corporation’s money or from any other source; 
 
build a long-term financial capacity and sustained investment in low-income 
communities in the State; 
 
coordinate and create pathways to follow-on financing in the State; and 
 
foster inclusive and diverse entrepreneurship and innovation throughout the State, 
which may include initiatives to raise awareness of programs to assist low-income 
communities. 
 
General Administration 
 
A board of directors is established to manage the corporation and its units and exercise its 
corporate powers, subject to specified requirements. Board members may not receive 
compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 599/ Page 3 
The board must appoint an advisory committee composed of members who are required 
for the corporation to qualify as a CDE, residents of the State, and geographically 
representative of the locations of low-income communities in the State. The board must 
establish related requirements for that advisory committee. The board also has ongoing 
oversight and planning responsibilities, such as the development of a strategic plan and the 
establishment of certain personnel policies. 
 
The corporation must (1) establish an investment committee and (2) adopt regulations 
establishing the responsibilities of the investment committee and the procedures for the 
appointment of investment committee members. Members of the investment committee 
also must be geographically representative of the locations of low-income communities in 
the State. 
 
Both the advisory committee and the investment committee must prioritize projects that 
are owned or operated by entities that have their principal place of business in the State. 
 
The corporation must employ a chief executive officer. The Department of Commerce and 
DHCD may provide staff to the corporation as provided in the State budget. The 
corporation may retain any necessary accountants, engineers, financial advisors, or other 
consultants. 
 
The Attorney General is the legal advisor to the corporation and must assign to the 
corporation assistant Attorneys General. The Attorney General must designate 
one assistant Attorney General as general counsel to the corporation, subject to additional 
specified requirements. With the approval of the Attorney General, the corporation may 
retain any additional necessary attorneys. 
 
The corporation is exempt from specified provisions of State law related to employment 
and procurement, although the corporation, board, and corporation employees are still 
subject to procurement policies and procedures for exempt units. The corporation is also 
subject to the Public Information Act. The board, officers and employees of the 
corporation, members of the investment committee, and members of the advisory 
committee are subject to the Public Ethics Law and must disclose specified employment 
or financial interests to the State Ethics Commission. The corporation is also exempt from 
State and local taxes. 
 
The books and records of the corporation are subject to audit at any time by the State and 
each year by an independent auditor. The corporation must conduct an independent 
assessment of the board and the corporation every five years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 599/ Page 4 
General Corporation Powers 
 
Among other powers, the corporation may: 
 
 
accept loans, grants, investments, or assistance of any kind from the federal or State 
government, a local government, a college or university, or a private source; 
 
acquire, purchase, hold, lease as lessee, and use (1) a franchise, patent, or license or 
(2) any real, personal, mixed, tangible, or intangible property, or an interest thereof; 
 
sell, lease, transfer, license, assign, or dispose of property or a property interest that 
it acquires; 
 
fix and collect rates, rentals, fees, royalties, and charges for services and resources 
it provides or makes available; 
 
create, own, control, or be a member of a corporation, limited liability company, 
partnership, or other entity, whether operated for profit or not for profit; 
 
exercise power usually possessed by a private corporation in performing similar 
functions unless to do so would conflict with State law; and 
 
do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the bill. 
 
Investments and Other Financial Transactions 
 
Generally, the corporation may make qualified equity investments and other financial 
assistance available to projects in low-income communities if the investments are made on 
review and approval of a written application. The project must be located in the State. The 
corporation may also make investments under an agreement with the Board of Trustees for 
the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) under § 21-123.2 of the State Personnel 
and Pensions Article. (Under those provisions, investment of certain excess contributions 
to the State pension system are allowed to be made by the Maryland Technology 
Development Corporation (TEDCO) or another entity but must include a goal of 50% 
investment in commercialization of technology sponsored or created by a university in the 
State.) 
 
In regard to any and all programs of the corporation, except as otherwise provided in the 
bill, the corporation must adopt regulations to govern investments that specify: 
 
 
the types of businesses and projects in which an investment may be made; 
 
the basic standards an enterprise must meet to qualify for an investment; 
 
the amount of money available for investment; 
 
the investment policy statement of the corporation that describes the procedures, 
criteria, investment philosophy, and guidelines for how the corporation’s 
investment decisions will be made; and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 599/ Page 5 
 
a process for considering whether investments help to foster inclusive and diverse 
entrepreneurship, including the corporation’s support for low-income communities. 
 
The corporation may: 
 
 
provide equity investment to a qualified business or project in the form of a grant, 
loan, tax credit allocation, or any other form of financial assistance to carry out its 
purposes; 
 
acquire, develop, improve, manage, market, license, sublicense, maintain, lease as 
lessor or lessee, or operate a project in the State to carry out its purposes; and 
 
acquire, directly or indirectly, from a person or political subdivision, by purchase, 
gift, or devise, any property, rights-of-way, franchises, easements, or other interests 
in land, including submerged land and riparian rights (1) as necessary or convenient 
to improve or operate a project to carry out its purposes and (2) on the terms and at 
the prices that the corporation considers reasonable. 
 
Any income from the investment of money of the corporation, including investment 
proceeds and earnings, must be credited to the corporation. 
 
Corporation Debt Is Not State Debt 
 
A debt, claim, obligation, or liability of the corporation or any subsidiary is not (1) a debt, 
claim, obligation, or liability of the State, a unit or instrumentality of the State, or of a State 
officer or State employee or (2) a pledge of the credit of the State. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By October 1 each year, the corporation must submit a report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly containing a complete operating and financial statement covering the 
corporation’s operations, information on various corporation activities and initiatives, and 
information on the corporation’s investments, among other things. 
 
On a quarterly basis, the corporation must report to the Governor, the Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee, and the General Assembly; the report must include a list of the 
businesses and projects receiving support through programs administered by the 
corporation, including those receiving investments made under § 21-123.2 of the 
State Personnel and Pensions Article. 
 
The corporation must also publish annual financial statements, audit reports, and policies 
of the board visibly on its website. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 599/ Page 6 
Current Law:  The corporation is structured similarly to other statewide development 
entities, such as TEDCO and the Maryland Economic Development Corporation, although 
the latter has the express ability to issue bonds to finance projects. 
 
Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
 
Chapter 30 of 2016 established the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
in DHCD. The fund is one of many programs at the department that provides funding for 
community development initiatives. The fund is authorized to provide grants and loans to 
government agencies and community development organizations for demolition, land 
assembly, architecture and engineering, and site development for revitalization projects in 
an area designated as a sustainable community or specified qualified opportunity zones. In 
practice, the fund only provides grants. 
 
Background:  CDEs are entities certified by the U.S. Department of the Treasury to make 
loans or investments that stimulate community development. CDEs are funded through 
NMTCs:  CDEs sell the tax credits to investors with federal income tax liabilities and use 
the funds raised by the sale to make debt or equity investments in entities located in 
qualified low-income communities. NMTCs are allocated based on a competitive annual 
process, with $5.0 billion dedicated to the program in 2023. Once a CDE receives an 
NMTC award, it has five years to utilize it. Many public jurisdictions have established 
quasi-governmental entities that have become CDEs to directly channel federal investment 
in their communities. 
 
For purposes of NMTCs, “low-income community” means any population census tract 
with either (1) a poverty rate of at least 20% or (2) a median family income that does not 
exceed 80% of the statewide or metropolitan area (as applicable) median family income. 
 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Maryland Community Investment Corporation 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $0.8 million in general 
funds for the corporation (as a pass-through in DHCD’s budget), contingent on legislation 
establishing the corporation. This bill satisfies that contingency, so general fund 
expenditures increase by $0.8 million in fiscal 2025 to establish the corporation. This 
estimate assumes that level of funding is also provided in fiscal 2026 through 2029, at 
which point State support for the corporation may begin to decrease as the corporation 
relies on nonbudgeted funds available through its ongoing operations. It is assumed that 
this level of funding is sufficient to pay for the corporation’s overall administrative costs, 
including a chief executive officer and financial and accounting staff, although a portion 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 599/ Page 7 
of the costs are for assistance from State personnel, as discussed below. Direct corporation 
staff are not considered State employees. 
 
The bill specifies that DHCD and Commerce may provide staff to the corporation as 
provided in the State budget. As the budget includes contingent funding for the corporation, 
it is assumed that those funds (and future discretionary funding) may be used to reimburse 
DHCD and/or Commerce for technical assistance provided during the corporation’s initial 
start-up phase in fiscal 2025 and 2026. 
 
The bill establishes the Attorney General as the legal advisor to the corporation and 
requires the Attorney General to designate at least one assistant Attorney General to the 
corporation as general counsel. The Office of the Attorney General advises that NMTC 
projects are complex financial transactions in which there are significant legal compliance 
and reporting requirements. The corporation requires a full-time counsel, and possibly 
another assistant Attorney General to assist the corporation with its application for an 
NMTC allocation, provide advice to the board, review project applications, set up corporate 
structures for each qualified project, make investments in qualified projects, prepare 
documents and provide closing support on transactions, and ensure compliance with all 
NMTC requirements. 
 
This estimate assumes that one assistant Attorney General, with sufficient experience and 
skills necessary to provide the level of legal services required, is assigned in fiscal 2025 
and that, as is typical in such cases, the corporation pays for the associated personnel costs 
(estimated at approximately $135,000 to $156,000 annually). 
 
Accordingly, consistent with the contingent funding in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly, general fund expenditures increase by $0.8 million in fiscal 2025, 
which reflects the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one assistant Attorney General as general counsel to the corporation as well as the 
expenditure of remaining available funds for the corporation’s other administrative 
expenses, including reimbursement to DHCD and/or Commerce for staff assistance and 
payment of remaining administrative costs (for example, employing a chief executive 
officer, as required, who is not a State employee under the bill). It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses associated with the 
position. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$140,938 
Other Operating Expenses 
7,526 
Remainder for Other Administrative Expenses 
651,536 
Total FY 2025 Corporation Expenditures 
$800,000 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 599/ Page 8 
Future year general fund expenditures reflect a full salary for the assistant Attorney General 
with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing 
operating expenses, plus about $650,000 annually for other administrative expenses for the 
corporation, consistent with assumed State funding levels. General fund expenditures may 
increase by lesser amounts over time and eventually cease once the corporation is 
self-sustaining. 
 
Based on the timing of the annual CDE and NMTC application process, the corporation 
may receive an allocation of NMTCs as early as fiscal 2026 – although the corporation 
would need to become certified and apply for an NMTC allocation within six months of 
being established. DHCD advises that multiple public CDEs have applied for NMTCs 
within one year of being established. According to DHCD, on average, approximately 50% 
of CDEs that apply in the competitive round receive NMTC allocations, with an average 
award of $50 million. NMTCs must then be sold (at a discount) to private investors. 
 
Accordingly, nonbudgeted revenues for the corporation increase significantly – potentially 
by tens of millions of dollars – as early as fiscal 2026 from funds provided by private 
investors for NMTCs. Nonbudgeted expenditures increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2026 as the corporation uses the funds to make debt or equity investments in entities 
located in qualified low-income communities. Over time, nonbudgeted revenues and 
expenditures increase as investment returns are realized and used to pay for the 
corporation’s administrative costs and provide further rounds of investment. The 
corporation may also apply for additional allocations of NMTCs in future years. 
 
This estimate does not reflect any investments made by the corporation under an agreement 
with the Board of Trustees for SRPS, as authorized under the bill. Potential funds for such 
investments – excess pension contributions – are infrequent. 
 
Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
 
Altering the eligible uses of the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund to 
include funding for credit enhancement for revitalization projects in certain areas does not 
affect overall special fund expenditures, although existing grant funds may be reallocated 
among eligible purposes. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments benefit from greater flexibility in the use of 
Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact funding. The bill does not otherwise 
directly affect local government finances or operations, although local governments may 
benefit from additional investments made by the corporation in their jurisdictions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 599/ Page 9 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 483 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Commerce; Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; 
Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Planning; U.S. Department of 
the Treasury; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 599/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Community Investment Corporation – Establishment 
(Housing and Community Development Financing Act of 2024) 
 
BILL NUMBER: HB 599 
 
PREPARED BY: Brad Fallon 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
  X      WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation seeks to establish the Maryland Community Investment Corporation 
(“MCIC”) to be certified by the U.S. Treasury’s Community Development Financial 
Institutions Fund as a Community Development Entity (“CDE”). A CDE certification 
will allow the MCIC to compete for a share of $5 billion through the competitive New 
market Tax Credit Program administered by the U.S. Treasury. Awards under the 
program will allow for investments in projects and low-income communities within 
Maryland. As such, this bill will have a significant positive economic impact.  
 
Additionally, the legislation seeks to expand the qualified expenses under the Strategic 
Demolition and Smart Growth Impact fund to include debt payments and credit 
enhancements. This will allow for new redevelopment of projects statewide and in 
Baltimore City through Project CORE. As such, this legislation will have a significant 
positive economic impact. 

END OF PAGE 10