START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 534 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 534 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Community Development Administration - Live Near Your School Program - 
Extension 
 
 
This bill extends the termination date of Chapter 247 of 2021, which established the Live 
Near Your School program (LNYS) and a related home buyer assistance program, from 
September 30, 2024, to September 30, 2030. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Live Near Your School Program 
 
Chapter 247 authorized the Community Development Administration (CDA) within the 
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to administer LNYS. 
Under LNYS, CDA may administer community development projects that (1) are in 
sustainable communities and (2) provide current students and recent graduates with 
financial assistance in the form of grants to buy homes near the school attended by the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 534/ Page 2 
student or graduate. A community development project administered under these 
provisions is not subject to specified provisions of current law that require part of the 
housing to be occupied by families of limited income. CDA must adopt regulations to 
implement LNYS. 
 
Home Buyer Assistance Program 
 
Chapter 247 also authorized CDA to administer a home buyer assistance program to assist 
specified students and graduates in receiving low-interest loans to purchase homes near the 
public institution of higher education attended by the individual. CDA may administer a 
home buyer assistance program that (1) assists current students and recent graduates to 
receive low-interest mortgage loans, with down payment and closing cost assistance 
options, for the purchase of homes near the school attended by the student or graduate; 
(2) coordinates with, and matches where appropriate, similar programs offered by public 
institutions of higher education, private employers, and county and municipal governments 
to maximize the total amount that current students and recent graduates can receive under 
the program; (3) authorizes a public institution of higher education to provide matching 
funds to a home buyer who receives assistance, as specified; and (4) uses available funding 
sources. 
 
CDA may (1) allow home buyers to use the loans for the purchase of newly constructed or 
existing homes; (2) require a home purchased under the program to be occupied by the 
home buyer as a principal residence; and (3) use available funding sources. 
 
CDA may facilitate the marketing of the program with specified entities and adopt 
regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions relating to this program with existing funding 
for the marketing of current programs of DHCD, if available. Annually, by December 31, 
DHCD must report to the General Assembly on the program. In a report dated 
March 7, 2024, DHCD indicated that during calendar 2022, it had reached out to numerous 
educational institutions as potential partners, but none expressed interest in participating in 
the program. Therefore, the program has not been active. 
 
Community Development Projects – Generally 
 
A project qualifies as a community development project if it meets specified housing, 
infrastructure, and facilities requirements that promote sound community development. A 
project qualifies as a public purpose project if it is undertaken with the financial assistance 
of CDA or the assistance of federal low-income housing credits authorized by the Internal 
Revenue Code and is (1) eligible wholly or partly for federal low-income housing credits 
or (2) in a location designated as a distressed area by the Secretary of Housing and 
Community Development. A project qualifies as a rental housing project if (1) its purpose 
is to acquire, construct, or rehabilitate real property or all or part of a building or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 534/ Page 3 
improvement that will be occupied by households of limited income and (2) a portion of 
the rental units in the project are set aside for households of lower income for the greater 
of 15 years or the number of years required by federal law. 
 
A community development project may include specified public or private facilities that 
are not needed to support housing if they are less than a substantial part of the project or if 
the Secretary of Housing and Community Development finds that they will promote sound 
community development. 
 
State Expenditures:  DHCD advises that since the enactment of Chapter 247, neither 
LNYS nor the related home buyer assistance program have received funding. In addition, 
as noted above, to date, there has not been any interest in the home buyer assistance 
program from any potential partners. As a result, both programs are currently inactive. As 
the bill only extends the termination date of Chapter 247, it is assumed DHCD will continue 
to not operate LNYS or the related home buyer assistance program absent any funding for 
either program or any interest in the home buyer assistance program from potential 
partners. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 90 (Senator Hayes) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Baltimore 
City 
Community 
College; 
University 
System 
of 
Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 15, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3