START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 589 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 589 
(Dorchester County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Dorchester County - County Applicants - Polygraph Examination 
 
   
This bill exempts an applicant for employment as (1) a paramedic or an emergency medical 
technician with the Emergency Medical Services Division in the Dorchester County 
Department of Emergency Services or (2) a 9-1-1 specialist at the Dorchester County 
9-1-1 Center in the Dorchester County Department of Emergency Services from the 
prohibition against an employer requiring or demanding, as a condition of employment, 
prospective employment, or continued employment, that an individual submit to or take a 
polygraph examination. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to Dorchester County. 
  
Local Effect:  No material effect on Dorchester County operations or finances. Revenues 
are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an employer in the State may not require or demand, as a 
condition of employment, prospective employment, or continued employment, that an 
individual submit to or take a lie detector or similar test. However, various exemptions 
from this prohibition are specified in statute, which include law enforcement officers or 
employees of law enforcement agencies and correctional officers at specified facilities, 
among others. Exemptions are also specified for only an applicant for employment (i.e., not 
current employees), such as applicants for employment as a paramedic or an emergency 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 589/ Page 2 
medical technician with St. Mary’s County or with the St. Mary’s County emergency 
communication center, among others.  
 
Each application for employment must provide notice of the prohibition, which an 
applicant must sign as acknowledgment. An employer who violates this law is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $100. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1270 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 809 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Dorchester County; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 15, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2