START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 513 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 513 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Work Zone Speed Control Systems - Revisions (Maryland Road 
Worker Protection Act of 2024) 
 
 
This Administration bill makes changes to the State’s work zone speed control systems 
(work zone speed cameras) program. Specifically, the bill (1) increases civil penalties for 
violations captured by work zone speed cameras; (2) alters the distribution of the revenues 
collected from these penalties; (3) repeals the requirement that work zone speed cameras 
may only be used on expressways or controlled access highways, facilitating their use by 
local jurisdictions; (4) makes several clarifying, conforming, and other changes to the 
program; and (5) establishes multiple reporting requirements. The bill generally takes 
effect June 1, 2024; however, provisions requiring additional signage and flashing 
lights and establishing a tiered civil penalty system take effect January 1, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although not reflected below, special fund revenues likely increase due to 
the higher penalty in FY 2024, as discussed below. In FY 2025, special fund administrative 
costs increase by $4.2 million to put additional systems into place; additional spending for 
authorized purposes is not reflected below. In FY 2025, special fund revenues increase by 
$15.8 million ($13.6 million for the State Highway Administration (SHA) and $2.3 million 
for the Department of State Police (DSP)) – due to the higher penalty for the first half of 
the year, and expanded enforcement and establishment of a tiered penalty system in the 
second half. Out-years reflect full implementation and greater compliance. Reliance on 
general fund expenditures for DSP may be mitigated somewhat. General fund revenues 
increase due to higher penalty provisions and additional contested cases in District Court. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$15.8 
$16.9 
$15.6 
$14.3 
$13.1 
GF Expenditure 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Expenditure 
$4.2 
$4.4 
$4.4 
$4.4 
$4.4 
Net Effect 
$11.7 
$12.6 
$11.2 
$9.9 
$8.7  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 513/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Likely no effect on local revenues in FY 2024. Beginning in FY 2025, local 
revenues increase, potentially significantly, assuming the expanded authorization to 
implement local work zone speed camera systems is used, as discussed below. 
Expenditures increase for implementation costs, which may be incurred as early as 
FY 2024 (if the authorization is used immediately). After cost recovery, local expenditures 
further increase for public safety purposes, including pedestrian or highway safety 
programs. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Civil Penalties and Revenue Distribution 
 
Effective June 1, 2024, the bill sets the civil penalty for work zone speed camera violations 
at $80 (rather than a maximum of $40). Subsequently, effective January 1, 2025, the bill 
establishes a tiered penalty system based on the speed recorded by the system in excess of 
the posted speed limit, as shown below in Exhibit 1. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalty Structure for Violations Recorded by Work Zone Speed Control Systems 
Effective January 1, 2025 
 
 
Penalty 
Exceeding the Speed Limit by: 
Base Amount 
With Workers Present 
12 - 15 MPH, inclusive 
$60 
$120 
16 –19 MPH, inclusive 
80 
160 
20 - 29 MPH, inclusive 
140 
280 
30 - 39 MPH, inclusive 
270 
540 
40 or more MPH 
500 
1,000 
 
MPH:  miles per hour 
 
Note:  Penalties are doubled for a violation recorded when workers are present in a work zone. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 513/ Page 3 
Also effective June 1, 2024, the bill alters the distribution of the revenues collected from 
work zone speed cameras controlled by a State agency so that, after the initial distribution 
to cover the costs of implementing and administering work zone speed control systems, 
only 25% of the remaining balance, instead of the entire remaining balance, is distributed 
to DSP for specified vehicle and equipment costs. The bill requires the other 75% of the 
remaining balance to be distributed to the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) for highway 
and work zone safety purposes and SHA system preservation. 
 
Required Signage 
 
Effective January 1, 2025, the bill alters the definition of “work zone” such that any such 
segment of a highway designated as a work zone must be equipped with (1) signage 
designating each entrance and exit to the work zone and (2) flashing lights that operate 
whenever workers are present at the work zone. Similarly, the definition of “work zone 
speed control system” is altered to require that a device be equipped with flashing blue 
lights. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
By December 1, 2024 (and annually thereafter), SHA must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly (1) on any pilot program that SHA conducted in the previous fiscal year 
that tests new technologies for detecting and recording work zone speed camera violations 
or (2) that SHA did not conduct any such pilot program in the previous fiscal year. A report 
must include information on (1) how data collected from the device tested may be used for 
the enforcement of work zone speed camera violations and (2) any legislative or regulatory 
changes that would be necessary to authorize the effective use of the device. The Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT) must also annually report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on how funds distributed to TTF under the bill’s changes have been 
spent. 
 
Clarifying Changes and Additional Provisions Related to Use of Systems 
 
The bill makes several other changes – some of which are clarifying, while others modify 
related requirements – to existing provisions governing the use of work zone speed 
cameras, including:  
 
 
clarifying that statutory provisions related to the issuance of citations and the 
disposition of fines (e.g., cost recovery and the use of any remaining balance after 
cost recovery) apply to local work zone speed control systems; 
 
clarifying that a work zone speed control system operator does not need to be present 
in person or remotely at the highway work zone when a work zone speed control 
system is in use;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 513/ Page 4 
 
clarifying that multiple work zone speed control systems may be implemented and 
used in a work zone;  
 
establishing that in the first 30 days that a work zone speed control system is in use, 
warnings or citations may be issued – rather than only warnings; and  
 
establishing that if a work zone has more than one work zone speed control system 
in use, only one citation may be issued for the same registration plate for alleged 
violations that occur within a one-hour period. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 500 of 2009 authorized the use of work zone speed control systems 
in the State. Unless the driver of a motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer 
at the time of the violation, the owner or driver of the vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if 
the vehicle is recorded speeding at least 12 mph above the posted speed limit by a speed 
monitoring system in violation of specified speed restrictions in the Maryland Vehicle Law. 
The maximum fine for a citation issued by a speed monitoring system operator is $40. 
However, a local law enforcement or other designated agency operating the speed 
monitoring system may mail a warning notice instead of a citation. 
 
Revenue from the civil fines collected through use of State operated work zone speed 
cameras must be distributed first to DSP and SHA to cover the costs of implementing and 
administering work zone speed cameras. Any remaining amounts must be distributed to 
DSP to be used only for the purchase of replacement vehicles and related motor vehicle 
equipment used to outfit police vehicles. 
 
Background:  MDOT notes that the bill is largely a result of recommendations made by 
the Governor’s Work Zone Safety Work Group in a November 2023 report. The 
workgroup, created in response to a spike in roadway fatalities following the COVID-19 
pandemic and a March 2023 incident in which six roadway workers were killed, was 
charged with making recommendations to enhance work zone safety and protect roadway 
workers and law enforcement personnel from harm. 
 
State Revenues: 
 
Maryland Department of Transportation and Department of State Police 
 
MDOT advises that, in fiscal 2023, 335,888 citations were issued for work zone speed 
camera violations, resulting in approximately $9.7 million in prepaid fine revenues. 
Although the maximum penalty for work zone speed camera violations is $40, the average 
revenue received per citation issued ($28.80) is less than the maximum penalty due to 
various factors (e.g., contested, reduced, erroneous, and absolved citations). 
 
Of this $9.7 million, MDOT reports that SHA and DSP received approximately 
$8.0 million to cover implementation and administrative costs (approximately 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 513/ Page 5 
$1.24 million for DSP and $6.74 million for SHA). The remaining $1.7 million and an 
additional $446,990 (which was a carryover from the previous fiscal year) was also 
distributed to DSP in fiscal 2023 for the purchase of replacement vehicles and related motor 
vehicle equipment used to outfit police vehicles. MDOT advises that this volume of 
citations and amount of prepaid fine revenue have been relatively constant in recent years; 
thus, for purposes of this analysis, the volume of citations and resultant prepaid fine 
revenues are assumed to, in the absence of the bill, remain constant in future fiscal years. 
 
Under the bill, MDOT expects the number of citations to increase significantly due to 
deployment of additional systems, which would not begin until fiscal 2025. Nevertheless, 
a higher penalty takes effect June 1, 2024 – specifically, the bill sets the civil penalty at 
$80 (rather than a maximum of $40 under current law). Beginning January 1, 2025, the 
tiered penalty system shown in Exhibit 1 takes effect (concurrent with the expected 
deployment of additional work zone monitoring systems). 
 
Exhibit 2 shows the estimated total volume of citations for each fiscal year and anticipated 
prepaid fine revenue collected from those citations. The estimate reflects a higher civil 
penalty ($80 rather than a maximum of $40) beginning in June 2024 (fiscal 2024) and 
continuing through the first half of fiscal 2025, with the tiered penalty system shown in  
Exhibit 1 in place thereafter. Accordingly, although not shown below, revenue likely 
increases in fiscal 2024 due to the higher civil penalty in place for one month of the year. 
For illustrative purposes only, assuming a constant rate of citations issued at the $80 fine 
rate, additional prepaid fine revenue could double for that month (an increase of more than 
$806,000 for June 2024). In reality, due to the lag time between the issuance of a citation 
and payment of the citation, the impact is likely lower in fiscal 2024.  
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Total Estimated Citations and Prepaid Fine Revenue under the Bill 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Citations 
 400,000  
 380,000  
 361,000  
 342,950  
 325,803  
Prepaid Fine Revenue $25,513,301  $26,585,003  $25,255,753  $23,992,966  $22,793,317  
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Effective January 1, 2025, the bill imposes additional signage and lighting requirements to 
alert drivers to work zones as well as to the presence of work zone speed cameras. Thus, 
DLS advises that the bill may result in more drivers reducing their speed sufficiently to 
avoid being issued a citation. Likewise, DLS assumes that, because of the much higher 
tiered civil penalties established at the same time, most drivers will become more cognizant 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 513/ Page 6 
of work zone speed cameras and attempt to lower their speed, such that recorded violations 
will generally fall in the lower tiers and relatively few penalties will be doubled due to 
presence of workers when the violation occurs (as the requirement for flashing blue lights 
could have an even greater deterrent effect). DLS also notes that, under the tiered penalty 
system, the civil penalty drops from $80 to $60 for speeding between 12 and 15 mph over 
the limit but is maintained at $80 for speeding between 16 and 19 mph over the limit – if 
no workers are present at the time of the violation. Otherwise, the penalty is doubled to 
$120 and $160, respectively. For more excessive speeding, the penalties are much greater. 
 
Even with more work zone speed cameras in use, MDOT assumes citations decrease by 
about 5% annually beginning in fiscal 2026 as drivers become more aware of the penalties 
for a violation and the use of such cameras. DLS advises that, since the bill establishes 
significantly higher penalties than under current law, the deterrent effect may be greater 
than anticipated and realized sooner. Thus, to the extent the assumed gradual decrease in 
citations accelerates, revenues under the bill may be considerably less significant than 
reflected in this estimate.  
 
Exhibit 3 shows the total prepaid fine revenue and the related distribution anticipated for 
SHA and DSP under the bill, based on the assumptions discussed above for Exhibit 2. 
 
 
Exhibit 3 
Distribution of Total Prepaid Fine Revenue under the Bill to 
The Department of State Police and the State Highway Administration 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
  
 
FY 2025  
FY 2026  
FY 2027  
FY 2028  
FY 2029  
Total Revenue  
$25.5  
$26.6  
$25.3 
$24.0  
$22.8  
Cost Recovery  
$12.2  
$12.3  
$12.4  
$12.4  
$12.4  
DSP  
1.9  
1.9  
1.9  
1.9  
1.9  
SHA  
10.3  
10.5  
10.5  
10.5  
10.5  
Remainder  
$13.3  
$14.2  
$12.9  
$11.6  
$10.4  
DSP (25%)  
3.3  
3.6 
3.2 
2.9 
2.6 
SHA (75%)  
10.0  
10.7 
9.7 
8.7 
7.8 
DSP Total  
$5.2  
$5.4 
$5.1 
$4.8 
$4.5 
SHA Total  
$20.3  
$21.2 
$20.2 
$19.2 
$18.3 
 
DSP:  Department of State Police  
 
 
SHA:  State Highway Administration  
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. Administrative and related implementation costs 
increase in fiscal 2025, primarily due to expansion, and remain relatively stable in the out-years.  
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 513/ Page 7 
Exhibit 4 shows the estimated net increase in revenue for SHA and DSP under the bill. In 
addition to less revenue from prepaid fines, current law projections generally assume lower 
administrative costs for SHA and DSP compared to those under the bill. 
 
Prepaid fine revenue increases by $15.8 million in fiscal 2025. After administrative cost 
recovery for both DSP and SHA, under the bill, 25% of the remainder of prepaid fine 
revenue is also distributed to DSP, and SHA receives the other 75%. The additional prepaid 
fine revenue in fiscal 2024 is assumed to be distributed under the new formula, taking into 
consideration costs for the month; accordingly, if realized, the $806,272 in additional 
revenues would net to an increase of $96,094 for DSP and $710,178 for SHA. 
 
 
Exhibit 4 
Estimated Increase in Prepaid Fine Revenue, by Distribution, under the Bill 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Total New Revenue 
$15.8  
$16.9  
$15.6  
$14.3  
$13.1  
For Cost Recovery 
$4.2  
$4.4  
$4.4  
$4.4  
$4.4  
    DSP 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
    SHA 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
Remainder 
$11.7 
$12.6 
$11.2 
$9.9 
$8.7 
    DSP (25%, net) 
1.6 
1.9 
1.5 
1.2 
0.9 
    SHA (75%) 
10.0 
10.7 
9.7 
8.7 
7.8 
DSP Total 
$2.3 
$2.5 
$2.2 
$1.8 
$1.5 
SHA Total 
$13.6 
$14.4 
$13.4 
$12.5 
$11.6 
 
DSP:  Department of State Police 
SHA:  State Highway Administration 
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. Distribution of the balance of revenues remaining 
after cost recovery is not based on the remainder shown above but on the total remainder shown in Exhibit 3, 
taking into consideration revenues and cost recovery assumed under current law. Accordingly, the 
$1.7 million that would have gone entirely to DSP under current law is not reflected as new revenue for 
DSP.  
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
As noted above, this estimate is based on assumptions that are subject to considerable 
uncertainty. Specifically, it may not fully account for the deterrent effect of the higher 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 513/ Page 8 
penalties and changes in driver behavior due to greater recognition of work zone speed 
cameras, which could reduce the total number of citations assumed to be issued. 
Accordingly, revenues may increase much less significantly than reflected above. 
 
District Court 
 
Under the bill, the number of citations issued in work zones is expected to increase above 
current levels, at least for three years. Additionally, with higher fines, a greater percentage 
of individuals is expected to contest citations and, as a result, the number of trials in the 
District Court likely increases, potentially significantly. Although most individuals issued 
citations are expected to fall into the lower categories under the tiered penalty system (and 
be issued citations for $60 or $80 fines), individuals who receive citations for the highest 
categories of speeding (or when workers are present) pay considerably higher penalties 
than the $40 fine generally imposed under current law. Those individuals are assumed to 
be much more likely to contest a citation and, as a result, pay those much higher fines into 
the general fund (assuming found guilty after a trial). Additionally, because the bill 
establishes fixed (rather than maximum) penalties, any violators found guilty after a trial 
must pay the penalty that applies to the speed at which they were issued the citation. Thus, 
in contrast to current law, judges may not use discretion when imposing a fine after a guilty 
disposition, which may further increase general fund revenues. 
 
Further, should local governments implement work zone speed cameras under the bill, 
violations are subject to the same tiered penalties as for violations recorded by work zone 
speed cameras controlled by a State agency. Accordingly, violations in the higher speed 
categories are also likely to be contested, which would then, as noted under Additional 
Comments below, likely result in even more general fund revenues.  
 
Motor Vehicle Administration Flag Fees 
 
TTF revenues likely increase further due to flag fees placed on the registrations of 
individuals who fail to pay a citation. 
 
State Expenditures:  Annual administrative costs to operate the work zone speed camera 
program under current law are $1.2 million for DSP and $6.7 million for SHA. As the bill 
allows for expansion of work zone speed cameras, Exhibit 5 shows the estimated increase 
in expenditures for administration of the program with more systems deployed. These 
expenditures reflect additional administrative costs (which may include additional staff and 
other operating expenses) to expand the work zone speed camera program by deploying 
additional systems. The bill also requires, beginning January 1, 2025, signage designating 
each entrance and exit to a work zone and flashing blue lights for a work zone speed camera 
that operate whenever workers are present at the work zone. Although not quantified here, 
expenditures likely increase further to procure these devices, with those costs being 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 513/ Page 9 
incurred in fiscal 2025. Regardless, all such costs are fully offset by the significant increase 
in special fund revenues anticipated for both DSP and SHA. Otherwise, the expenditures 
shown reflect the minimum amount required to be spent by the agencies under the bill.  
 
 
Exhibit 5 
Estimated Increase in Implementation Expenditures under the Bill 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Current Law 
$8.0 
$8.0 
$8.0 
$8.0 
$8.0 
    DSP 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
1.2 
    SHA 
6.7 
6.7 
6.7 
6.7 
6.7 
The Bill 
$12.2 
$12.3 
$12.4 
$12.4 
$12.4 
    DSP 
1.9 
1.9 
1.9 
1.9 
1.9 
    SHA 
10.3 
10.5 
10.5 
10.5 
10.5 
Net Increase 
$4.2 
$4.4 
$4.4 
$4.4 
$4.4 
    DSP 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
    SHA 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
 
DSP:  Department of State Police 
SHA:  State Highway Administration 
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. Administrative and related implementation costs 
increase in fiscal 2025, primarily due to expansion, and remain relatively stable throughout the period 
covered by this fiscal and policy note.  
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
As shown in Exhibit 6, after required expenditures for implementation, millions of dollars 
remain available to both agencies for authorized purposes. For example, for fiscal 2025, 
special fund expenditures for DSP may further increase by as much as another $1.6 million 
(reflecting the balance of the $2.3 million increase in DSP’s share of projected prepaid fine 
revenue) for vehicle and equipment upgrades. Likewise, TTF expenditures for SHA may 
increase by as much as another $10.0 million (reflecting the balance of the $13.6 million 
increase in projected prepaid fine revenue distributed to SHA) for highway and work zone 
safety upgrades and SHA system preservation. 
 
For DSP, the availability of additional revenue may reduce the need for general funds in 
future fiscal years – for the vehicle replacement and related outfitting of motor vehicles. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 513/ Page 10 
(This analysis assumes the monies received by DSP are treated as special funds and may 
be retained by DSP rather than revert to the general fund if not expended at year-end.) 
However, any such impact depends on other factors, such as the cost and replacement 
schedule of vehicles, and has not been quantified. Similarly, the availability of additional 
revenue for SHA may allow existing projects to be enhanced or accelerated or more 
projects to be undertaken. 
 
 
Exhibit 6 
Additional Funding Available for Expenditure under the Bill 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Net New Revenue  
$15.8 
$16.9 
$15.6 
$14.3 
$13.1 
    DSP 
2.3 
2.5 
2.2 
1.8 
1.5 
    SHA 
13.6 
14.4 
13.4 
12.5 
11.6 
Used for Increased Costs 
$4.2 
$4.4 
$4.4 
$4.4 
$4.4 
    DSP 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
    SHA 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
Residual Available 
$11.7 
$12.6 
$11.2 
$9.9 
$8.7 
    DSP 
1.6 
1.9 
1.5 
1.2 
0.9 
    SHA 
10.0 
10.7 
9.7 
8.7 
7.8 
 
DSP:  Department of State Police 
SHA:  State Highway Administration 
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. Administrative and related implementation costs 
increase in fiscal 2025, primarily due to expansion, and remain relatively stable throughout the period 
covered by this fiscal and policy note.  
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase, potentially significantly, beginning in 
fiscal 2025 to the extent that local governments place speed work zone speed cameras 
pursuant to the bill’s expansion of an existing authorization. Under current law, work zone 
speed cameras may be used to capture violations within a work zone that is an expressway 
or a controlled access highway and on which the speed limit is 45 miles per hour or greater. 
These limitations have substantially curtailed the ability of local governments to establish 
work zone speed monitoring systems. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 513/ Page 11 
If the expanded authorization is used under the bill, expenditures also increase (potentially 
as early as fiscal 2024) to procure, install, and maintain additional speed cameras. Based 
on historical data and the use of speed camera systems in the State to date, the increase in 
revenues is likely to exceed the increase in expenditures. After cost recovery, the remaining 
revenues may only be expended for public safety purposes, including pedestrian or 
highway safety programs. Thus, expenditures also increase for those purposes. 
 
Additional Comments:  Under current law, a citation issued as a result of work zone speed 
camera system controlled by a State agency that is contested in District Court must be paid 
directly to the District Court. The bill does not expand this provision to also apply to work 
zone speed camera systems controlled by local governments. However, this analysis 
assumes any such citations are paid to the District Court and, as a result, accrue to the 
general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 479 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; National 
Transportation Safety Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - March 29, 2024 
Enrolled - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 513/ Page 12 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Motor Vehicles - Work Zone Speed Control Systems - Revisions 
(Maryland Road Worker Protection Act of 2024) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 513 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Lt. Governor’s Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12