START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 250

Chapter 250

(House Bill 545)

AN ACT concerning

Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program – Nancy Grasmick
Public School Professional Award – Public School Nurses

FOR the purpose of expanding the Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award
within the Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program to include public
school nurses; and generally relating to loan repayment assistance for public school
nurses.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–1501 through 18–1503 and 18–1506
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

18–1501.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) (1) “Eligible field of employment” means employment in the State by an
organization, institution, association, society, or corporation that is exempt from taxation
under § 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

(2) “Eligible field of employment” includes employment by the State or any
local government in the State, but does not include being employed as a judicial clerk in
any court.

(c) “Higher education loan” means any loan for undergraduate or graduate study
that is obtained for tuition, educational expenses, or living expenses from:

(1) A college or university, government, or commercial source; or

(2) An organization, institution, association, society, or corporation that is
exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) or (4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

(d) (1) “Mental health professional” means an individual who provides mental
health services in public schools and is employed by:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 250 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) A county school system; or

(ii) A local health department to provide school health services
through an agreement with a county board.

(2) “Mental health professional” includes a school psychologist, resource
psychologist, psychologist coordinator, social worker, social worker supervisor, school
counselor, or mental health coordinator.

(e) “Program” means the Janet L. Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program.

(F) “PUBLIC SCHOOL NURSE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) IS LICENSED AS A REGISTERED NURSE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
TITLE 8 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE;

(2) PROVIDES HEALTH SERVICES IN A PUBLIC SCHOOL; AND

(3) IS EMPLOYED BY:

(I) A COUNTY SCHOOL SYSTEM; OR

(II) A LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT TO PROVIDE SCHOOL
HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH AN AGREEMENT WITH A COUNTY BOARD.

18–1502.

(a) There is a program of loan assistance repayment known as the Janet L.
Hoffman Loan Assistance Repayment Program in the State.

(b) The Office of Student Financial Assistance shall assist in the repayment of
the amount of any higher education loan owed by an individual who:

(1) (i) Receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from:

1. A college or university in the State of Maryland;

2. A school of law; or

3. For a mental health professional, any accredited college or
university; or

(ii) Receives a Resident Teacher Certificate (RTC) from the
Department after completing an alternative teaching preparation program approved by the

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 250

State Superintendent;

(2) Obtains eligible employment;

(3) Receives an income that is less than the maximum eligible total income
levels established by the Office, including any additional sources of income; and

(4) Satisfies any other criteria established by the Office.

(c) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the Office shall assist
in the repayment of the amount of any higher education loan owed by a:

(1) Public school teacher in the State who:

(i) Has taught in Maryland for at least 2 years:

1. In science, technology, engineering, fine arts, or math
subjects;

2. In a school in which at least the following percentages of
the students are enrolled in the free and reduced price lunch program in the State:

A. 75% through June 30, 2025; and

B. 55% beginning July 1, 2025; or

3. In a school that:

A. Had Title I status during the 2018–2019 school year;

B. Lost Title I status after the 2018–2019 school year; and

C. Participates in the United States Department of
Agriculture Community Eligibility Provision; and

(ii) Has received a performance evaluation rating for the most recent
year available in the county in which the teacher taught; [or]

(2) Mental health professional who has provided mental health services in
a public school for at least 2 years as an employee of:

(i) A county school system; or

(ii) A local health department through an agreement with a county
board; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 250 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) NURSE WHO HAS BEEN A PUBLIC SCHOOL NURSE FOR AT LEAST 2
YEARS.

(d) (1) A grant awarded under subsection (c) of this section shall be known as
the Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award.

(2) A recipient of a Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Award shall
be known as a Nancy Grasmick Public School Professional Scholar.

(e) An applicant for assistance in the repayment of a commercial loan shall
demonstrate to the Office that the commercial loan was used for tuition, educational
expenses, or living expenses for graduate or undergraduate study.

(f) Assistance in the repayment of a loan from an entity set forth in §
18–1501(c)(2) of this subtitle shall require the approval of the Office.

(g) Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the Office shall assist
in the repayment of the amount of any higher education loan owed by a licensed clinical
alcohol and drug counselor, a licensed clinical marriage and family therapy counselor, or a
licensed clinical professional counselor whose practice is located in a high–need geographic
area of the State as determined by the Maryland Department of Health.

18–1503.

(a) The Office of Student Financial Assistance shall adopt regulations to
establish:

(1) The maximum starting income for eligibility in the Janet L. Hoffman
Loan Assistance Repayment Program;

(2) The maximum total income for eligibility in the Janet L. Hoffman Loan
Assistance Repayment Program, including any additional sources of income;

(3) That priority for participation in the Program shall be given to an
individual who:

(i) Graduated from an institution of higher education in the last 3
years;

(ii) Is a resident of the State;

(iii) Is employed on a full–time basis; and

(iv) 1. Provides, as the principal part of the individual’s
employment, legal services to low–income residents in the State who cannot afford legal
services, nursing services in nursing shortage areas in the State as defined in § 18–802 of

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 250

this title, or other services in an eligible field of employment in which there is a shortage of
qualified practitioners to low–income or underserved residents or areas of the State; or

2. For teacher [and], mental health professional, AND
PUBLIC SCHOOL NURSE applicants only, qualifies for a Nancy Grasmick Public School
Professional Award;

(4) A limit on the total amount of assistance provided by the Office of
Student Financial Assistance in repaying the loan of an eligible individual, based on the
individual’s total income and outstanding higher education loan balance;

(5) A procedure and schedule for the monthly or annual payment of the
amount of loan assistance provided by the Office of Student Financial Assistance to the
eligible individual, as appropriate to assist an eligible individual in meeting loan
forgiveness program requirements;

(6) A requirement that an eligible individual apply to federal loan
forgiveness programs for which the individual may qualify;

(7) A requirement that an eligible individual notify the Office of Student
Financial Assistance if the individual receives other loan repayment assistance; and

(8) An annual review of the eligibility of each individual participating in
the Program.

(b) The Office of Student Financial Assistance shall adopt any other regulations
necessary to implement this subtitle.

18–1506.

The Office shall publicize the availability of the Program, including by publicizing
the Program:

(1) At historically Black colleges and universities;

(2) In a manner that focuses on students who are historically
underrepresented in the teaching field; [and]

(3) To eligible mental health professionals in an effort to recruit and retain
mental health professionals to public schools in the State; AND

(4) TO ELIGIBLE PUBLIC SCHOOL NURSES IN AN EFFORT TO RECRUIT
AND RETAIN NURSES WORKING IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN THE STATE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 250 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6