START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 511

Chapter 511

(House Bill 561)

AN ACT concerning

Tree Expert Licenses – ~~Workers’~~ ~~Compensation~~ ~~Insurance~~ ~~Requirements~~ ~~and~~
Application and Renewal Fee Alterations and Insurance Requirements

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~licensed~~ ~~tree~~ ~~expert,~~ ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~business~~ ~~that~~ ~~employs~~ ~~a~~ ~~licensed~~
~~tree~~ ~~expert,~~ ~~to~~ ~~carry~~ ~~and~~ ~~show~~ ~~proof~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~workers’~~ ~~compensation~~ ~~insurance~~ ~~for~~
~~certain~~ ~~employees;~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~law~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~that~~ ~~certain~~
~~application~~ ~~and~~ ~~renewal~~ ~~fees~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~exceed~~ ~~certain~~ ~~amounts~~ specifying the
maximum amounts of certain fees established by the Department of Natural
Resources by regulation; authorizing the Department ~~of~~ ~~Natural~~ ~~Resources~~ to
permanently revoke or temporarily suspend a tree expert license if the license holder
fails to maintain ~~workers’~~ ~~compensation~~ certain insurance in a certain manner; and
generally relating to tree expert licenses.

BY repealing
Article – Natural Resources
Section 5–416
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
Section 5–416
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 5–417 and 5–418
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section ~~5–418,~~ ~~5–419,~~ 5–419 and 5–421
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 511 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[5–416.

The Department may examine applicants for licensing as tree experts and pass upon
their competence.]

5–416.

(A) IN ORDER TO FOSTER AND PROMOTE CONSUMER PROTECTIONS,
ENSURE THE RESPONSIBLE AND ETHICAL MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES,
AND PROMOTE INDUSTRY SAFETY, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL FACILITATE THE
LICENSING OF TREE EXPERTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS PART.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS PART.

5–417.

(a) (1) A person may not engage in the work or business of a tree expert
without a license issued under the provisions of this part.

(2) An employee under the supervision of a licensed tree expert may not be
required to have a license in the name of the employee.

(b) A licensed tree expert shall within a time period established by the
Department notify the Department electronically of:

(1) Any company that engages in the business or work of the treatment,
care, or removal of trees for compensation under the tree expert’s license, and any changes
to that status; and

(2) The liability and property damage insurance and workers’
compensation insurance carried by any company that engages or works under the tree
expert’s license, and any changes to the insurance.

5–418.

(a) The Department may examine an applicant for license as a tree expert and
pass upon the competence of the applicant. It shall issue a “tree expert” license to any
applicant, who:

(1) Pays the fee provided in § 5–419 of this subtitle;

(2) Has attained 18 years of age;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 511

(3) (i) Has had 2 years of approved college education in forestry,
arboriculture, horticulture, applied agricultural sciences, or the equivalent education and
a minimum of 1 year of experience with a licensed tree expert in Maryland or with an
acceptable tree expert company in another state; or

(ii) For at least 3 years immediately preceding the date of application
has been engaged continuously in practice as a tree expert with a licensed tree expert in
Maryland or with an acceptable tree expert company in another state; and

(4) Has passed the examination given by the Department.

(b) Every licensee shall carry and show proof of liability and property damage
insurance, in the form and amount required by the Department at the time it issues the
license. The licensee shall maintain the insurance protection for the period the license is in
effect.

(C) EVERY LICENSEE, OR BUSINESS EMPLOYING A LICENSEE, SHALL CARRY
AND SHOW PROOF OF WORKERS’ COMPENSATION INSURANCE IN THE FORM AND
AMOUNT REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR EACH EMPLOYEE WORKING UNDER
THE SUPERVISION OF THE LICENSED TREE EXPERT UNDER § 5–417(A)(2) OF THIS
~~PART.~~

5–419.

(a) An SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, AN applicant shall pay
to the Department at the time of making application, a fee set by the Department by
regulation [in an amount not to exceed the costs of processing the application].

(b) (1) A tree expert license shall be renewed in accordance with a timetable
and procedure established by the Department by regulation.

(2) A SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, A person who
holds a license and wishes to renew it shall pay a fee set by the Department by regulation
[in an amount not to exceed the costs of processing the license renewal].

(3) After September 1, 2017, to qualify for the renewal of a tree expert
license, a licensed tree expert shall complete the professional development curriculum
established by the Department by regulation.

(c) FEES ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION MAY NOT
EXCEED:

(1) FOR THE EXAMINATION FEE...................................................... $45;

(2) FOR THE INITIAL LICENSE FEE ......................................... $55; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 511 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) FOR THE RENEWAL FEE........................................................... $100.

(D) (1) Fees the Department receives shall be paid into the State Treasury for
the Department’s use.

(2) (I) The Secretary shall prepare an annual report on the number of
licenses issued and the receipts and expenses under Part III of this subtitle during each
fiscal year.

(II) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE SECRETARY
SHALL SUBMIT THE ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

5–421.

(a) (1) The Department may permanently revoke or temporarily suspend the
license of any licensed tree expert who:

(i) Is found guilty of any fraud or deceit in obtaining the license, or
guilty of negligence or wrongful conduct in the practice of tree culture or care; [or]

(ii) In the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area, as
defined under § 8–1802 of this article, fails to comply with:

1. The terms of a State or local permit, license, or approval;
or

2. Any State or local law, an approved plan, or other legal
requirement; OR

(III) FAILS TO MAINTAIN LIABILITY, PROPERTY, OR WORKERS’
COMPENSATION INSURANCE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 5–418(C) OF THIS PART AS
REQUIRED BY LAW.

(2) The Critical Area Commission shall notify the Department of any tree
expert who fails to comply with any requirement under paragraph (1)(ii) of this subsection.

(b) The Department may promulgate rules of ethics and temporarily suspend for
a period not to exceed two years the license of any licensed tree expert who violates the
rules of ethics. This power of suspension is in addition to, and not in limitation of, the power
to revoke or suspend provided in subsection (a) of this section.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 511

(c) A license issued under this subtitle may not be revoked or suspended until
after the licensee has a hearing before the Department. Notice of the cause for suspension
or revocation and the hearing date shall be sent to the licensee at the last known address
of the licensee by registered or certified mail at least 20 days before the hearing. The
nonappearance of the licensee after the required notice has been given, does not prevent
holding the hearing.

(d) The Department may reissue any tree expert’s license previously revoked
under rules and regulations it prescribes.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5