START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 278

Chapter 278

(House Bill 506)

AN ACT concerning

Sexual Harassment Prevention Training – Morgan State University and
St. Mary’s College of Maryland – Training Format

FOR the purpose of providing that a certain required sexual harassment prevention
training for employees of Morgan State University and St. Mary’s College of
Maryland may consist of webinar, computer–based, or online training under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to sexual harassment prevention training for
employees of Morgan State University and St. Mary’s College of Maryland.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 2–203.1(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

2–203.1.

(c) (1) Each State employee shall complete at least a cumulative 2 hours of
in–person or virtual, interactive training on sexual harassment prevention within:

(i) 6 months after the employee’s initial appointment; and

(ii) every 2–year period thereafter.

(2) The training required under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall
include:

(i) information on the federal and State laws concerning the
prohibition of sexual harassment;

(ii) best practices in prevention and correction of sexual harassment,
abusive conduct, and retaliation;

(iii) remedies and procedures available to victims of sexual
harassment in employment; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 278 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) additional training for supervisors regarding information on:

1. properly responding to complaints of sexual harassment
and preventing further abuse and retaliation; and

2. creating and maintaining a workplace culture in which
sexual harassment is not tolerated.

(3) (i) This paragraph applies only to:

1. a unit of the University System of Maryland; OR

2. MORGAN STATE UNIVERSITY; OR

3. ST. MARY’S COLLEGE OF MARYLAND.

(ii) The training required under paragraph (1) of this subsection may
consist of webinar, computer–based, or online training.

(iii) If the training required under paragraph (1) of this subsection
consists of webinar, computer–based, or online training, the training also shall include an
evaluative component that:

1. ensures employee engagement in the training; and

2. assesses employee comprehension of training objectives.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2