START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 584 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 584 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Workers' Compensation - Occupational Disease Presumptions - First Responders 
(Caring for Public Employees in the Safety Professions - CAPES Act) 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes additional occupational disease presumptions for 
specified public safety employees (generally firefighters) who contract thyroid, colon, or 
ovarian cancer that is caused by contact with a toxic substance encountered in the line of 
duty. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase, likely minimally, beginning in  
FY 2025 due to the bill’s expansion of occupational disease presumptions. Revenues are 
not affected. 
 
Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (Chesapeake) Effect:  Chesapeake 
expenditures likely increase beginning in FY 2025, potentially significantly, to the extent 
that the bill results in additional workers’ compensation benefits payments on behalf of the 
State and local governments. Revenues increase to the extent that premiums are raised due 
to claims experience under the expanded occupational disease presumptions. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures likely increase, potentially significantly, 
beginning in FY 2025 due to the bill’s expansion of occupational disease presumptions. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 584/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill’s occupational disease presumptions apply only to (1) volunteer 
and career firefighters; (2) firefighting instructors; (3) rescue squad members; (4) advanced 
life support unit members; and (5) fire marshals employed by an airport authority, a county, 
a fire control district, a municipality, or the State. Further, the presumptions only apply 
when the covered employee or volunteer meets other eligibility criteria established under 
current law for the existing cancer or leukemia disability presumptions. 
 
Current Law:  Workers’ compensation law establishes a presumption of compensable 
occupational disease for certain public safety employees who are exposed to unusual 
hazards in the course of their employment. It is assumed that these injuries or diseases are 
due to the employees’ work and, therefore, require no additional evidence in the filing of a 
claim for workers’ compensation. As shown below, generally, presumptions are based on 
particular occupations and their associated health risks. 
 
Type of Personnel/Occupation 
Type of Disease 
 
Volunteer and career firefighters, firefighting 
instructors, rescue squad members, and 
advanced 
life 
support 
unit 
members; 
fire marshals employed by an airport authority, 
a county, a fire control district, a municipality, 
or the State 
 
Heart disease, hypertension, or lung disease 
that results in partial or total disability or death  
 
Leukemia or prostate, rectal, throat, multiple 
myeloma, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, brain, 
bladder, kidney or renal cell, testicular, or 
breast cancer under specified conditions 
 
 
Police officers; deputy sheriffs, correctional 
officers, and detention officers of specified 
counties 
 
 
Heart disease or hypertension that results in 
partial or total disability or death 
 
 
Department of Natural Resources paid law 
enforcement employees, park police officers of 
the Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission, forest rangers, park 
rangers, and wildlife rangers  
 
 
Lyme disease under specified conditions 
 
One of the above cancer or leukemia disability presumptions applies if:   
 
 
a covered employee has a cancer or leukemia disability that is caused by contact 
with a toxic substance that the individual has encountered in the line of duty;  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 584/ Page 3 
 
a covered employee has completed at least 10 years of cumulative service in the 
State as a firefighter, firefighting instructor, rescue squad member, or advanced life 
support unit member (or a combination of those jobs);  
 
the cancer or leukemia results in partial or total disability or death; and  
 
for specified volunteer positions, a covered employee has met a suitable standard of 
physical examination before becoming a volunteer. 
 
Under these circumstances, a covered employee who receives a presumption is entitled to 
workers’ compensation benefits in addition to any benefits that the individual is entitled to 
receive under the retirement system in which the individual participated at the time of the 
claim. However, the weekly total of workers’ compensation and retirement benefits may 
not exceed the weekly salary that was paid to the individual; any necessary adjustment is 
made against the workers’ compensation benefits.  
 
Although statute is silent on the issue, occupational disease presumptions have long been 
considered rebuttable presumptions. Two court decisions address the use of “is presumed” 
in reference to occupational diseases in current law, specifying that the term “without 
contrary qualification, should be read to be a presumption, although rebuttable, of fact.” 
(See Board of County Commissioners v. Colgan, 274 Md. 193, 334 A.2d 89 (1975); and 
Montgomery County Fire Board v. Fisher, 53 Md. App. 435, 454 A.2d 394, aff’d, 
298 Md. 245, 468 A.2d 625 (1983).) However, the Court of Special Appeals (now the 
Appellate Court of Maryland) has stated that, “after the last injurious exposure to a hazard 
and the conclusion of employment the nexus between an occupational disease and an 
occupation becomes increasingly remote.” (See Montgomery County, Maryland v. Pirrone, 
109 Md. App. 201, 674 A.2d 98 (1996).) 
 
Background:  According to the National Cancer Institute (NCI), thyroid cancer is any 
cancer that starts in the thyroid gland. NCI estimates that, in the United States, thyroid 
cancer accounted for 2.2% (43,720) of all new cancer cases in 2023 and 0.3% (2,120) of 
all cancer deaths in that same year. 
 
According to NCI, colon cancer is any cancer that starts in the colon. NCI estimates that, 
in the United States, colorectal cancer (which includes not only colon cancer, but also 
cancer that begins in the rectum) accounted for 7.8% (153,020) of all new cancer cases in 
2023 and 8.6% (52,550) of all cancer deaths in that same year. 
 
According to NCI, ovarian cancer is any cancer that starts in the ovaries and fallopian tubes. 
NCI estimates that, in the United States, ovarian cancer accounted for 1.0% (19,710) of all 
new cancer cases in 2023 and 2.2% (13,270) of all cancer deaths in that same year. 
 
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) advises that cancer is 
a leading cause of death among firefighters, and its research suggests that firefighters are 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 584/ Page 4 
at a higher risk of certain types of cancers when compared to the general population due to 
exposure to chemicals in gases, vapors, and particulate matter. Notably, a study conducted 
by NIOSH in 2013 found that firefighters are more likely to develop cancers of the 
respiratory, digestive, and urinary systems. 
 
State/Chesapeake/Local Expenditures:  Any increase in expenditures depends on how 
many affected public safety employees qualify for the occupational disease presumptions 
in any given year and whether any of those employees would have received workers’ 
compensation for thyroid, colon, or ovarian cancer absent the bill. DLS advises that a 
covered employee may still receive workers’ compensation for those cancers under current 
law; the presumptions established under the bill ensure no additional evidence is required 
to qualify for benefits. 
 
State Expenditures 
 
State expenditures (all funds) may increase, likely minimally, beginning in fiscal 2025 due 
to the bill’s expansion of the State’s occupational disease presumptions. Some State 
employees, particularly those within the Office of the Fire Marshal and the 
Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport Fire and Rescue 
Department, may be able to qualify for the occupational disease presumptions established 
by the bill. Even so, DLS advises that the number of State employees likely eligible for 
presumptions under the bill is relatively small; thus, any increase in State expenditures due 
to additional claims benefits is likely to be minimal. 
 
Chesapeake Expenditures 
 
As the administrator of workers’ compensation claims for the State and the workers’ 
compensation insurer for many local governments, Chesapeake anticipates more claims to 
be paid out due to the additional occupational disease presumptions beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025. 
 
For illustrative purposes only, Chesapeake advises that, over the 10-year period from 
2014 through 2023, Chesapeake has incurred approximately $37.6 million on about 
749 occupational disease presumption cases for the State and for local governments it 
insures. About 64% of those cases were for local government public safety employees, and 
local government claims accounted for approximately 62% of the claims payments. This 
amounts to an average of $48,351 per case and $2.32 million per year. 
 
Local Expenditures 
 
Local governments are disproportionately affected by the bill because counties and 
municipalities, many of which are self-insured, employ the majority of the public safety 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 584/ Page 5 
personnel who may be affected by the bill. Accordingly, local expenditures likely increase 
beginning as early as fiscal 2025. DLS advises that, although the amount of any such 
increase in expenditures cannot be reliably estimated at this time, it could (given the high 
per claim cost for these types of cases) be significant. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 476 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; Subsequent Injury 
Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services 
Systems; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of State Police; 
Harford County; Maryland Municipal League; National Cancer Institute; National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 584/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Workers’ Compensation - Occupational Disease Presumptions - 
First Responders (Caring for Public Employees in the Safety 
Professions - CAPES Act) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0584 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6