START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 597 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 597 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Growing Apprenticeships and the Public Safety Workforce (GAPS) Act 
 
   
This Administration bill renames the Law Enforcement Cadet Apprenticeship Program in 
the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) to be the Public Safety Apprenticeship Program 
and expands the purposes and scope of the program, including expanding eligibility for the 
program to include public safety agencies and groups of public safety agencies (instead of 
just law enforcement agencies). The bill also alters the eligibility criteria, the types of 
grants awarded, and the maximum grant amount that may be awarded under the program; 
MDL may award start-up grants of up to $200,000 and stabilization grants of up to $5,000. 
In addition, the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC) must 
(1) develop mental health wellness policies to be implemented in law enforcement agencies 
and correctional facilities in the State and (2) submit a related annual report. Finally, the 
bill establishes the Workgroup on Growing Engagement in the Law Enforcement and 
Corrections Workforce, staffed by MPTSC, to study and make recommendations related 
to the law enforcement and corrections workforce. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024; 
provisions relating to the workgroup terminate June 30, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill can likely be implemented using existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. State public safety agencies may benefit from the expanded apprenticeship 
program, as discussed below. The bill does not otherwise affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local public safety agencies may benefit from the expanded apprenticeship 
program, as discussed below. The bill does not otherwise affect local finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 597/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Public safety agency” includes a correctional unit, a law enforcement 
agency, and a public safety agency as defined in current law, which means (1) a functional 
division of a public agency that provides firefighting, police, medical, or other emergency 
services or (2) a private entity that provides firefighting, police, medical, or other 
emergency services on a voluntary basis.  
 
The bill’s provisions may not be construed as reducing or lowering the minimum 
qualifications for employment in a public safety agency. 
 
Public Safety Apprenticeship Program:  The purposes of the renamed and expanded 
program are modified to: 
 
 
provide young individuals opportunities to begin a career with a public safety 
agency; 
 
foster positive relationships between the public, particularly young individuals, and 
public safety agencies; 
 
develop a cohort of individuals qualified to join a public safety agency; 
 
encourage public safety agencies to hire apprentices; and 
 
help public safety agencies offset additional costs, if any, associated with hiring 
apprentices. 
 
The program must consist of start-up grants and stabilization grants. A public safety agency 
or a group of public safety agencies participating in the program must (1) develop a 
registered apprenticeship program and (2) establish a registered apprenticeship program 
that develops a career path that enables an individual to work in a public safety agency. 
 
MDL must administer the program as modified by the bill and award start-up and 
stabilization grants under the program on a competitive basis to an eligible public safety 
agency or a group of eligible public safety agencies.  
 
MDL may award to a public safety agency or a group of public safety agencies (1) a start-up 
grant of up to $200,000 for the development and launch of a public safety agency’s 
registered apprenticeship program under the bill and (2) a stabilization grant of up to $5,000 
on the initial enrollment of each apprentice in the public safety agency’s registered 
apprenticeship program. However, MDL may not award a start-up or stabilization grant to 
a public safety agency or a group of public safety agencies that fail to bargain with the 
appropriate exclusive representative regarding any adjustments to wages, hours, or other 
terms and conditions of employment that are required for individuals to participate in the 
public safety agency’s apprenticeship program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 597/ Page 3 
The bill repeals several provisions relating to the cadet apprenticeship program rendered 
obsolete by the bill, including provisions related to grant eligibility and grant amounts.  
 
Mental Health Wellness Policies:  MPTSC must develop mental health wellness policies 
to be implemented in law enforcement agencies and correctional facilities in the State by: 
 
 
determining ways to promote safety and wellness at every level of a law 
enforcement agency and a correctional facility; 
 
incorporating into trainings stress management techniques designed by law 
enforcement officers and correctional officers; 
 
establishing confidential peer support programs; 
 
offering psychological programming to help officers manage stress; and 
 
using measuring tools to track effectiveness. 
 
By January 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, MPTSC must report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the status of the development and implementation of those policies 
and the effects of the policies. 
 
Workgroup on Growing Engagement in the Law Enforcement and Corrections Workforce:  
The workgroup must (1) identify and study the shortage of employees in the law 
enforcement and corrections fields; (2) determine ways to advertise and promote law 
enforcement and corrections employment opportunities across the State; (3) explore 
recruitment and retention strategies used in the law enforcement and corrections fields that 
have been successful in other states and countries; and (4) make recommendations on 
incentives or other methods to increase the number of employees in the law enforcement 
and corrections workforce.  
 
The Governor must designate the chair of the workgroup, and the workgroup may establish 
a subgroup to assist the workgroup in carrying out its duties, as specified. Members of the 
workgroup or any subgroup established may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses, as specified. 
 
By January 1, 2025, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the 
Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Law Enforcement Cadet Apprenticeship Program:  Chapter 25 of 2019 established a  
Law Enforcement Cadet Apprenticeship Program in MDL to award competitive grants to 
law enforcement agencies, defined as the police departments of a county, municipal 
corporation, or university in Maryland. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 597/ Page 4 
The purposes of the Cadet Program are to: 
 
 
provide young individuals opportunities to begin a career in law enforcement; 
 
foster positive relationships between the public, particularly young individuals, and 
law enforcement agencies; 
 
develop a cohort of individuals qualified to join a law enforcement agency; 
 
encourage law enforcement agencies to hire apprentices; and 
 
help law enforcement agencies offset additional costs, if any, associated with hiring 
apprentices. 
 
MDL is charged with administering the Cadet Program and awarding competitive grants 
to law enforcement agencies. To be eligible for an award, the law enforcement agency must 
employ at least one apprentice who (1) has been employed by the agency for at least 
seven months; (2) is enrolled in the first year of a specified apprenticeship program; and 
(3) lives in a zip code in which at least 10% of the population is below the federal poverty 
level, as specified. 
 
The amount of a grant awarded under the Cadet Program is based on the number of 
apprentices within the law enforcement agency who meet all three of the eligibility criteria 
and is generally capped at $2,000 for each such apprentice. However, for an eligible 
university law enforcement agency, a grant award is capped at $1,000 for each such 
apprentice. The Governor must include in the State budget an appropriation of at least 
$750,000 each year for the Cadet Program. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes 
the mandated $750,000 for the Cadet Program. 
 
Police Recruitment & Retention Initiative:  The Police Recruitment & Retention (PRAR) 
initiative within the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (formerly the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services) provides funding to 
local law enforcement agencies to recruit and retain qualified sworn police officers. The 
fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $1.3 million in general funds for PRAR. 
 
Tuition waiver and loan repayment programs help improve the knowledge base of police 
officers and are an important recruitment and retention benefit. Chapter 59 of 2021, the 
Maryland Police Accountability Act of 2021, established the Maryland Loan Assistance 
Repayment Program (LARP) for police officers to assist in the repayment of a higher 
education loan owed by a police officer who meets specified requirements. Chapter 100 
of 2023 renamed and expanded the program to allow specified parole and probation agents 
to qualify for LARP and increased the mandated appropriation from $1.5 million to 
$5.0 million. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $5.0 million for LARP. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 597/ Page 5 
In addition, the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program provides tuition assistance. 
A recipient of a scholarship must meet specified requirements, including satisfying any 
additional criteria that the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) may 
establish. A recipient of a scholarship must repay the commission the funds received if the 
recipient does not satisfy or fulfill the specified program requirements. Chapter 100 also 
renamed and expanded the scholarship program to allow specified parole and probation 
agents to qualify. However, Chapter 100 reduced the mandated appropriation for the 
scholarship program by $3.5 million so that the Governor must include $5.0 million, 
instead of $8.5 million, in the annual budget to MHEC to award scholarships ($2.5 million 
must be used for scholarships to students intending to become police officers or probation 
agents after graduation and $2.5 million must be used for existing police officers or 
probation agents to attend an eligible institution and remain a police officer or probation 
agent after graduation). The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $5.0 million for the 
scholarship program. 
 
Income Tax – Subtraction Modification:  Chapter 519 of 2016 established a subtraction 
modification of up to $5,000 of the income earned by a law enforcement officer if (1) the 
officer resides in the political subdivision in which the officer is employed and (2) the 
crime rate in the political subdivision exceeds the State’s crime rate. Chapter 631 of 2020 
expanded the subtraction modification for local law enforcement officers by extending 
eligibility to law enforcement officers of the Maryland-National Capital Park Police and 
the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission Police Force. 
 
Background:  The 2022 Joint Chairmen’s Report outlined concerns with workforce 
shortages among government employees in the public safety, health, and transportation 
sectors. The report directed MDL to convene workgroups to study and report on the 
short-term and long-term needs in each respective sector, as specified. 
 
The final report of the Public Safety Apprenticeship Workgroup included the following 
recommendations:  (1) encourage government agencies to partner with MDL, the 
Department of Budget Management, local workforce development boards, and bargaining 
units to assess workforce needs and explore apprenticeship options; (2) promote group, 
regional, and jurisdictional apprenticeship programs for local public safety agencies; and 
(3) assess and reform policies, processes, and hiring requirements that may be limiting the 
success of workers, employers, and apprentices. 
 
In addition, Chapter 168 of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. The 
purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages;  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 597/ Page 6 
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and  
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023 and published the Interim 
Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. For more information regarding 
apprenticeships in the State, see the Appendix – Apprenticeship. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes 
$750,000 in general funds for the Public Safety Apprenticeship Program, consistent with 
the mandated appropriation required by statute for each fiscal year. The money may be 
used to provide grants to eligible public safety agencies and to cover MDL’s administrative 
costs of operating the program. MDL advises that it has not made grants under the program 
since its inception, presumably because law enforcement agencies are not applying for such 
grants. Therefore, it is assumed that MDL can use the existing mandated appropriation of 
$750,000 annually to make start-up and stabilization grants under the expanded program, 
with no need for any additional resources. If the program expansion results in a sizeable 
increase in the demand for grants that strains current funding levels, additional funds may 
be needed in the future, but any such increase seems unlikely at this time. 
 
While the overall level of funding available for the program is not anticipated to be 
affected, some State and local public safety agencies may benefit from the expansion of 
the program. Specifically, some public safety agencies and groups of public safety agencies 
that are not currently eligible for the program become eligible under the bill, and grant 
awards are increased. 
 
MPTSC can develop the mental health wellness policies, submit the required reports, and 
staff the workgroup with existing budgeted resources. Any expense reimbursements for 
workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 597/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 470 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Baltimore City; Montgomery, Talbot, and Wicomico counties; City of Frostburg; Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s Office; Governor’s Office; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Department of General Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 597/ Page 8 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a 
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. More 
specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as changes to current 
programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. The approval 
process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program in a proposed 
industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current staffing level of 
the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate supervision can be 
provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations of the entity. The 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory role for legislation 
and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 597/ Page 9 
As of November 28, 2023, there were 11,530 apprentices registered in 125 different 
occupations, with more than 400 approved registered apprenticeship programs and more 
than 3,800 employers. There were 1,825 Certificates of Completion for apprentices 
processed between January 1, 2023, and November 28, 2023. The State added 38 new 
apprenticeship programs in 2023. The diversity of Maryland’s apprenticeship system has 
also increased since the transfer of the program to DWDAL in 2016. The percentage of 
minority apprentices increased from 36% in November 2016 to 44% in November 2023. 
Likewise, the percentage of female apprentices increased from 3.7% in November 2016 to 
7.7% in November 2023. 
 
Chapter 168 (Senate Bill 104) of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
The purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages;  
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and  
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023 and published the Interim 
Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 597/ Page 10 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Growing Apprenticeships and the Public Safety Workforce (GAPS) 
Act 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 597 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 10