START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 528 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 528 
(Delegate Buckel) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Orphans' Court Judges - Restriction on Practicing Law 
 
 
This bill modifies an existing prohibition (that does not apply equally in all counties and 
Baltimore City) against an orphans’ court judge practicing law during a term of office. The 
bill narrows the prohibition and makes it equally applicable to all counties and 
Baltimore City. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill modifies a prohibition against an orphans’ court judge acting as 
an attorney at law in any civil or criminal matter during a term of office, which under 
current law is subject to exceptions applicable in certain counties and Baltimore City. The 
bill repeals the exceptions and establishes a narrower prohibition applicable to all counties 
and Baltimore City that prohibits an orphans’ court judge from acting as an attorney at law 
in a civil or criminal matter during a term of office if the matter is (1) within the jurisdiction 
of the orphans’ court in any county or Baltimore City and related to the administration of 
an estate or a guardianship of a minor or (2) related to the preparation of an estate plan or 
estate planning documents that might come within the jurisdiction of the court in any 
county or Baltimore City following the death of any individual. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 528/ Page 2 
Current Law:  Under the Maryland Constitution, each county and Baltimore City elects, 
for a term of four years, three judges to the orphans’ court of their respective jurisdictions, 
with the exception of Harford, Howard, and Montgomery counties, where a circuit court 
judge sits as the orphans’ court. The orphans’ courts are the State’s probate courts. The 
courts supervise the handling of estates and also have certain jurisdiction over the 
guardianship of minors and their property. 
 
Under State law, with exceptions in certain counties and Baltimore City, an orphans’ court 
judge may not act as an attorney at law in a civil or criminal matter during a term of office. 
The prohibition does not apply: 
 
 
in Harford and Montgomery counties; 
 
in Baltimore City, to an orphans’ court judge while practicing law before any court 
of the State except an orphans’ court; or 
 
in Baltimore, Calvert, Howard, and Prince George’s counties, to an orphans’ court 
judge while practicing law in connection with a case that is (1) outside the 
jurisdiction of the orphans’ court and (2) unrelated to the administration of an estate 
or guardianship. 
 
Generally, the Maryland Code of Judicial Conduct (Judicial Code) prohibits a judge from 
practicing law; however, a part-time judge of an orphans’ court who is an attorney may 
practice law, to the extent expressly allowed by law and subject to other applicable 
provisions of the Judicial Code, provided that (1) the judge must not use the judge’s judicial 
office to further the judge’s success in the practice of law and (2) the judge must not appear 
as an attorney in the court in which the judge serves. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 210 and HB 1240 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 116 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 528/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3