START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 515 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 515 
(Delegate J. Long) 
Appropriations 
 
 
Workgroup to Study the Fiscal and Operational Viability of Public-Private 
Partnerships for Calvert County Public Schools 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup to Study the Fiscal and Operational Viability of 
Public-Private Partnerships (P3s) for Calvert County Public Schools (CCPS). The 
Calvert County Board of Education must provide staff for the workgroup. Members of the 
workgroup may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
By December 31, 2024, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to 
specified State and local entities. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates 
June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  CCPS advises that a reliable estimate of the fiscal effect is not feasible in 
the absence of better information regarding the level and type of staff support needed. 
Expenditures may increase for temporary staffing or consultant services to the extent that 
current staff lack the time or expertise to support the workgroup. CCPS further advises that 
time constraints for workgroup members may prevent it from meeting the bill’s reporting 
deadline. No effect on revenues. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 515/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must study:   
 
 
the fiscal and operational viability of using a P3 for financing, constructing, 
maintaining, and operating schools in Calvert County; 
 
implementation of a P3 by CCPS; and 
 
how a P3 may relieve the significant burden for funding new school construction 
and renovations for CCPS. 
 
With respect to P3s, the workgroup must make recommendations for (1) new school 
construction and (2) maintenance and rehabilitation of schools to meet identified needs at 
a lower cost. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public-private Partnerships in State Law 
 
Chapter 5 of 2013 established a new framework for the approval and oversight of P3s by 
the State. Chapter 5 defined a P3 as a method for delivering public infrastructure assets 
using a long-term, performance-based agreement between specified State “reporting” 
agencies and a private entity where appropriate risks and benefits can be allocated in a 
cost-effective manner between the contract partners, in which:   
 
 
a private entity performs functions normally undertaken by the government, but the 
reporting agency remains ultimately accountable for the public infrastructure asset 
and its public function; and 
 
the State may retain ownership of the public infrastructure asset and the private 
entity may be given additional decision-making rights in determining how the asset 
is financed, developed, constructed, operated, and maintained over its life cycle. 
 
A “public infrastructure asset” is a capital facility or structure, including systems and 
equipment related to the facility or structure intended for public use. 
 
Chapter 5 establishes the public policy of the State to utilize P3s, if appropriate, for 
(1) developing and strengthening the State’s public infrastructure assets; (2) apportioning 
between the public sector and the private sector the risks involved in the development and 
strengthening of public infrastructure assets; (3) fostering the creation of new jobs; and 
(4) promoting the State’s socioeconomic development and competitiveness. The public 
policy also asserts that private entities that enter into P3s must comply with the provisions 
of the Labor and Employment Article and the federal Fair Labor Standards Act. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 515/ Page 3 
Charles County Workgroup 
 
Chapters 425 and 426 of 2022 established a similar workgroup for Charles County Public 
Schools. The Interagency Commission on School Construction advises that the workgroup 
submitted its final report on December 12, 2022, but was not able to assess the fiscal 
viability of a P3. The workgroup lacked the financial expertise to assess the viability and 
instead recommended that a financial advisor be brought on for that purpose. 
Operationally, Charles County Public Schools concluded that a P3 model would not be 
needed for new construction based on current enrollment trends but could be considered if 
enrollment growth outpaces the school system’s capacity in the future. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 467 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 114 (Senators Jackson and Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Calvert County; Interagency Commission on School 
Construction; Maryland Stadium Authority; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - April 10, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - June 10, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3