START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 593

Chapter 593

(House Bill 562)

AN ACT concerning

Special Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Fishing License – Nonresidents –
License Fee

FOR the purpose of increasing the license fee for a special Chesapeake Bay and coastal
sport fishing license for certain license applicants; and generally relating to the
special Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–745(d)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

4–745.

(d) (2) (i) The Department may provide by regulation for issuance of an
annual special Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license, which when permanently
affixed to a boat registered in any state shall authorize any person on the boat to fish for
finfish in the Chesapeake Bay or in its tributaries up to tidal boundaries or in State waters
of the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic coastal bays and their tributaries, except that such
a license may not be used on a boat that has been hired to take such persons fishing.

(ii) The annual fee for this special license shall be:

1. FOR A RESIDENT APPLICANT………….……… $50.

2. FOR A NONRESIDENT APPLICANT..…………$100.

(iii) If a boat owner purchases the special license under this
paragraph, the boat owner may fish anywhere in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries
or the State waters of the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic coastal bays and their
tributaries, whether the boat owner is fishing in the owner’s boat, in another person’s boat,
on land, or elsewhere. The Department shall issue a complimentary Chesapeake Bay and
coastal sport fishing license to the boat owner who purchases a special license under this
paragraph. If a boat to which the special license is affixed has more than one owner, then

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 593 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

only the individual applicant who signs the application for the special license shall be
entitled to a complimentary Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license under this
paragraph.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2