START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

Chapter 122

(House Bill 538)

AN ACT concerning

Land Use – Affordable Housing – Zoning Density and Permitting
(Housing Expansion and Affordability Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Historic Property Revitalization Director as a position
in the Department of Housing and Community Development; establishing the duties
of the Historic Property Revitalization Director; prohibiting a local legislative body
from prohibiting the placement of certain manufactured homes or modular dwellings
in a zoning district that allows single–family residential uses under certain
circumstances; ~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~local~~ ~~jurisdiction~~ ~~from~~ ~~using~~ ~~an~~ ~~element~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~adequate~~
~~public~~ ~~facilities~~ ~~law~~ ~~to~~ ~~deny~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~permit~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~State–funded~~ ~~affordable~~ ~~housing~~
~~project~~ ~~or~~ ~~to~~ ~~restrict~~ ~~or~~ ~~limit~~ ~~the~~ ~~development~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~project~~ ~~in~~ ~~certain~~ ~~manners;~~
requiring local jurisdictions to allow an increase in density of certain qualified
projects in certain districts or zones for certain properties formerly owned by the
State, located within a certain distance of a rail station, or owned or controlled by a
nonprofit organization; providing for the calculation of residential density in certain
zoning districts; prohibiting the application of certain zoning requirements under
certain circumstances; establishing limits on the maximum number of public
hearings on certain projects under certain circumstances; requiring an entity
responsible for a certain qualified project to conduct a certain public health impact
assessment and submit the assessment to the Department for approval; prohibiting
the Department from approving a certain public health impact assessment under
certain circumstances; defining certain terms; ~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~termination~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~
~~portion~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act;~~ and generally relating to land use and zoning for affordable
housing.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 2–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 2–204
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 1–401, 4–104, and 10–103
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Land Use
Section ~~4–104(c)~~ ~~and~~ ~~7–105;~~ ~~and~~ 7–501 through ~~7–506~~ 7–509 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle 5. Housing Expansion and Affordability”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Land~~ ~~Use~~
~~Section~~ ~~7–101~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2012~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

2–201.

The Department consists of:

(1) the Division of Credit Assurance;

(2) the Division of Development Finance;

(3) the Division of Neighborhood Revitalization;

(4) the Community Development Administration;

(5) the Community Legacy Program;

(6) the Housing Finance Review Committee;

(7) the Lead Hazard Advisory Committee;

(8) the Maryland Housing Fund;

(9) the Neighborhood Business Development Program; [and]

(10) THE HISTORIC PROPERTY REVITALIZATION DIRECTOR; AND

[(10)] (11) any other governmental unit that under law is a part of the
Department.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

2–204.

(A) THERE IS A HISTORIC PROPERTY REVITALIZATION DIRECTOR.

(B) THE HISTORIC PROPERTY REVITALIZATION DIRECTOR SHALL:

(1) SUPPORT THE WORK OF THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET;

(2) COLLECT AND MAINTAIN FROM STATE AGENCIES THAT OWN
PROPERTY AN INVENTORY OF STATE–OWNED BUILDINGS THAT ARE GREATER THAN
50 YEARS OLD TO BE USED FOR PRIORITIZING PHYSICAL ASSESSMENTS AND, IF
APPLICABLE, DETERMINING ELIGIBILITY FOR THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF
HISTORIC PLACES;

(3) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET AND
TO DETERMINE THE HIGHEST AND BEST VALUE FOR THE STATE’S DISPOSITION OF
PROPERTY, SUPPORT STUDIES AND CONSULTATIONS RELEVANT TO:

(I) STABILIZATION;

(II) MOTHBALLING;

(III) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS;

(IV) ECONOMIC PROSPECTS; AND

(V) LONG–TERM GROUND LEASES;

(4) WORK WITH THE DEPARTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE, AND OTHER MEMBERS OF THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET TO
IDENTIFY EXISTING STATE AND FEDERAL PROGRAMS AND FINANCING MECHANISMS
THAT MAY BE LEVERAGED TO ENHANCE THE SUCCESSFUL REDEVELOPMENT OF
PROPERTY;

(5) WORK WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES OFFICE
OF REAL ESTATE DURING THE DISPOSITION PROCESS OF RELEVANT PROPERTY;
AND

(6) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2026, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
THEREAFTER, AND IN CONSULTATION WITH THE SMART GROWTH SUBCABINET,
REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, ON THE PROGRESS OF EFFORTS UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE HISTORIC PROPERTY REVITALIZATION DIRECTOR SHALL
RECEIVE A SALARY AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

Article – Land Use

1–401.

(a) Except as provided in this section, this division does not apply to charter
counties.

(b) The following provisions of this division apply to a charter county:

(1) this subtitle, including Parts II and III (Charter county –
Comprehensive plans);

(2) § 1–101(l), (m), and (o) (Definitions – “Plan”, “Priority funding area”,
and “Sensitive area”);

(3) § 1–201 (Visions);

(4) § 1–206 (Required education);

(5) § 1–207 (Annual report – In general);

(6) § 1–208 (Annual report – Measures and indicators);

(7) Title 1, Subtitle 3 (Consistency);

(8) Title 1, Subtitle 5 (Growth Tiers);

(9) § 4–104(b) 4–104(C) (Limitations – Bicycle parking);

(10) § 4–104(C) 4–104(D) (LIMITATIONS – MANUFACTURED HOMES
AND MODULAR DWELLINGS);

(11) § 4–208 (Exceptions – Maryland Accessibility Code);

[(11)] (12) § 4–210 (Permits and variances – Solar panels);

[(12)] (13) § 4–211 (Change in zoning classification – Energy generating
systems);

[(13)] (14) § 4–212 (Agritourism);

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

[(14)] (15) § 4–213 (Alcohol production);

[(15)] (16) § 4–214 (Agricultural alcohol production);

[(16)] (17) § 4–215 (Pollinator–friendly vegetation management);

[(17)] (18) § 5–102(d) (Subdivision regulations – Burial sites);

[(18)] (19) § 5–104 (Major subdivision – Review);

[(19)] (20) Title 7, Subtitle 1 (Development Mechanisms);

[(20)] (21) Title 7, Subtitle 2 (Transfer of Development Rights);

[(21)] (22) except in Montgomery County or Prince George’s County, Title
7, Subtitle 3 (Development Rights and Responsibilities Agreements);

[(22)] (23) Title 7, Subtitle 4 (Inclusionary Zoning);

(24) TITLE 7, SUBTITLE 5 (HOUSING EXPANSION AND
AFFORDABILITY);

[(23)] (25) § 8–401 (Conversion of overhead facilities);

[(24)] (26) for Baltimore County only, Title 9, Subtitle 3 (Single–County
Provisions – Baltimore County);

[(25)] (27) for Frederick County only, Title 9, Subtitle 10 (Single–County
Provisions – Frederick County);

[(26)] (28) for Howard County only, Title 9, Subtitle 13 (Single–County
Provisions – Howard County);

[(27)] (29) for Talbot County only, Title 9, Subtitle 18 (Single–County
Provisions – Talbot County); and

[(28)] (30) Title 11, Subtitle 2 (Civil Penalty).

(c) This section supersedes any inconsistent provision of Division II of this article.

4–104.

(a) IN THIS SECTION, “MODULAR DWELLING” MEANS A BUILDING
ASSEMBLY OR SYSTEM OF BUILDING SUBASSEMBLIES DESIGNED FOR HABITATION
AS A DWELLING FOR ONE OR MORE INDIVIDUALS:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THAT INCLUDES THE NECESSARY ELECTRICAL, PLUMBING,
HEATING, VENTILATING, AND OTHER SERVICE SYSTEMS;

(2) THAT IS MADE OR ASSEMBLED BY A MANUFACTURER ON OR OFF
THE BUILDING SITE FOR INSTALLATION, OR ASSEMBLY AND INSTALLATION, ON THE
BUILDING SITE; AND

(3) INSTALLED AND SET UP ACCORDING TO THE MANUFACTURER’S
INSTRUCTIONS ON AN APPROVED FOUNDATION AND SUPPORT SYSTEM.

(B) The powers granted to a local jurisdiction under this subtitle do not:

(1) grant the local jurisdiction powers in any substantive area not
otherwise granted to the local jurisdiction by any other public general or public local law;

(2) restrict the local jurisdiction from exercising any power granted to the
local jurisdiction by any other public general or public local law or otherwise;

(3) authorize the local jurisdiction or its officers to engage in any activity
that is beyond their power under any other public general or public local law or otherwise;
or

(4) preempt or supersede the regulatory authority of any unit of the State
under any public general law.

[(b)] (C) (1) If a legislative body regulates off–street parking, the legislative
body shall require space for the parking of bicycles in a manner that the legislative body
considers appropriate.

(2) A legislative body may allow a reduction in the number of required
automobile parking spaces based on the availability of space for parking bicycles.

(C) (D) A LEGISLATIVE BODY MAY NOT PROHIBIT THE PLACEMENT OF A
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME OR MODULAR DWELLING IN A ZONE THAT ALLOWS
SINGLE–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USES IF THE MANUFACTURED HOME OR DWELLING:

(1) (I) MEETS THE DEFINITION OF MODULAR DWELLING UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION; OR

(2) (II) MEETS THE DEFINITION OF A MANUFACTURED HOME IN §
9–102(A) OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(2) AND IS, OR WILL BE AFTER PURCHASE, CONVERTED TO REAL
PROPERTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 8B, SUBTITLE 2 OF THE REAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE; OR

(2) IS LOCATED ON LAND:

(I) CURRENTLY OR PREVIOUSLY OWNED BY THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT;

(II) GREATER THAN 80 ACRES IN SIZE; AND

(III) THAT WAS THE SITE OF A FORMER U.S. MILITARY
RESERVATION.

~~7–101.~~

~~To~~ ~~encourage~~ ~~the~~ ~~preservation~~ ~~of~~ ~~natural~~ ~~resources~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~affordable~~
~~housing~~ ~~and~~ ~~to~~ ~~facilitate~~ ~~orderly~~ ~~development~~ ~~and~~ ~~growth,~~ ~~a~~ ~~local~~ ~~jurisdiction~~ ~~that~~ ~~exercises~~
~~authority~~ ~~granted~~ ~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~division~~ ~~may~~ ~~enact,~~ ~~and~~ ~~is~~ ~~encouraged~~ ~~to~~ ~~enact,~~ ~~local~~ ~~laws~~
~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~or~~ ~~requiring:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~planning,~~ ~~staging,~~ ~~or~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~adequate~~ ~~public~~ ~~facilities~~ ~~and~~
~~affordable~~ ~~housing;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~off–site~~ ~~improvements~~ ~~or~~ ~~the~~ ~~dedication~~ ~~of~~ ~~land~~ ~~for~~ ~~public~~ ~~facilities~~
~~essential~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~development;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~moderately~~ ~~priced~~ ~~dwelling~~ ~~unit~~ ~~programs;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~mixed~~ ~~use~~ ~~developments;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~cluster~~ ~~developments;~~

~~(6)~~ ~~planned~~ ~~unit~~ ~~developments;~~

~~(7)~~ ~~alternative~~ ~~subdivision~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~that:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~meet~~ ~~minimum~~ ~~performance~~ ~~standards~~ ~~set~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~local~~
~~jurisdiction;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~reduce~~ ~~infrastructure~~ ~~costs;~~

~~(8)~~ ~~floating~~ ~~zones;~~

~~(9)~~ ~~incentive~~ ~~zoning;~~ ~~and~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(10)~~ ~~performance~~ ~~zoning.~~

SUBTITLE 5. HOUSING EXPANSION AND AFFORDABILITY.

7–501.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITY LAW” MEANS A LOCAL LAW PROVIDING
FOR OR REQUIRING THE PLANNING, STAGING, OR PROVISION OF ADEQUATE PUBLIC
FACILITIES, AS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 7–101(1) OF THIS TITLE.

(C) (B) “AFFORDABLE” MEANS THAT HOUSING COSTS DO NOT EXCEED
30% OF A HOUSEHOLD’S INCOME.

(D) (C) “AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT” MEANS A DWELLING UNIT THAT
IS AFFORDABLE TO HOUSEHOLDS EARNING 60% OR LESS OF THE AREA MEDIAN
INCOME.

(E) (D) “AREA MEDIAN INCOME” MEANS THE MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD
INCOME FOR THE AREA ADJUSTED FOR HOUSEHOLD SIZE AS PUBLISHED AND
ANNUALLY UPDATED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT.

(F) (E) “BOARD OF APPEALS” MEANS A BOARD OF APPEALS ESTABLISHED
UNDER TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(G) (F) “COTTAGE CLUSTER” MEANS A GROUPING OF NOT FEWER THAN
FOUR DETACHED HOUSING UNITS PER ACRE THAT:

(1) HAVE A FOOTPRINT OF LESS THAN 900 SQUARE FEET EACH; AND

(2) INCLUDE A COMMON COURTYARD.

(H) (G) “HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION” OR “HISTORIC
PRESERVATION COMMISSION” MEANS A COMMISSION ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 8,
SUBTITLE 2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~(I)~~ (H) “MIDDLE HOUSING” MEANS:

(1) DUPLEXES;

(2) TRIPLEXES;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(3) QUADPLEXES;

(4) COTTAGE CLUSTERS; OR

(5) TOWN HOUSES.

(J) (I) (1) “MIXED–USE” MEANS A COMBINATION OF HOUSING,
RETAIL, AND OFFICE SPACE ANY COMBINATION OF A RESIDENTIAL USE WITH A
RECREATIONAL, OFFICE, DINING, OR RETAIL USE.

(2) “MIXED–USE” DOES NOT MEAN ANY COMBINATION OF A
RESIDENTIAL USE WITH AN INDUSTRIAL OR HAZARDOUS USE.

(K) (J) “PERMIT” MEANS A BUILDING PERMIT OR OTHER PERMIT ISSUED
IN WRITING, AS REQUIRED BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION, TO AUTHORIZE THE START OF
PREDEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES TO CONSTRUCT, ALTER,
DEMOLISH, OR RELOCATE AN EXISTING OR NEW STRUCTURE.

(L) (K) “PLANNING COMMISSION” INCLUDES A PLANNING COMMISSION
OR BOARD ESTABLISHED UNDER:

(1) TITLE 2 OF THIS ARTICLE;

(2) DIVISION II OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

(3) TITLE 10 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(M) (L) “TOWN HOUSE” MEANS A COMPLEX OF DWELLING UNITS
CONSTRUCTED IN A ROW OF TWO THREE OR MORE ATTACHED UNITS, WHERE EACH
DWELLING UNIT IS LOCATED ON AN INDIVIDUAL LOT OR PARCEL AND SHARES AT
LEAST ONE COMMON WALL WITH AN ADJACENT DWELLING UNIT.

(N) (M) “UNREASONABLE LIMITATION OR REQUIREMENT” INCLUDES ANY
LIMITATION OR REQUIREMENT THAT ~~HAS~~ AMOUNTS TO A DE FACTO DENIAL BY
HAVING A SUBSTANTIAL ADVERSE IMPACT ON:

(1) THE VIABILITY OF AN AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT IN A
QUALIFIED PROJECT;

(2) THE DEGREE OF AFFORDABILITY OF AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS IN A QUALIFIED PROJECT; OR

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE ALLOWABLE DENSITY OR NUMBER OF UNITS OF THE
QUALIFIED PROJECT.

7–502.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “QUALIFIED PROJECT” MEANS A RESIDENTIAL
PROJECT THAT:

(1) CONSISTS OF NEW CONSTRUCTION OR SUBSTANTIAL
RENOVATION, AS ANNUALLY ESTABLISHED AND IDENTIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT
OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT IN THE MULTIFAMILY RENTAL
FINANCING PROGRAM GUIDE;

(2) IS ON PROPERTY THAT:

(I) 1. WAS FORMERLY OWNED BY THE STATE;

(II) 2. CONSISTS OF MORE THAN ONE BUILDING;

(III) 3. INCLUDES AT LEAST ONE BUILDING THAT WAS BUILT
MORE THAN 50 YEARS BEFORE THE DATE OF APPLICATION FOR THE PROJECT; AND

(IV) 4. IS APPROPRIATE FOR REDEVELOPMENT AS
DETERMINED BY THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT;
OR

(II) 1. IS CURRENTLY OR WAS FORMERLY OWNED BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT;

2. IS GREATER THAN 80 ACRES IN SIZE; AND

3. WAS THE SITE OF A FORMER U.S. MILITARY
RESERVATION;

(3) CONTAINS AT LEAST 50% 25% OF UNITS THAT ARE AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS; AND

(4) IS DEED–RESTRICTED TO INCLUDE 50% 25% OF UNITS THAT ARE
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 40 YEARS.

(B) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, A LOCAL JURISDICTION
SHALL ALLOW THE DENSITY OF A QUALIFIED PROJECT TO EXCEED THE DENSITY
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(2) IN AN AREA ZONED EXCLUSIVELY FOR SINGLE–FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY INCLUDE MIDDLE HOUSING UNITS.

(3) IN AN AREA ZONED EXCLUSIVELY FOR MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT:

(I) SHALL HAVE A DENSITY LIMIT THAT EXCEEDS BY 30% THE
ALLOWABLE DENSITY IN THAT ZONE FOR USES THAT ARE NOT PART OF A QUALIFIED
PROJECT; AND

(II) MAY CONSIST OF MIXED–USE.

(4) IN SUBJECT TO § 7–509 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IN AN AREA ZONED
EXCLUSIVELY FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY CONSIST OF
MIXED–USE DEVELOPMENT WITH DENSITY LIMITS THAT DO NOT EXCEED THE
HIGHEST ALLOWABLE DENSITY IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION’S MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL ZONES:

(I) IN AN AREA ZONED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE; OR

(II) ON LAND THAT:

1. IS CURRENTLY OR WAS FORMERLY OWNED BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT;

2. IS MORE THAN 80 ACRES IN SIZE; AND

3. WAS THE SITE OF A FORMER U.S. MILITARY
RESERVATION.

(5) IN AN AREA ZONED FOR MIXED–USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY
INCLUDE 30% MORE HOUSING UNITS THAN ARE ALLOWED IN THAT ZONE FOR USES
~~THAT~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~PART~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~PROJECT~~ CONSIST OF RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT WITH DENSITY LIMITS THAT DO NOT EXCEED THE GREATER OF THE
FOLLOWING:

(I) THE HIGHEST ALLOWABLE DENSITY IN THE LOCAL
JURISDICTION’S RESIDENTIAL ZONES; OR

(II) SIX UNITS PER GROSS ACRE.

(6) IF A QUALIFIED PROJECT IS ALLOWED TO EXCEED THE DENSITY
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE UNDER

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THIS SECTION, THE QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY NOT ALSO EXCEED THE AUTHORIZED
DENSITY UNDER § 7–503 OR § 7–504 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–503.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “QUALIFIED PROJECT” MEANS A RESIDENTIAL PROJECT THAT:

(I) CONSISTS OF NEW CONSTRUCTION OR SUBSTANTIAL
RENOVATION;

(II) IS ON PROPERTY THAT IS LOCATED WITHIN 1
THREE–QUARTERS OF A MILE OF A RAIL STATION LOCATED IN THE STATE;

(III) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (IV) OF THIS PARAGRAPH:

1. CONTAINS AT LEAST 25% 15% OF UNITS THAT ARE
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS; AND

(IV) 2. IS DEED–RESTRICTED TO INCLUDE 25% 15% OF UNITS
THAT ARE AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 40 YEARS;
AND

(IV) IN A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY THAT, ON OR BEFORE
DECEMBER 31, 2024, HAS REQUIREMENTS EQUAL TO OR EXCEEDING THE
REQUIREMENTS UNDER ITEM (III) OF THIS SECTION PARAGRAPH:

1. CONTAINS AT LEAST 20% OF UNITS THAT ARE
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS; AND

2. IS DEED–RESTRICTED TO INCLUDE 20% OF UNITS
THAT ARE AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 40 YEARS.

(3) “RAIL STATION” MEANS A PRESENT OR PLANNED:

(I) MARC STATION ALONG THE PENN, CAMDEN, OR
BRUNSWICK LINES;

(II) BALTIMORE METRO SUBWAYLINK STATION;

(III) BALTIMORE LIGHT RAILLINK STATION;

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(IV) METRORAIL SYSTEM STATION IN THE STATE; OR

(V) ANY OTHER PASSENGER RAIL STATION.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(1) A PROPERTY LOCATED WITHIN THREE–FOURTHS OF A MILE OF A
RAIL STATION IN THE STATE IF:

(I) THE RAIL STATION IS LOCATED ON THE CAMPUS OF AN
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION AS DEFINED IN § 10–101 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE; OR

(II) ONLY A PORTION OF THE PROPERTY IS LOCATED WITHIN
THE THREE–FOURTHS OF A MILE OF THE RAIL STATION; OR

(2) AN AREA ZONED FOR SINGLE–FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE:

(1) (I) ON JANUARY 1, 2024; AND

(2) (II) DURING ANY PROCESS TO INCREASE ALLOWABLE DENSITY
UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, A LOCAL JURISDICTION
SHALL ALLOW THE DENSITY OF A QUALIFIED PROJECT TO EXCEED THE DENSITY
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE.

(2) IN AN AREA ZONED EXCLUSIVELY FOR SINGLE–FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY INCLUDE MIDDLE HOUSING UNITS.

(3) IN AN AREA ZONED EXCLUSIVELY FOR MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT:

(I) SHALL HAVE A DENSITY LIMIT THAT EXCEEDS BY 30% THE
ALLOWABLE DENSITY IN THAT ZONE FOR USES THAT ARE NOT PART OF A QUALIFIED
PROJECT; AND

(II) MAY CONSIST OF MIXED–USE.

(4) IN SUBJECT TO § 7–509 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IN AN AREA ZONED
EXCLUSIVELY FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY CONSIST OF
MIXED–USE, WITH DENSITY LIMITS THAT DO NOT EXCEED THE HIGHEST ALLOWABLE
DENSITY IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION’S MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONES.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) IN AN AREA ZONED FOR MIXED–USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY
INCLUDE 30% MORE HOUSING UNITS THAN ARE ALLOWED IN THAT ZONE FOR USES
THAT ARE NOT PART OF A QUALIFIED PROJECT.

(6) IF A QUALIFIED PROJECT IS ALLOWED TO EXCEED THE DENSITY
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE UNDER
THIS SECTION, THE QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY NOT ALSO EXCEED THE AUTHORIZED
DENSITY UNDER § 7–502 OR § 7–504 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–504.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CONTROLLED BY” MEANS A BUSINESS STRUCTURE IN WHICH A
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION IS A MANAGING MEMBER, GENERAL PARTNER, OR
OTHERWISE CONTROLLING ENTITY WITH A FOR–PROFIT MEMBER OR PARTNER AS
DEMONSTRATED BY AN ATTORNEY LICENSED IN THE STATE.

(2) (3) “NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ORGANIZATION
THAT IS QUALIFIED AS TAX–EXEMPT UNDER § 501(C)(3) OF THE INTERNAL
REVENUE CODE AND HAS BEEN DESIGNATED AS SUCH FOR AT LEAST 3 YEARS.

(3) (4) “QUALIFIED PROJECT” MEANS A RESIDENTIAL PROJECT
THAT:

(I) CONSISTS OF NEW CONSTRUCTION OR SUBSTANTIAL
RENOVATION;

(II) IS ON LAND, INCLUDING LAND THAT IS SUBJECT TO A
GROUND LEASE, THAT:

1. IS WHOLLY OWNED BY A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION;
OR

2. INCLUDES IMPROVEMENTS OWNED BY AN ENTITY
THAT IS CONTROLLED BY A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION;

(III) CONTAINS AT LEAST 50% 25% OF UNITS THAT ARE
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS; AND

(IV) IS DEED–RESTRICTED TO INCLUDE 50% 25% OF UNITS THAT
ARE AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 40 YEARS.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(B) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, A LOCAL JURISDICTION
SHALL ALLOW THE DENSITY OF A QUALIFIED PROJECT TO EXCEED THE DENSITY
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE.

(2) IN AN AREA ZONED EXCLUSIVELY FOR SINGLE–FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY INCLUDE MIDDLE HOUSING UNITS.

(3) IN AN AREA ZONED EXCLUSIVELY FOR MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT:

(I) SHALL HAVE A DENSITY LIMIT THAT EXCEEDS BY 30% THE
ALLOWABLE DENSITY IN THAT ZONE FOR USES THAT ARE NOT PART OF A QUALIFIED
PROJECT; AND

(II) MAY CONSIST OF MIXED–USE.

(4) IN SUBJECT TO § 7–509 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IN AN AREA ZONED
EXCLUSIVELY FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY CONSIST OF
MIXED–USE DEVELOPMENT WITH DENSITY LIMITS THAT DO NOT EXCEED THE
HIGHEST ALLOWABLE DENSITY IN THE LOCAL JURISDICTION’S MULTIFAMILY
RESIDENTIAL ZONES.

(5) IN AN AREA ZONED FOR MIXED–USE, A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY
INCLUDE 30% MORE HOUSING UNITS THAN ARE ALLOWED IN THAT ZONE FOR USES
THAT ARE NOT PART OF A QUALIFIED PROJECT.

(6) IF A QUALIFIED PROJECT IS ALLOWED TO EXCEED THE DENSITY
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE UNDER
THIS SECTION, THE QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY NOT ALSO EXCEED THE AUTHORIZED
DENSITY UNDER § 7–502 OR § 7–503 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–505.

A LOCAL JURISDICTION MAY NOT IMPOSE ANY UNREASONABLE LIMITATION
OR REQUIREMENTS ON A QUALIFIED PROJECT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING
LIMITATIONS ON OR REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING:

(1) HEIGHT;

(2) SETBACK;

(3) BULK;

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) PARKING;

(5) LOADING, DIMENSIONAL, OR AREA; OR

(6) SIMILAR REQUIREMENTS.

7–506.

(A) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED OR REQUIRED BY STATE LAW, A
LOCAL GOVERNMENT MAY NOT REQUIRE THAT A QUALIFIED PROJECT UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE BE REVIEWED AT MORE THAN ~~ONE~~ TWO PUBLIC ~~HEARING~~ HEARINGS
BEFORE EACH OF THE FOLLOWING:

(1) THE LOCAL GOVERNING BODY; AND

(2) THE PLANNING COMMISSION;

~~(3).~~

(B) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED OR REQUIRED BY STATE LAW, A
LOCAL GOVERNMENT MAY NOT REQUIRE THAT A QUALIFIED PROJECT UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE BE REVIEWED AT MORE THAN ONE PUBLIC HEARING BEFORE EACH OF
THE FOLLOWING:

(1) A HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION OR HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION; AND

(4) (2) THE BOARD OF APPEALS.

7–507.

THE INCREASED DENSITY LIMITS UNDER §§ 7–502 THROUGH 7–504 OF THIS
SUBTITLE ARE IN ADDITION TO INCREASED DENSITY THAT IS ALLOWED OR
REQUIRED BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION.

7–508.

UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE DENSITY OF A QUALIFIED PROJECT MAY NOT
EXCEED THE DENSITY OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED IN A DISTRICT OR ZONE LOCATED
ON:

(1) AGRICULTURAL LAND, AS DEFINED IN § 9–206 OF THE TAX –
PROPERTY ARTICLE; OR

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

(2) CONSERVATION PROPERTY, AS DEFINED IN § 8–209.1 OF THE
TAX – PROPERTY ARTICLE.

7–509.

(A) (1) BEFORE A QUALIFIED PROJECT IS AUTHORIZED TO EXCEED THE
DENSITY IN AN AREA ZONED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE UNDER § 7–502(B)(4), §
7–503(C)(4), OR § 7–504(B)(4) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE ENTITY RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE QUALIFIED PROJECT SHALL:

(I) CONDUCT A PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENT; AND

(II) RECEIVE APPROVAL OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACT
ASSESSMENT FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT.

(2) A PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENT UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL EVALUATE POTENTIAL PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACTS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE PROXIMITY OF THE QUALIFIED PROJECT TO ANY HEALTH HAZARDS
WITHIN THE AREA ZONED FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USE.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MAY
NOT APPROVE A PUBLIC HEALTH IMPACT ASSESSMENT SUBMITTED UNDER THIS
SECTION IF THE ASSESSMENT SHOWS THAT RESIDENTIAL USE IN THE
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE WOULD PRESENT A SUBSTANTIAL RISK TO THE HEALTH AND
SAFETY OF THE RESIDENTS.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

10–103.

(a) Except as provided in this section, this division does not apply to Baltimore
City.

(b) The following provisions of this division apply to Baltimore City:

(1) this title;

(2) § 1–101(m) (Definitions – “Priority funding area”);

(3) § 1–101(o) (Definitions – “Sensitive area”);

(4) § 1–201 (Visions);

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) § 1–206 (Required education);

(6) § 1–207 (Annual report – In general);

(7) § 1–208 (Annual report – Measures and indicators);

(8) Title 1, Subtitle 3 (Consistency);

(9) Title 1, Subtitle 4, Parts II and III (Home Rule Counties –
Comprehensive Plans; Implementation);

(10) § 4–104(b) 4–104(C) (Limitations – Bicycle parking);

(11) § 4–104(C) 4–104(D) (LIMITATIONS – MANUFACTURED HOMES
AND MODULAR DWELLINGS);

(12) § 4–205 (Administrative adjustments);

[(12)] (13) § 4–207 (Exceptions – Maryland Accessibility Code);

[(13)] (14) § 4–210 (Permits and variances – Solar panels);

[(14)] (15) § 4–211 (Change in zoning classification – Energy generating
systems);

[(15)] (16) § 4–215 (Pollinator–friendly vegetation management);

[(16)] (17) § 5–102(d) (Subdivision regulations – Burial sites);

[(17)] (18) Title 7, Subtitle 1 (Development Mechanisms);

[(18)] (19) Title 7, Subtitle 2 (Transfer of Development Rights);

[(19)] (20) Title 7, Subtitle 3 (Development Rights and Responsibilities
Agreements);

[(20)] (21) Title 7, Subtitle 4 (Inclusionary Zoning);

(22) TITLE 7, SUBTITLE 5 (HOUSING EXPANSION AND
AFFORDABILITY); and

[(21)] (23) Title 11, Subtitle 2 (Civil Penalty).

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~
~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 122

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Land~~ ~~Use~~

~~7–105.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITY LAW” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN
§ 7–501 OF THIS TITLE.

(3) “PERMIT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–501 OF THIS TITLE.

(4) “STATE–FUNDED AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT” INCLUDES
ANY RESIDENTIAL PROJECT THAT IS FUNDED:

(I) WITH FEDERAL LOW–INCOME TAX CREDITS GRANTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH 26 U.S.C. § 42; OR

(II) UNDER TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 2, SUBTITLE 4, OR SUBTITLE 12
OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

(B) IN MAKING A DECISION ON A PERMIT APPLICATION FOR A
STATE–FUNDED AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT, A LOCAL JURISDICTION MAY NOT
USE AN ELEMENT OF AN ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITY LAW TO:

(1) DENY THE PERMIT; OR

(2) UNREASONABLY RESTRICT OR LIMIT THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
PROJECT, INCLUDING ANY RESTRICTION OR LIMITATION THAT MAY RESULT IN A
SUBSTANTIAL ADVERSE IMPACT ON:

(I) THE VIABILITY OF THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING
~~DEVELOPMENT;~~

(II) THE DEGREE OF AFFORDABILITY OF THE AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS; OR

(III) THE ALLOWABLE DENSITY OF THE PROJECT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That a Position Identification
Number (PIN) shall be created in the Department of Housing and Community Development
for the Historic Property Revitalization Director.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 122 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ January 1, 2025. ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~remain~~ ~~effective~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~
~~15~~ ~~years~~ ~~and,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~end~~ ~~of~~ ~~September~~ ~~30,~~ ~~2039,~~ ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~with~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~action~~
~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~abrogated~~ ~~and~~ ~~of~~ ~~no~~ ~~further~~ ~~force~~ ~~and~~ ~~effect.~~

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20