START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

Chapter 705

(House Bill 575)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Victim Compensation – Alterations
(Victim Compensation Reform Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of altering the composition of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board;
altering certain duties, powers, and procedures for the Board to make awards to
victims of crime; altering the powers and duties of certain employees; altering the
amount and types of awards the Board is authorized to make to certain victims of
crime; authorizing reconsideration and judicial review of decisions of the Board;
altering certain criminal penalties; authorizing the Governor to include certain
funding in the annual budget bill for the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund; and
generally relating to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board and the Criminal
Injuries Compensation Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–801, 11–802, 11–804(b) and (c), 11–805, 11–807(b), 11–808(a), 11–809(a),
11–810, 11–811(a) and (b), 11–813, 11–814, 11–818, and 11–819
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–804(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board.

(c) “Claimant” means the person filing a claim under this subtitle.

(d) (1) “Crime” means:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a criminal
offense under state, federal, or common law that is committed in:

1. this State; or

2. another state against a resident of this State; or

(ii) an act of international terrorism as defined in Title 18, § 2331 of
the United States Code that is committed outside of the United States against a resident
of this State.

(2) “Crime” does not include an act involving the operation of a vessel or
motor vehicle unless the act is:

(i) a violation of § 20–102, § 20–104, § 21–706, § 21–901.3, §
21–902, [or] § 21–904, OR § 21–1124.3 of the Transportation Article;

(ii) a violation of § 8–738 of the Natural Resources Article;

(iii) a violation of the Criminal Law Article;

(iv) operating a motor vehicle or vessel that results in an intentional
injury; or

(v) a violation of federal law or the law of another state that is
substantially equivalent to a violation under this paragraph, as required under 34 U.S.C.
§ 20102(b)(5) and (6).

(e) “Dependent” means:

(1) a surviving spouse, DOMESTIC PARTNER, or child of a person; or

(2) a person who is dependent on another person for principal support.

(f) “Executive Director” means the Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of
Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services.

(G) “QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY” MEANS:

(1) A LICENSED PHYSICIAN, DENTIST, OR PSYCHOLOGIST
AUTHORIZED TO PRACTICE UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE;

(2) A SOCIAL WORKER OR CASEWORKER OF ANY PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
HEALTH OR SOCIAL SERVICES AGENCY OR PROVIDER; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(3) AN ADVOCATE OR VICTIM SERVICE PROVIDER FROM A DOMESTIC
VIOLENCE OR SEXUAL ASSAULT PREVENTION OR ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

[(g)] (H) “Victim” means a person:

(1) who suffers physical OR PSYCHOLOGICAL injury or death as a result
of a crime or delinquent act; OR

(2) [who suffers psychological injury as a direct result of:

(i) a fourth degree sexual offense or a delinquent act that would be
a fourth degree sexual offense if committed by an adult;

(ii) a felony or a delinquent act that would be a felony if committed
by an adult; or

(iii) physical injury or death directly resulting from a crime or
delinquent act; or

(3)] who suffers physical injury or death as a direct result of:

(i) trying to prevent a crime or delinquent act or an attempted crime
or delinquent act from occurring in the person’s presence;

(ii) trying to apprehend an offender who had committed a crime or
delinquent act in the person’s presence or had committed a felony or a delinquent act that
would be a felony if committed by an adult; or

(iii) helping a law enforcement officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties or helping a member of a fire department OR AN AGENCY THAT PROVIDES
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES who is being obstructed from performing the member’s
duties.

11–802.

(a) The General Assembly finds:

(1) that many [innocent] persons suffer personal physical or psychological
injury or die because of [crimes or delinquent acts or in their efforts to prevent them or
apprehend persons committing or attempting to commit them] CRIME VICTIMIZATION;

(2) that [these persons or their dependents may as a result suffer
disability, incur financial hardships, or become reliant on public assistance] THERE IS A
NEED FOR GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE FOR CRIME VICTIMS AND THEIR LOVED ONES;
and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) that [there is a need for government financial assistance for these
victims] NEEDED ASSISTANCE INCLUDES FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO ADDRESS THE
MANY SIGNIFICANT EMOTIONAL, PRACTICAL, AND FINANCIAL HURDLES THAT
RESULT FROM CRIME VICTIMIZATION, INCLUDING LOST WORK, UNEXPECTED
FUNERAL EXPENSES, AND HEALTH NEEDS.

(b) The policy of the State is that help, care, and support be provided by the State,
as a matter of moral responsibility AND PUBLIC SAFETY, for these victims.

11–804.

(a) There is a Criminal Injuries Compensation Board in the Governor’s Office of
Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services.

(b) (1) The Board consists of [five] SEVEN members.

(2) THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD SHALL REFLECT THE RACIAL,
ETHNIC, GEOGRAPHIC, AND GENDER DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

(3) Of the [five] SEVEN members of the Board:

(i) one shall be a family member of a homicide victim;

(ii) [no more than four may belong to the same political party] AT
LEAST ONE SHALL BE A SURVIVOR OF VIOLENCE WHO IS A MEMBER OF A COMMUNITY
THAT EXPERIENCES DISPROPORTIONATELY HIGH RATES OF VIOLENCE AND
INCARCERATION; and

(iii) [one shall have been admitted to practice law in the State for at
least 5 years immediately preceding the appointment] AT LEAST ONE SHALL BE A
REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION THAT PROVIDES ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS
APPLYING FOR VICTIM COMPENSATION.

[(3)] (4) The Executive Director shall appoint the members of the Board,
with the approval of the Governor and the advice and consent of the Senate.

(c) (1) The term of a member is 5 years.

(2) A member who is appointed to fill a vacancy occurring other than by
expiration of a term serves for the rest of the unexpired term.

(3) A MEMBER MAY NOT SERVE MORE THAN TWO CONSECUTIVE
TERMS.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

11–805.

(a) Subject to the authority of the Executive Director, the Board has the following
powers and duties:

(1) to establish and maintain an office and to appoint and prescribe the
duties of a claims examiner, a secretary, clerks, and any other employees and agents as
may be necessary;

(2) to adopt regulations to carry out the provisions and purposes of this
subtitle, including procedures for the review and evaluation of claims and regulations for
the approval of attorneys’ fees for representation before the Board or before the court on
judicial review;

(3) to request from the State’s Attorney, the Department of State Police,
[or] county or municipal police departments, OR A QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY any
investigation and information that will help the Board to determine[:

(i)] whether a crime or a delinquent act was committed or attempted;
[and

(ii) whether and to what extent the victim or claimant was
responsible for the victim’s or claimant’s own injury;]

(4) to DELEGATE TO EMPLOYEES OF THE BOARD THE ABILITY TO hear
and determine each claim for an award filed with the Board under this subtitle, TO HEAR
~~APPEALS~~ ~~BY~~ ~~APPLICANTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~INITIAL~~ ~~DETERMINATIONS~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~BY~~ ~~EMPLOYEES~~ ~~OF~~
THE BOARD, and to reinvestigate or reopen a case as the Board determines to be necessary;

(5) to direct medical examination of victims;

(6) to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine any person under oath, and
issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses or requiring the
production of documents or other evidence; AND

(7) to take or cause to be taken affidavits or depositions within or outside
the State[; and

(8) to submit each year to the Governor, to the Executive Director, and,
subject to § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the General Assembly a written
report of the activities of the Board].

(b) Except as otherwise provided by law, an employee of the Board is subject to
the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) [(1)] The Board [may delegate to a member or employee of the Board its
powers under this section to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine a person under oath,
and issue subpoenas.

(2) A subpoena issued under this section is subject to the Maryland Rules]
~~SHALL:~~

(1) MAY DELEGATE TO EMPLOYEES OF THE BOARD AUTHORITY TO
HEAR CLAIMS AND MAKE INITIAL DETERMINATIONS REGARDING EACH CLAIM FOR
AN AWARD FILED WITH THE BOARD UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, AND ANY OTHER
POWERS NECESSARY FOR THE OFFICE WITHIN THE BOARD TO MAKE INITIAL
DETERMINATIONS; AND

(2) SHALL SUBMIT EACH YEAR TO THE GOVERNOR, TO THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, AND, SUBJECT TO § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A WRITTEN REPORT OF THE ACTIVITIES OF
THE BOARD, INCLUDING:

(I) THE NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS FILED WITH THE BOARD;

(II) THE NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS APPROVED;

(III) THE NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS DENIED;

(IV) AGGREGATED DATA REGARDING THE BASIS FOR EACH
DENIAL;

(V) ANONYMIZED DATA INDICATING THE RACE, GENDER, AGE,
AND COUNTY OF RESIDENCE OF VICTIMS;

(VI) ANONYMIZED DATA INDICATING THE CRIME INVOLVED IN
EACH APPLICATION; AND

(VII) THE AVERAGE TIME IN BETWEEN THE BOARD RECEIVING AN
APPLICATION, THE DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY, AND THE FIRST
DISBURSEMENT TO THE VICTIM.

(D) (1) A CLAIM BY A PERSON OTHER THAN THE VICTIM MAY NOT
INCLUDE NARRATIVE DESCRIBING THE VICTIM OR A PHOTOGRAPH OF THE VICTIM.

(2) THE BOARD MAY NOT DISCLOSE THE IDENTITY OF OR
INFORMATION THAT CLEARLY IDENTIFIES A VICTIM OF SEXUAL ASSAULT, CHILD
ABUSE, STALKING, OR ELDER ABUSE.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(3) IF THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF A RECORD OR REPORT THAT THE
BOARD OBTAINS IS PROTECTED BY LAW OR REGULATION, THE RECORD OR REPORT
SHALL REMAIN CONFIDENTIAL, SUBJECT TO THE LAW OR REGULATION.

11–807.

(b) When a report of a [violent] crime is filed with a law enforcement unit, the
law enforcement unit shall give to a victim of that [violent] crime written information that
the Board supplies about compensation for victims.

11–808.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the following
persons are eligible for awards in the manner provided under this subtitle:

(i) a victim;

(ii) a dependent of a victim who died as a direct result of:

1. a crime or delinquent act;

2. trying to prevent a crime or delinquent act or an attempted
crime or delinquent act from occurring in the victim’s presence or trying to apprehend a
person who had committed a crime or delinquent act in the victim’s presence [or had
committed a felony or a delinquent act that would be considered a felony if committed by
an adult]; or

3. helping a law enforcement officer perform the officer’s
duties or helping a member of a fire department OR AN AGENCY THAT PROVIDES
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES who is obstructed from performing the member’s
duties;

(iii) any person who paid or assumed responsibility for the funeral
expenses of a victim who died as a direct result of:

1. a crime or delinquent act;

2. trying to prevent a crime or delinquent act or an attempted
crime or delinquent act from occurring in the victim’s presence or trying to apprehend a
person who had committed a crime or delinquent act in the victim’s presence [or had
committed a felony]; or

3. helping a law enforcement officer perform the officer’s
duties or helping a member of a fire department OR AN AGENCY THAT PROVIDES

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES who is obstructed from performing the member’s
duties; and

(iv) 1. a parent, child, DOMESTIC PARTNER, DEPENDENT
MINOR, ADULT UNDER LEGAL GUARDIANSHIP, or spouse of a victim who resides with
the victim; or

2. a parent, child, DOMESTIC PARTNER, DEPENDENT
MINOR, ADULT UNDER LEGAL GUARDIANSHIP, or spouse of an individual who is
incarcerated for abuse as defined in § 4–501 of the Family Law Article and who, prior to
incarceration:

A. resided with the parent, child, DOMESTIC PARTNER,
DEPENDENT MINOR, ADULT UNDER THEIR LEGAL GUARDIANSHIP, or spouse; and

B. provided financial support to the parent, child, DOMESTIC
PARTNER, DEPENDENT MINOR, ADULT UNDER THE INDIVIDUAL’S LEGAL
GUARDIANSHIP, or spouse.

(2) A person who commits the crime or delinquent act that is the basis of a
claim, or an accomplice of the person, is not eligible to receive an award with respect to the
claim.

11–809.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) [and], (3), AND (4) of this
subsection, a claimant shall file a claim within [3] 4 years after the later of:

(i) the discovery of the occurrence of the crime or delinquent act or
the death of the victim; or

(ii) the earlier of:

1. the date the claimant discovered an attempt to obtain a
reversal of a conviction, a sentence, or an adjudication for the crime or delinquent act; or

2. the date the claimant, exercising ordinary diligence,
should have discovered an attempt to obtain a reversal of a conviction, a sentence, or an
adjudication for the crime or delinquent act.

(2) In a case of child abuse, a claimant may file a claim[:

(i) up to the date the child who was the subject of the abuse reaches
the age of 25 years; or

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(ii) if the Board determines that there was good cause for failure to
file a claim before the date the child who was the subject of the abuse reached the age of 25
years,] at any time.

(3) In a case [of sexual assault, a] WHERE THE FILING OF A CLAIM WAS
DELAYED AS THE RESULT OF A DELAY IN THE TESTING OF DNA OR A DELAY IN DNA
PROFILE MATCHING FROM A SEXUAL ASSAULT FORENSIC EXAMINATION KIT OR
BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL RELATED TO A SEXUAL OFFENSE, A CLAIMANT SHALL FILE A
CLAIM WITHIN 4 YEARS AFTER NOTIFICATION OF THE RESULTS OF THE TESTING OR
DNA PROFILE MATCHING.

(4) A claimant may file a claim at any time if the Board determines that
there was good cause for failure to file a claim within the time limits provided under
paragraphs (1) and [(2)] (3) of this subsection.

11–810.

(a) [(1)] The Board may make an award only if the Board finds that:

[(i)] (1) a crime or delinquent act was committed; AND

[(ii)] (2) the crime or delinquent act directly resulted in:

[1.] (I) physical injury to or death of the victim; or

[2.] (II) psychological injury to the victim that necessitated
mental health counseling[;

(iii) police, other law enforcement, or judicial records show that the
crime or delinquent act or the discovery of child abuse was reported to the proper
authorities within 48 hours after the occurrence of the crime or delinquent act or the
discovery of the child abuse; and

(iv) the victim has cooperated fully with all law enforcement units.

(2) For good cause, the Board may waive the requirements of paragraph
(1)(iii) and (iv) of this subsection].

(b) THE BOARD SHALL ACCEPT AS EVIDENCE:

(1) A REPORT PRODUCED BY A LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;

(2) MEDICAL RECORDS DOCUMENTING AN INJURY CONSISTENT WITH
THE ALLEGED CRIME;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) A SWORN STATEMENT FROM A QUALIFIED THIRD PARTY;

(4) A PEACE ORDER ISSUED UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 15 OF THE
COURTS ARTICLE;

(5) A PROTECTIVE ORDER ISSUED UNDER TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 5 OF
THE FAMILY LAW ARTICLE; AND

(6) ANY OTHER EVIDENCE THE BOARD CONSIDERS PROBATIVE.

(C) Unless total dependency is established, family members, HOUSEHOLD
MEMBERS, AND MINORS LIVING WITH A LEGAL GUARDIAN are considered to be partly
dependent on a parent OR A LEGAL GUARDIAN with whom they reside without regard to
actual earnings.

[(c)] (D) The Board may make an award only if the claimant, as a result of the
injury on which the claim is based, has:

(1) incurred at least $100 in unreimbursed and unreimbursable expenses
or indebtedness reasonably incurred or claimed for:

(i) medical care, INCLUDING THE COST OF MEDICAL SUPPLIES;

(ii) expenses for eyeglasses and other corrective lenses;

(iii) mental health counseling;

(iv) funeral expenses;

(v) repairing, replacing, or cleaning property;

(vi) disability or dependent claim, OR ANY ASSISTIVE
TECHNOLOGY RELATED TO A DISABILITY OR DEPENDENT CLAIM; [or]

(VII) THE COSTS OF ONE–TIME RELOCATION, INCLUDING ANY
SECURITY DEPOSIT;

(VIII) CHILD CARE EXPENSES INCURRED AS A RESULT OF SEEKING
MEDICAL OR PSYCHOLOGICAL CARE;

(IX) TRANSPORTATION COSTS INCURRED BY TRAVEL TO SEEK
MEDICAL OR PSYCHOLOGICAL CARE; OR

[(vii)] (X) other necessary services; or

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(2) lost at least $100 in earnings or support.

[(d)] (E) [(1) (i) Except as provided under subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, in considering a claim and in determining the amount of an award, the Board
shall determine whether the victim’s conduct contributed to the infliction of the victim’s
injury, and, if so, reduce the amount of the award or reject the claim.

(ii) The Board may disregard the responsibility of the victim for the
victim’s own injury if that responsibility is attributable to efforts by the victim:

1. to prevent a crime or delinquent act or an attempted crime
or delinquent act from occurring in the victim’s presence; or

2. to apprehend an offender who had committed a crime or
delinquent act in the victim’s presence or had committed a felony or delinquent act that
would be a felony if committed by an adult.

(2)] A claimant filing for injuries incurred as the occupant of a motor vehicle
or a dependent of an occupant of a motor vehicle operated in violation of § 21–902 of the
Transportation Article may not receive an award unless the claimant proves that the
occupant did not know or could not have known of the condition of the operator of the
vehicle.

[(3) A claimant may not receive an award if:

(i) the victim initiated, consented to, provoked, or unreasonably
failed to avoid a physical confrontation with the offender; or

(ii) the victim was participating in a crime or delinquent act when
the injury was inflicted.]

[(e)] (F) (1) A victim or dependent may not be denied compensation [solely]
because the victim:

(i) is a relative of the offender; or

(ii) was living with the offender as a family member or household
member at the time of the injury or death.

(2) If the Board can reasonably determine that the offender will not receive
any economic benefit or undue enrichment from the compensation, the Board may award
compensation to a victim or dependent who is a relative, family member, or household
member of the offender.

11–811.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) (i) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, an award under
this subtitle shall be made in accordance with the schedule of benefits, as it existed on
January 1, 2001, and degree of disability as specified in Title 9, Subtitle 6 of the Labor and
Employment Article and any other applicable provisions of the Labor and Employment
Article, except for Title 9, Subtitle 8 of the Labor and Employment Article.

(ii) For determining the amount of an award under this subtitle, the
term “average weekly wages” does not include tips, gratuities, and wages that are
undeclared on the claimant’s State or federal income tax returns for the applicable years.

(iii) If a claimant does not have “average weekly wages” to qualify
under the formula in Title 9, Subtitle 6 of the Labor and Employment Article, the award
shall be in an amount equal to the average of the maximum and minimum awards listed in
the applicable portion of that subtitle.

(2) An award for loss of earnings or support made under this subtitle may
be up to two–thirds of the victim’s gross average wage, but may not be less than the amount
provided in paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(3) The parent or guardian of a victim who is a child and who resides with
the victim may be eligible for an award of up to 30 days of lost earnings as a result of caring
for the victim.

(4) An award for funeral expenses may not exceed [$7,500] $10,000.

(5) Subject to the limitation under subsection (b)(3) of this section and §
11–812 of this subtitle, a person who is eligible for an award as the result of the death of a
victim or psychological injury may be eligible, under the regulations that the Board adopts,
to receive psychiatric, psychological, or mental health counseling.

(6) Subject to the limitation under subsection (b)(6) of this section and §
11–812 of this subtitle, a parent, child, DOMESTIC PARTNER, DEPENDENT, or spouse of
a victim who resides with the victim and who is eligible for an award as the result of the
injury of a victim is eligible to receive psychiatric, psychological, or mental health
counseling.

(7) Subject to the limitation under subsection (b)(7) of this section and §
11–812 of this subtitle, a parent, child, DOMESTIC PARTNER, DEPENDENT, or spouse of
a victim who died as a direct result of a crime or delinquent act is eligible for an award of
up to 2 weeks of lost average weekly wages.

(b) Compensation awarded under this subtitle may not exceed:

(1) for a disability–related or dependency–related claim:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(i) except as provided in item (ii) of this paragraph, $25,000; or

(ii) if the injury to the victim results in permanent total disability,
up to an additional $25,000 after a disability–related claim has been awarded to the victim;

(2) $45,000 for a medical claim;

(3) [$10,000] $45,000 for each claimant for psychiatric, psychological, or
mental health counseling under subsection (a)(5) of this section;

(4) except as provided in item (1)(ii) of this subsection, a total of $45,000,
including any subsequent and supplemental awards;

(5) [$250] $2,000 for each claimant for repair, replacement, or cleaning of
property damaged, soiled, or littered as a result of a crime or law enforcement investigation
of a crime, INCLUDING THE COST OF REPLACING LOCKS;

(6) for an award for psychiatric, psychological, or mental health counseling
made under subsection (a)(6) of this section:

(i) $10,000 for each claimant; and

(ii) $20,000 for each incident; or

(7) $2,000 for lost average weekly wage claims made under subsection
(a)(7) of this section.

11–813.

(a) The Board may make an emergency award to the claimant before making a
final decision in the case, if the Board determines, before taking action on the claim, that:

(1) an award likely will be made on the claim; and

(2) the claimant will suffer undue hardship unless immediate payment is
made.

(b) [(1)] The amount of an emergency award under this section:

[(i)] (1) may not exceed [$5,000] $10,000; and

[(ii)] (2) shall be deducted from any final award made to the
claimant.

[(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, a claimant shall
repay the Board:
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) the excess of the amount of the emergency award over any final
award; or

(ii) if a final award is not made, all of the emergency award.

(3) On written request by a claimant, for a compelling reason the Board
may waive the requirement that a claimant repay an emergency award under paragraph
(2) of this subsection.]

(C) UNLESS THE BOARD FINDS BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE THAT
THE APPLICATION IS WITHOUT MERIT, THE BOARD SHALL MAKE EMERGENCY
AWARDS FOR:

(1) FUNERAL EXPENSES;

(2) CRIME SCENE CLEANUP; AND

(3) EMERGENCY RELOCATION.

(D) THE BOARD SHALL MAKE AVAILABLE PUBLICLY ON ITS WEBSITE A
FORM OR ONLINE APPLICATION PORTAL FOR VICTIMS TO APPLY FOR EMERGENCY
AWARDS.

11–814.

(a) (1) Within 30 days after the receipt of a claim, the Board shall notify the
claimant BY E–MAIL, PHONE, OR OTHER MANNER TO PROVIDE IMMEDIATE NOTICE if
additional material is required.

(2) THE BOARD SHALL DOCUMENT THE DATE AND TIME THAT NOTICE
IS ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, within [90] 30
days after the receipt of a claim and all necessary supporting material, the Board OR
EMPLOYEES OF THE BOARD shall:

(i) complete the review and evaluation of each claim; and

(ii) file with the Executive Director a written report setting forth the
decision and the reasons in support of the decision.

(2) For good cause shown, for a period not to exceed 1 year the Board may
extend the time to file its report with the Executive Director after receipt of the claim and
all necessary supporting material until the first to occur of the following events:

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(i) the claimant no longer has expenses related to the crime; or

(ii) the claimant has been awarded the maximum amount
authorized under §§ 11–811(b) and 11–812 of this subtitle.

(c) (1) Within 30 days after the receipt of a written report from the Board OR
AN EMPLOYEE OF THE BOARD, the [Executive Director shall modify, affirm, or reverse
the decision of the Board] CLAIMANT MAY PETITION THE BOARD FOR
RECONSIDERATION OF A DECISION MADE BY THE BOARD OR AN EMPLOYEE OF THE
BOARD.

(2) (I) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE RECEIPT OF A PETITION FOR
RECONSIDERATION, THE BOARD SHALL ISSUE A DECISION.

(II) THE BOARD SHALL FILE WITH THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
A WRITTEN REPORT SETTING FORTH THE DECISION AND THE REASONS IN SUPPORT
OF THE DECISION.

(3) A CLAIMANT MAY APPEAL THE DECISION OF THE BOARD ON A
PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION BY FILING A PETITION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW IN
ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 7 OF THE MARYLAND RULES.

(d) [The decision of the Executive Director to affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the Board is final.

(e)] The claimant shall be given a copy of [the final] ANY report [on request]
ISSUED BY THE BOARD OR AN EMPLOYEE OF THE BOARD.

11–818.

(a) A person may not assert a false claim under this subtitle.

(b) A person who violates this section:

(1) is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine not less
than $500 [or imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or both]; and

(2) shall forfeit any benefit received and reimburse the State for payments
received or paid on the person’s behalf under this subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 705 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

11–819.

(a) (1) There is a Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund.

(2) The Fund consists of:

(i) money distributed to the Fund from the additional court costs
collected from defendants under § 7–409 of the Courts Article;

(ii) any investment earnings or federal matching funds received by
the State for criminal injuries compensation; and

(iii) funds made available to the Fund from any other source.

(3) The Fund is a special continuing, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to
§ 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(4) The Treasurer shall separately hold the Fund and the Comptroller shall
account for it.

(5) The Fund shall be invested and reinvested in the same manner as other
State funds.

(6) The Fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as
provided in § 2–1220 of the State Government Article.

(7) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
ADEQUATE TO ENSURE A BALANCE IN THE FUND.

(b) The Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund:

(1) shall be used to:

(i) carry out the provisions of this subtitle; and

(ii) distribute restitution payments forwarded to the Fund under §
9–614 of the Correctional Services Article; and

(2) may be used for:

(i) any award given under this subtitle; and

(ii) the costs of carrying out this subtitle.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 705

(c) This section does not prohibit the Fund from receiving money from any other
source.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall take
effect July 1, 2025.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
3 of this Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17