START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 586 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 586 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Weinberg Center/New Spires Arts 
Stages Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
   
This bill renames the Class C (Weinberg Center) beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license as 
the Class C (Weinberg Center/New Spires Art Stages) BWL license and authorizes the 
Frederick County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license for use by the 
Weinberg Center for the Arts at the New Spires Arts Stages. The manager of the 
Weinberg Center for the Arts or the New Spires Arts Stages, or another municipal official 
designated by the Mayor of the City of Frederick, must sign the license application. Beer, 
wine, and liquor may be sold for one hour before to one hour after (1) a performance; (2) a 
fundraiser that benefits the Weinberg Center for the Arts or the New Spires Arts Stages; or 
(3) an event hosted by an outside group that has rented either facility. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues decrease by approximately $375 annually 
beginning in FY 2025 from the issuance of one Class C (Weinberg Center/New Spires Art 
Stages) BWL license, as discussed below. Frederick County can handle any additional 
enforcement activity using existing budgeted resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 586/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class C (Weinberg Center) License 
 
A Class C (Weinberg Center) BWL license authorizes the nonprofit Weinberg Center for 
the Arts to sell beer, wine, and liquor at retail to a customer on the licensed premises. Beer, 
wine, and liquor may be sold for one hour before to one hour after a performance or a 
fundraiser that benefits the Weinberg Center for the Arts. The annual license fee is $325.  
 
The president and two other officers of the Weinberg Center for the Arts must sign the 
application for the license. At least two of the officers must be residents of the county.   
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Frederick County will issue one additional Class C (Weinberg 
Center/New Spires Art Stages) BWL license to the New Spires Art Stages under the bill. 
Frederick County advises that the board currently issues multiple Class C per diem 
BWL licenses to New Spires Art Stage each year, collecting approximately $700 annually. 
The annual license fee for the permanent Class C (Weinberg Center/New Spires Art Stages) 
BWL license is $325; therefore, revenues decrease by approximately $375 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025. However, the board advises the permanent license authorized by 
the bill could create administrative efficiencies to the extent it reduces the number of 
per diem licenses issued by the board.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 563 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2