START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 583 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 583 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention - Establishment 
 
 
This Administration bill establishes the Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and 
Intervention in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The purpose of the center is 
to reduce firearm violence, harm from firearm violence, and misuse of firearms in the State 
by partnering with federal, State, and local agencies and affected communities to 
implement a public health approach to firearm violence reduction. The center must 
(1) work in consultation with specified State agencies and stakeholders; (2) solicit and 
consider recommendations from specified communities and experts; and (3) submit to the 
Governor and General Assembly a preliminary State Plan for a Public Health Approach to 
Reducing Firearm Violence (by May 1, 2025), and a State Strategic Plan for Firearm 
Violence Reduction Using Public Health Strategies (by May 1, 2029, and every four years 
thereafter). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The FY 2025 budget includes $2.0 million in general funds for MDH 
contingent on passage of legislation establishing the center; accordingly, general fund 
expenditures increase by $2.0 million in FY 2025. Future years assume $8.0 million in 
discretionary funding for the center in FY 2026, increasing to $10.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2027. Federal fund expenditures increase by $0.2 million in FY 2025 for 
specified costs that exceed the general fund appropriation, as discussed below; in addition, 
federal fund revenues and expenditures increase beginning in FY 2025 to the extent the 
center secures additional federal funds. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$2.0 
$8.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
FF Expenditure 
$0.2 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($2.2) 
($8.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 583/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Beginning in FY 2026, revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that 
local health departments (LHDs) apply for and receive grants from the center, as discussed 
below. Any effect on other local entities is speculative, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Secretary of Health must appoint the executive director of the center 
who must (1) coordinate and direct any planning related to the center initiated by MDH 
and (2) appoint and remove all staff in accordance with the provisions of the State 
Personnel and Pensions Article. 
 
The center must (1) work in consultation with the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy (GOCCP), the Department of State Police (DSP), and any other relevant State 
or local agency to ensure a multidepartmental approach to reducing firearm violence and 
(2) solicit and consider recommendations from communities disproportionately impacted 
by firearm violence, public health experts, individuals or organizations with expertise in 
firearm safety and training, and any other experts, groups, or organizations the 
executive director determines to be appropriate and necessary. 
 
The center may: 
 
 
apply for, receive, and spend federal funds made available to MDH for use in 
carrying out the powers and duties of the Secretary or MDH; 
 
offer training and technical assistance to State and local agencies, health care 
professionals, and community and faith-based organizations to increase capacity to 
implement evidence-based firearm violence prevention and intervention strategies; 
 
issue best practice guidance and model processes in consultation with affected 
communities regarding implementation of evidence-based firearm violence 
prevention and intervention strategies; 
 
facilitate cross-jurisdictional data and information sharing in consultation with 
GOCCP; 
 
conduct public awareness campaigns; 
 
share data and collaborate with higher education and research institutions regarding 
the prevention of firearm violence; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 583/ Page 3 
 
promote the development of evidence-based firearm violence prevention initiatives 
in affected communities throughout the State; and 
 
engage in any other activity consistent with the center’s mission. 
 
For fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor may include in the annual 
budget bill a general fund appropriation sufficient to fund the center. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland State Police Gun Center 
 
The Maryland State Police Gun Center within DSP is a statewide firearms enforcement 
center for the tracking, screening, and vetting of all firearm crimes committed in the State 
and firearms surrendered under final protective orders in the State. The center must 
(1) create and maintain a statewide database to track information on crimes committed with 
crime firearms and firearms surrendered under final protective orders in the State; 
(2) coordinate with DSP and law enforcement agencies to screen and vet all firearm crimes 
committed in the State; and (3) assist DSP and law enforcement agencies with firearm 
enforcement and firearm violation reduction efforts. Each law enforcement agency must 
report specified information to the center on both crimes committed in the jurisdiction with 
crime firearms and firearms surrendered under final protective orders issued in the 
jurisdiction. 
 
Executive Order on Reducing Gun Violence and Making Our Communities Safer 
 
On March 14, 2023, President Joseph R. Biden, Jr. issued an executive order requiring 
specified entities to take specific actions to reduce gun violence, including among other 
things, (1) expanding existing federal campaigns and other efforts to promote safe storage 
of firearms; (2) encouraging effective use of extreme risk protective orders; and (3) issuing 
a proposal on how the federal government can better support the recovery, mental health, 
and other needs of survivors of gun violence, families of victims and survivors of gun 
violence, first responders to incidents of gun violence, and communities affected by gun 
violence. 
 
Background:  The American Public Health Association (APHA) reports that gun violence 
is a leading cause of premature death in the United States, resulting in more than 
39,000 deaths and nearly 85,000 nonfatal injuries nationwide each year. APHA labels 
gun violence as a public health crisis and recommends a public health approach that 
involves (1) data collection and surveillance; (2) research to understand which policies and 
programs are effective in decreasing gun violence; (3) initiatives to implement those 
measures that are shown to work; and (4) continued surveillance and evaluation. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 583/ Page 4 
Additional data obtained from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
reported by EveryStat.org indicates that between 2012 and 2021, an average of 796 people 
died and 1,363 people were wounded by firearms in Maryland each year. Of those who 
died, 63% were homicides, 35% were suicides, 1% were police shootings, and 1% were 
either unintentional or undetermined. Moreover, guns are the leading cause of death among 
children and teens in the State. 
 
In April 2019, Anne Arundel County Executive Steuart Pittman, Jr. created the Gun 
Violence Prevention Task Force through executive order. The task force issued a final 
report on June 5, 2020. Following the report, the Anne Arundel County Department of 
Health launched the Gun Violence Intervention Team to address gun violence as a public 
health issue. The team is managed by a full-time health planner and meets monthly to 
discuss the work of subcommittees focused on three priority areas:  data; public awareness; 
and crisis response. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Fiscal 2025 Expenditures 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget includes $2.0 million in general funds for MDH’s Prevention and 
Health Promotion Administration contingent on passage of legislation establishing the 
Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention. Thus, MDH general fund 
expenditures increase by $2.0 million in fiscal 2025 as the bill satisfies this contingency. 
Federal fund expenditures also increase by $171,387 in fiscal 2025 for specified eligible 
costs that exceed the amount included in the fiscal 2025 budget, as discussed below.  
 
MDH advises that implementation of the center requires additional personnel. Thus, this 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring (1) one executive director to coordinate center activities; 
(2) one epidemiologist to support the collection, analysis, interpretation, and investigation 
of firearm-related data; and (3) one health policy analyst to conduct policy review and 
analysis with partners, identify specific policies and practices for improvement, and attend 
State and national conferences and site visits. Positions are assumed to begin  
October 1, 2024, consistent with the bill’s effective date. The estimate includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. MDH advises that 
the center also plans to expend $1.9 million on contractual services to develop the 
preliminary State Plan for a Public Health Approach to Reducing Firearm Violence by  
May 1, 2025, as detailed below.   
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 583/ Page 5 
Positions 
3.0 
Contractual Services  
$1,900,000 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
249,619 
Other Operating Expenses 
21,768 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$2,171,387 
 
MDH notes that the $1.9 million in anticipated costs for contractual services includes  
(1) $725,000 for community violence prevention; (2) $725,000 for trauma-informed 
community care; (3) $250,000 for information technology infrastructure; and (4) $200,000 
for community engagement. 
 
MDH further advises that it plans to use public health infrastructure federal grant funds to 
cover eligible public health infrastructure-related costs for the center in fiscal 2025 that 
exceed the $2.0 million general fund appropriation. 
 
Ongoing Expenditures for the Center  
 
Once the preliminary State Plan is completed, MDH advises that it anticipates general fund 
expenditures of $10.0 million in fiscal 2026 to expand the center’s activities, including 
$8.7 million in anticipated costs for contractual services, approximately $1.0 million to 
award grants (to LHDs and community-based organizations to implement firearm violence 
prevention activities and to academic partners to provide expertise, research-to-practice 
translation, and evaluation), and ongoing personnel and associated operating costs 
(reflecting full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses).  
 
MDH notes that the $8.7 million in anticipated costs for contractual services includes  
(1) $6.7 million to implement data-driven, strategic, place-based, and evidence-based 
firearm violence prevention activities; (2) $1.0 million for State agency partners to ensure 
capacity and technical assistance for coordination and collaboration for addressing shared 
risk and protective factors; and (3) $1.0 million for infrastructure and information 
technology capacity, including applying predictive analytics to a cross-sector data 
dashboard. 
 
DLS notes that the bill only requires MDH to (1) work in consultation with specified State 
agencies and stakeholders; (2) solicit and consider recommendations from specified 
communities and experts; and (3) submit to the Governor and General Assembly, a 
preliminary State Plan for a Public Health Approach to Reducing Firearm Violence (by  
May 1, 2025) and a State Strategic Plan for Firearm Violence Reduction Using Public 
Health Strategies (by May 1, 2029, and every four years thereafter). DLS further advises 
that a majority of the activities (and associated expenditures) the center plans to carry out 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 583/ Page 6 
in fiscal 2026 (including the entirety of the $8.7 million in contractual costs and the grant 
awards), are authorized (not required) activities and expenditures under the bill. 
 
Nevertheless, this analysis assumes the center implements a fairly robust plan, given the 
broad authority provided to the center by the bill. Furthermore, this analysis assumes the 
center may award grants in furtherance of the center’s mission under the bill’s authorization 
to engage in “any other activity consistent with the center’s mission.” Therefore, it is 
assumed that general fund expenditures increase by $8.0 million in fiscal 2026 for initial 
implementation of the preliminary State plan – which reflects the expected completion of 
the plan by May 1, 2025 – including $6.8 million in contractual services, approximately 
$0.9 million in grants, and approximately $0.3 million in ongoing personnel-related costs.  
 
Fiscal 2026 contractual services are assumed to include (1) $5.3 million to implement 
firearm prevention activities; (2) $800,000 for State agency partners, as discussed above; 
and (3) $750,000 for infrastructure and information technology capacity, as discussed 
above.   
 
This analysis further assumes that ongoing general fund expenditures for the center 
increase to $10.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027, including (1) ongoing 
personnel and associated operating costs; (2) annual contractual service costs of  
$8.7 million (reflecting the anticipated costs discussed above); and (3) a relatively stable 
level of grant awards (approximately $0.9 million annually).  
 
If, however, the center implements an even more robust plan, costs are higher. If a less 
robust plan is implemented, costs may be less.  
 
Federal Funds 
 
To the extent that the center secures federal grants-in-aid or other federal funds, federal 
fund revenues and expenditures increase and the need for general funds may decrease, 
particularly in the out-years. 
 
Effects on Other Agencies 
 
DSP and GOCCP advise that they can work in consultation with the center using existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Based on MDH’s current plan to award grants beginning in 
fiscal 2026, local revenues and expenditures increase as LHDs apply for and receive grants 
from the center to implement place- and evidence-based firearm violence prevention 
activities. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 583/ Page 7 
Depending on the contents of the required plan, other local entities (e.g., local law 
enforcement) may also be affected. However, any such effect results from the plan 
developed under the bill and not directly from the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
Designated Cross File:  SB 475 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention and Policy; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; American Public Health 
Association; U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; EveryStat.org; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 583/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Center for Firearm Violence Prevention and Intervention - 
Establishment 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0583 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8