START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 364

Chapter 364

(House Bill 541)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Student Loan Assistance Repayment Program for
Educators – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the Anne Arundel County Student Loan Assistance
Repayment Program for Educators to assist in the repayment of certain student
loans owed by educators who meet certain eligibility requirements; authorizing the
governing body of Anne Arundel County to establish the Program for educators
employed by the Anne Arundel County Public School System; requiring the county
to establish the amount and terms and conditions of the Program; and generally
relating to the establishment of the Anne Arundel County Student Loan Assistance
Repayment Program for Educators.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 18–4001 through 18–4005 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 40. Anne
Arundel County Student Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Educators”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

SUBTITLE 40. ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY STUDENT LOAN ASSISTANCE REPAYMENT
PROGRAM FOR EDUCATORS.

18–4001.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “EDUCATOR” INCLUDES A CLASSROOM TEACHER, AN EDUCATION
SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL, AN EDUCATION–RELATED SERVICE PROVIDER, AND A
SPECIALIST ELIGIBLE FOR CERTIFICATION FROM THE STATE DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION.

(B) (C) “HIGHER EDUCATION LOAN” MEANS ANY LOAN FOR
UNDERGRADUATE OR GRADUATE STUDY THAT IS OBTAINED FOR TUITION,
EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES, OR LIVING EXPENSES FROM:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 364 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) A COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY, GOVERNMENT, OR COMMERCIAL
SOURCE; OR

(2) AN ORGANIZATION, AN INSTITUTION, AN ASSOCIATION, A
SOCIETY, OR A CORPORATION THAT IS EXEMPT FROM TAXATION UNDER § 501(C)(3)
OR (4) OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.

(C) (D) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY STUDENT
LOAN ASSISTANCE REPAYMENT PROGRAM FOR EDUCATORS.

18–4002.

(A) IN ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY, THE GOVERNING BOARD OF THE COUNTY
MAY ESTABLISH A STUDENT LOAN ASSISTANCE REPAYMENT PROGRAM FOR
EDUCATORS EMPLOYED BY THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ATTRACT, RECRUIT, AND RETAIN
A DIVERSE CADRE OF QUALIFIED EDUCATORS IN THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM THAT IS REFLECTIVE OF THE STUDENT POPULATION
WITHIN THE COUNTY SCHOOLS.

(C) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, THE COUNTY SHALL
ASSIST IN THE REPAYMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION LOANS OWED BY AN INDIVIDUAL
WHO:

(1) RECEIVES A GRADUATE, PROFESSIONAL, OR UNDERGRADUATE
DEGREE FROM AN ACCREDITED COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY;

(2) OBTAINS EMPLOYMENT AS AN EDUCATOR IN THE ANNE ARUNDEL
COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM;

(3) COMMITS TO SERVE IN THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY PUBLIC
SCHOOL SYSTEM FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LESS THAN 5 YEARS;

(4) RECEIVES AN INCOME THAT IS LESS THAN THE MAXIMUM
ELIGIBLE TOTAL INCOME LEVELS ESTABLISHED BY THE COUNTY, INCLUDING ANY
ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF INCOME THE INDIVIDUAL MAY EARN;

(5) IS NOT IN DEFAULT ON ANY STUDENT LOAN; AND

(6) SATISFIES ANY OTHER CRITERIA ESTABLISHED UNDER THE
PROGRAM BY THE COUNTY.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 364

(D) AN APPLICANT FOR ASSISTANCE IN THE REPAYMENT OF A COMMERCIAL
LOAN SHALL DEMONSTRATE TO THE COUNTY THAT THE COMMERCIAL LOAN WAS
USED FOR TUITION, EDUCATIONAL EXPENSES, OR LIVING EXPENSES FOR GRADUATE
OR UNDERGRADUATE STUDY.

18–4003.

LOAN ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM SHALL BE IN THE AMOUNT AND ON
THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS ESTABLISHED BY THE COUNTY.

18–4004.

THE PROGRAM SHALL BE ADMINISTERED BY THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.

18–4005.

(A) FUNDS FOR THE PROGRAM SHALL BE AS PROVIDED ON AN ANNUAL
BASIS IN THE COUNTY BUDGET IN AN APPROPRIATION SEPARATE FROM THE
COUNTY’S APPROPRIATION TO THE OPERATING BUDGET OF THE ANNE ARUNDEL
COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION.

(B) FUNDS FOR THE PROGRAM MAY BE USED TO COVER ADMINISTRATIVE
EXPENSES OF THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3