START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 811

Chapter 811

(House Bill 501)

AN ACT concerning

Charter Counties – Enforcement of Local Laws

FOR the purpose of increasing the maximum amount of a civil or criminal fine that may be
imposed by a charter county to enforce certain local laws enacted by the county; and
generally relating to the enforcement of local laws by a charter county.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Local Government
Section 10–202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

10–202.

(a) A county may enact local laws and may repeal or amend any local law enacted
by the General Assembly on any matter covered by the express powers in this title.

(b) A county may provide for the enforcement of an ordinance, a resolution, a
bylaw, or a regulation adopted under this title:

(1) by civil fines not exceeding [$1,000] $5,000; or

(2) by criminal fines and penalties not exceeding [$1,000] $5,000 and
imprisonment not exceeding 6 months.

(c) A county may provide for the enforcement of local fair housing laws by fines
or penalties that do not exceed the fines or penalties provided in the federal Fair Housing
Act Amendments of 1988 for enforcement of similar federal fair housing laws.

(d) A county may provide for the enforcement of local employment discrimination
laws or public accommodations discrimination laws by civil fines not exceeding $5,000 for
any offense.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 811 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2