START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 587 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 587 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Manufacturer's Limited Beer, Wine, 
and Liquor Permit 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Frederick County Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
manufacturer’s limited beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) permit to a holder of a Class 1 
distillery license or a Class 5 brewery license. The permit authorizes the holder to allow a 
licensed caterer or other contracted party to provide sealed beer, wine, and liquor products 
not manufactured by the holder during private events for on-premises consumption at the 
licensed premises. The license holder may not allow patrons who are visiting any part of 
the manufacturer’s licensed premises that is open to the public to enter the private event 
area while the private event is being held. The license holder may not have a direct or 
indirect pecuniary interest in the licensed caterer or other contracted party. The license 
holder must request approval from the board before each event. The board must adopt 
regulations, including criteria for approving events and setting the annual permit fee. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues increase beginning in FY 2025 from the issuance 
of manufacturer’s limited BWL permits, as discussed below. Frederick County can handle 
any additional enforcement activity using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 587/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class 1 Distillery License 
 
A Class 1 distillery license authorizes the establishment and operation of a plant for 
distilling brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits at the location described in the 
license. It also authorizes the sale and delivery of those alcoholic beverages, with specified 
restrictions. The annual license fee is $2,000. 
 
Local licensing boards may grant an on-site consumption permit to a holder of a Class 1 
distillery license, which authorizes the license holder to use up to 7,750 gallons of liquor 
annually for mixed drinks sold through an on-premises consumption permit.  
 
Class 5 Brewery License 
 
The holder of a Class 5 brewery license may (1) establish and operate a plant for brewing 
and bottling malt beverages at the location described in the license; (2) import beer from a 
holder of a nonresident dealer’s permit; (3) contract to brew and bottle beer on behalf of 
other license holders; and (4) sell and deliver beer to a holder of a beer wholesaler’s license. 
The annual license fee is $1,500. 
 
Local licensing boards may issue on-premises consumption permits to applicants that hold 
a Class 5 brewery license and a Class D beer license. A local licensing board that does not 
issue a Class D beer license must establish an equivalent license and require the applicant 
to obtain that license before issuing a permit for on-premises consumption. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Frederick County advises that the board will likely issue up to 
nine manufacturer’s limited (BWL) permits to eligible holders of a Class 1 distillery license 
or a Class 5 brewery license. Although the bill requires the board to adopt regulations to 
set an annual permit fee, Frederick County advises that the annual permit fee will likely be 
$500. To the extent that the board issues a manufacturer’s limited (BWL) permit to the 
nine eligible license holders, revenues increase by approximately $4,500 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business distilleries and breweries that obtain the 
manufacturer’s limited (BWL) permit may benefit from the ability to provide sealed beer, 
wine, and liquor products not manufactured by the holder during private events for 
on-premises consumption at the licensed premises. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 587/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 561 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3