START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 571 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 571 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Program - Modifications 
 
 
This bill modifies the Family and Medical Leave Insurance (FAMLI) Program by altering 
key administrative deadlines, definitions, and components of the program’s administration, 
and authorizing the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) to adopt regulations that 
establish fees for private employer plans. The start dates are delayed by nine months to 
July 1, 2025, for required contributions and six months to July 1, 2026, for benefit 
payments. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund FAMLI revenues decrease by up to $915.5 million in FY 2025 
and $457.8 million in FY 2026, and special fund FAMLI expenditures decrease by up to 
$869.4 million in FY 2026 due to the delay in contributions and benefit payments. State 
expenditures (all funds) decrease by up to $26.1 million in FY 2025 and by up to 
$8.9 million in FY 2026 due to the delay in required contributions as an employer. 
General fund expenditures decrease by $12.4 million in FY 2025 relating to provider 
reimbursements. Beginning in FY 2026, FAMLI special fund revenues increase by the fees 
for private plans and any assessed MDL appeal costs, and general fund revenues may 
increase minimally due to imposed penalties. This bill eliminates a mandated 
appropriation for FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
($915.5) 
($457.8) 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
($21.2) 
($2.9) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
($3.8) 
($870.7) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Expenditure 
($1.9) 
($0.6) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
NonBud Exp. 
($0.5) 
($0.2) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
($11.2) 
($3.7) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($877.0) 
$420.3 
$- 
$- 
$- 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 571/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local expenditures for employer contributions are delayed by nine months 
until July 1, 2025; at that time, local governments that opt to provide a private plan may be 
subject to fees, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In addition to various minor, technical, and conforming changes to the 
FAMLI Program and its administrative processes, the bill’s significant changes include 
changes to the program’s timeline, private employer plans, enforcement and penalties, and 
administration, as discussed below. 
 
Timeline 
 
The program’s start dates are delayed by nine months to July 1, 2025, for required 
contributions and six months to July 1, 2026, for benefit payments. The Secretary of Labor 
must set the initial total rate of contribution by February 1, 2025, instead of by 
October 1, 2023, which then applies from July 1, 2025, through June 30, 2026. By 
November 15, instead of September 1, each year, the Secretary of Labor must submit an 
annual report on the program, which must include information on any grants issued to 
facilitate community partnerships. 
 
Private Employer Plans 
 
An employer must be authorized by the Secretary of Labor to provide a private employer 
plan, which consists of employer-provided benefits or insurance. The Secretary of Labor 
must establish reasonable criteria, including as specified in the bill, for determining which 
employers are authorized to meet the requirements of the program through 
employer-provided benefits. MDL may adopt regulations that establish reasonable 
application and application renewal fees for private employer plans that are paid to the 
FAMLI Fund and may only be used for administrative purposes of the program. An 
employer that provides a private employer plan may not deduct from an employee more 
than 50% of the contribution amount set by MDL (instead of no more than the maximum 
contribution amount set by MDL).  
 
Enforcement and Penalties 
 
A self-employed individual who fails to pay FAMLI contributions is subject to the same 
actions as an employer that fails to pay FAMLI contributions. If an employee or MDL 
(instead of only an employee) believes that an employer, a self-employed individual, or an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 571/ Page 3 
insurer (instead of only an employer) has violated the FAMLI law or regulations (instead 
of only the law), the employee or MDL may file a written complaint with the Secretary of 
Labor’s designee. The Secretary of Labor’s designee, instead of the Secretary, must 
investigate and enforce the program, and civil penalties may be assessed at the discretion 
of the Secretary’s designee. If a covered individual prevails in an appeal of an adverse 
decision of an employer or an insurer, MDL may assess MDL’s appeal costs against the 
employer or insurer. Among other sources, the FAMLI Fund consists of money collected 
from (1) assessed contributions and interest for an employer’s or a self-employed 
individual’s failure to pay contributions and (2) MDL’s appeal costs assessed against the 
employer or insurer.  
 
Administrative Changes 
 
The Secretary of Labor may use a portion of FAMLI funds or other available funding to 
award grants to facilitate community partnerships in amounts that, in the aggregate, do not 
exceed the amount appropriated in MDL’s annual budget for that purpose. The Secretary 
must establish procedures and forms for electronic filing of specified items. The bill 
exempts employers whose employees have filed claims with MDL from the prohibition 
against disclosing specified information for claims administration, and the bill prohibits 
MDL employees from disclosing personal identifying information as specified. 
 
The definition of “wages” is changed to confirm with the definition of “wages” under the 
Maryland Unemployment Insurance Law, and the bill also expands what is included as 
compensation for a self-employed individual. The definition of a “covered employee” is 
altered to be based on performing services under employment in the State over the 
four most recently completed calendar quarters for which quarterly reports have been 
required, as opposed to over the 12-month period. 
 
The average weekly wage that benefits are based on is calculated as the total wages 
received by the covered individual in the highest of the previous four completed 
calendar quarters for which quarterly reports have been required, divided by 13, instead of 
being based on the total wages received by the covered individual over the last 680 hours 
for which the covered individual was paid divided by the number of weeks worked. 
 
A self-employed individual must be a resident of the State to participate in FAMLI. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 48 of 2022 established the FAMLI Program, to be administered 
by MDL, and Chapters 258 and 259 of 2023 made several modifications to the program, 
including delaying the program’s start date by one year. 
 
The program generally provides up to 12 weeks of benefits to a covered individual who is 
taking leave from employment due to caring for or bonding with certain family members, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 571/ Page 4 
the individual’s own serious health condition, or a qualifying exigency arising out of a 
family member’s military deployment. The weekly benefit is based on an individual’s 
average weekly wage and is indexed to inflation. 
 
By September 1 each year, the Secretary of Labor must submit an annual report on the 
FAMLI Program to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Fund 
 
Chapter 48 also establishes the FAMLI Fund, which is a special fund administered by the 
Secretary of Labor consisting of employee, employer, and self-employed individual 
contributions and other specified sources of funds. Funds must be used to pay FAMLI 
benefits and may be used to pay for public education on the FAMLI Program and any other 
costs associated with the initial implementation and ongoing administration of the FAMLI 
Program. 
 
MDL must establish the new program using general funds until monies from required 
contributions become available. Employer and employee contributions to the program 
begin October 1, 2024, and claims for benefits begin January 1, 2026. 
 
Contributions 
 
Required contributions to the program, which are shared equally between employers and 
employees, are also based on employee wages, although employers with 14 or fewer 
employees are not required to contribute. The Secretary of Labor must set the initial total 
rate of contribution by October 1, 2023, which applies from October 1, 2024, through 
June 30, 2026, and may not exceed 1.2% of an employee’s wages up to and including the 
Social Security wage base. In September 2023, MDL set the initial total rate of contribution 
at 0.9% of covered wages. This rate will apply from the start of contributions in 
October 2024 through the end of June 2026. Thus, beginning October 1, 2024, each 
employee, each employer with 15 or more employees, and each participating 
self-employed individual must pay to the Secretary of Labor 0.9% of covered wages up to 
the Social Security cap, equally divided between employees and employers. 
 
Benefits 
 
A covered individual may not receive more than 12 weeks of benefits in an application 
year, except under specified circumstances. A covered individual may take eligible leave 
on an intermittent leave schedule under specified conditions. 
 
The weekly benefit payable to a covered individual is calculated based on the employee’s 
average weekly wage and ranges from a minimum of $50 to a maximum of $1,000 for the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 571/ Page 5 
12-month period beginning January 1, 2026. Beginning January 1, 2027, the maximum 
weekly benefit must be increased by the annual percentage growth in the Consumer Price 
Index, subject to a determination by the Board of Public Works based on expected 
economic conditions. 
 
Private Employer Plan 
 
An employer may satisfy the FAMLI Program’s requirements through a private employer 
plan consisting of employer-provided benefits, insurance, or a combination of both, if the 
plan is offered to all eligible employees and at least meets the rights, protections, and 
benefits provided to a covered employee under the program. An employer that provides 
covered employees with a private employer plan approved by MDL and those covered 
employees are exempt from the program’s required contributions. An employer that offers 
a private plan may not deduct from an employee more than the maximum contribution 
amount set by MDL. 
 
Prohibited Acts and Penalties 
 
An individual is disqualified from receiving benefits for one year if the individual willfully 
makes a false statement or misrepresentation regarding a material fact or willfully fails to 
report a material fact to obtain benefits. An employer is subject to a civil penalty of up to 
$1,000 for each occurrence if the employer willfully makes or causes a false statement to 
be made or willfully fails to report a material fact regarding an employee’s claim for 
benefits. In addition, an employer is prohibited from retaliating against an employee who 
exercises their rights under the program. The FAMLI Program also specifies how the 
Secretary must investigate and enforce the program, which includes mediation, issuing 
orders, assessing a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each employee for whom the employer 
is not in compliance, and asking the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the 
employee. 
 
Provider Reimbursements for Employer Share of Family and Medical Leave Insurance 
Contributions 
 
The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) is required to reimburse certain service 
providers for some or all of the employer share of FAMLI contributions on at least a 
quarterly basis, as follows:   
 
 
community provider that is required to be licensed or certified under Title 7 of the 
Health-General Article for 100% of the employer FAMLI contribution for 
employees who manage or provide services under that title;  
 
community provider that is required to be licensed or certified under Title 7.5 of the 
Health-General Article for a percentage of the employer FAMLI contribution for 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 571/ Page 6 
employees who manage or provide services under that title that is equal to the 
percentage of revenue that is attributable to federal and State Medicaid funding and 
any other State funding received by the provider for the services during the period 
covered by the reimbursement; or 
 
provider, as defined in § 16-201.4 of the Health-General Article, for a percentage of 
the FAMLI employer contribution for employees who manage or provide specified 
related services that is equal to the percentage of revenue attributable to federal and 
State Medicaid funding and any other State funding received by the provider for the 
services during the period covered by the reimbursement. 
 
State Revenues:  Delaying the FAMLI Program’s start date by nine months from 
October 1, 2024, to July 1, 2025, for required contributions decreases special fund revenues 
from employer and employee contributions. Based on a 0.9% rate, 100% employer 
participation, and the timing of when quarterly contributions are paid, MDL estimates 
FAMLI special fund revenues decrease by $915.5 million in fiscal 2025 and 
$457.75 million in fiscal 2026 as a result of the delay. To the extent employers participate 
in private plans, the actual decrease in revenues is less. 
 
However, MDL may adopt regulations that establish application and renewal fees for 
private employer plans, so some of the FAMLI revenue loss may be offset in fiscal 2026 
and FAMLI revenues annually increase beyond fiscal 2026 due to any such fees. The actual 
revenue impact will depend on the fees for private plans that MDL may establish in 
regulations and the number of employers that will participate in private plans, which is 
unknown at this time. 
 
Additionally, the bill broadens the authority to impose penalties and assess MDL’s appeal 
costs against the employer or insurer. Thus, general fund revenues may increase minimally 
beginning in fiscal 2026 from fines and FAMLI special fund revenues increase minimally 
beginning in fiscal 2026 from assessing MDL’s appeal costs in certain situations. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDL does not anticipate any change in operational expenditures 
under the bill, and the Department of Legislative Services concurs that MDL does not need 
any additional resources to implement the bill. The bill authorizes the Secretary of Labor 
to use a portion of FAMLI funds or other available funding to award grants to facilitate 
community partnerships, and the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $445,000 in 
funding for grants to local community organizations to inform individuals about the 
benefits that FAMLI will provide. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes 
$40.4 million ($24.2 million in federal funds and $16.2 million in general funds) for the 
FAMLI Program. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 571/ Page 7 
Family and Medical Leave Insurance Benefits 
 
Delaying the start of FAMLI benefits by six months to July 1, 2026, results in no FAMLI 
benefits being paid in fiscal 2026. Thus, based on existing projections of future benefit 
payments under current law, special fund expenditures for FAMLI benefits decrease by 
$869.4 million in fiscal 2026, assuming no employers participate in private plans. 
 
Employer Contributions for State Employee 
 
The State will incur costs under the FAMLI Program related to employer contributions for 
State employees if the State opts not to self-insure. Thus, based on the timing of when 
quarterly FAMLI payments are due, delaying the start of contributions generates potential 
savings to the State, as an employer, of up to approximately $26.1 million in total funds 
(almost $9 million in general funds) in fiscal 2025 and up to approximately $8.9 million 
(almost $3 million in general funds) in fiscal 2026. However, the State is still considering 
self-insuring, and no funding is included in the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced for these 
FAMLI costs; absent the bill, funds would have to be included in a future deficiency 
appropriation to cover the necessary payments in fiscal 2025. If the State opts to self-insure, 
expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2026 due to the application and renewal fees that 
MDL establishes in regulations for private plans. 
 
Service Providers 
 
MDH must reimburse certain service providers for some or all of the employer share of 
FAMLI contributions on at least a quarterly basis. The fiscal 2025 allowance includes 
$12.4 million in general funds in MDH for community provider contributions, which is 
reduced contingent on legislation delaying FAMLI implementation. As this bill delays the 
implementation of FAMLI and thereby activates the contingency, MDH expenditures in 
fiscal 2025 decrease by $12.4 million, with additional cost savings in fiscal 2026. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local jurisdictions that do not participate in a private plan 
experience savings from FAMLI contributions being delayed by nine months until 
July 1, 2025. However, expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2026 for local 
jurisdictions that participate in private plans by the amount of fees MDL establishes in 
regulations for private plans. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill makes several significant changes to the FAMLI Program, 
including delaying employer contributions by nine months and authorizing MDL to 
establish fees for private employer plans. Such changes are likely significant for small 
businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 571/ Page 8 
Additional Comments:  The bill takes effect October 1, 2024, the same date on which 
contributions are required to start under current law.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 485 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8