START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

Chapter 454

(House Bill 567)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Online Data Privacy Act of 2024

FOR the purpose of regulating the manner in which a controller or a processor in possession
of a consumer’s personal data may process the consumer’s personal data; authorizing
a consumer to exercise certain rights in regards to the consumer’s personal data;
requiring a controller of personal data to establish a method for a consumer to
exercise certain rights in regards to the consumer’s personal data; requiring a
controller to comply with a request by a consumer to exercise a certain right in a
certain manner, except under certain circumstances; authorizing a consumer to
designate an authorized agent to act on the consumer’s behalf to opt out of the
processing of the consumer’s personal data; requiring a controller to provide a
consumer with a certain privacy notice; requiring a controller that uses a processor
to process the personal data of consumers to enter into a contract with the processor
that governs the processor’s data processing procedures; requiring a controller to
conduct and document a data protection assessment for consumer data processing
activities that present a heightened risk of harm to a consumer; making a violation
of this Act an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice that is subject to
enforcement and penalties under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act; and
generally relating to online data privacy.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xl)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xli)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xlii); and 14–4601 through ~~14–4613~~ 14–4614 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle 46. Online Data Privacy Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xl) Title 14, Subtitle 13 of the Public Safety Article; [or]

(xli) Title 14, Subtitle 45 of this article; or

(XLII)TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 46 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

SUBTITLE 46. ONLINE DATA PRIVACY ACT.

14–4601.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “AFFILIATE” MEANS A PERSON THAT, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY
THROUGH ONE OR MORE INTERMEDIARIES, CONTROLS, IS CONTROLLED BY, OR IS
UNDER COMMON CONTROL WITH ANOTHER PERSON, SUCH THAT THE PERSON:

(1) SHARES COMMON BRANDING WITH ANOTHER PERSON; OR

(2) CONTROLS, IS CONTROLLED BY, OR IS UNDER COMMON CONTROL
WITH ANOTHER PERSON.

(1) OWNS OR HAS THE POWER TO VOTE MORE THAN 50 PERCENT %
OF THE OUTSTANDING SHARES OF ANY VOTING CLASS OF THE OTHER PERSON’S
SECURITIES;

(2) HAS THE POWER TO ELECT OR INFLUENCE THE ELECTION OF A
MAJORITY OF THE DIRECTORS, MEMBERS, OR MANAGERS OF THE OTHER PERSON;

(3) HAS THE POWER TO DIRECT THE MANAGEMENT OF THE OTHER
PERSON; OR

(4) IS SUBJECT TO THE OTHER PERSON’S EXERCISE OF THE POWERS
DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1), (2), OR (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(C) “AUTHENTICATE” MEANS TO USE REASONABLE MEANS TO DETERMINE
THAT A REQUEST TO EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
14–4605 OF THIS SUBTITLE IS BEING MADE BY, OR ON BEHALF OF, A CONSUMER WHO
IS ENTITLED TO EXERCISE THE CONSUMER RIGHT WITH RESPECT TO THE PERSONAL
DATA AT ISSUE.

(D) (1) “BIOMETRIC DATA” MEANS DATA GENERATED BY AUTOMATIC
MEASUREMENTS OF THE BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A CONSUMER THAT CAN
BE USED TO UNIQUELY AUTHENTICATE A CONSUMER’S IDENTITY.

(2) “BIOMETRIC DATA” INCLUDES:

(I) A FINGERPRINT;

(II) A VOICE PRINT;

(III) AN EYE RETINA OR IRIS IMAGE; AND

(IV) ANY OTHER UNIQUE BIOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS THAT
CAN BE USED TO UNIQUELY AUTHENTICATE A CONSUMER’S IDENTITY.

(3) “BIOMETRIC DATA” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) A DIGITAL OR PHYSICAL PHOTOGRAPH;

(II) AN AUDIO OR VIDEO RECORDING; OR

(III) ANY DATA GENERATED FROM A DIGITAL OR PHYSICAL
PHOTOGRAPH OR AN AUDIO OR VIDEO RECORDING, UNLESS THE DATA IS
GENERATED TO IDENTIFY A SPECIFIC CONSUMER.

(E) “BUSINESS ASSOCIATE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN HIPAA.

(F) “CHILD” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN COPPA.

(G) (1) “CONSENT” MEANS A CLEAR AFFIRMATIVE ACT SIGNIFYING A
CONSUMER’S FREELY GIVEN, SPECIFIC, INFORMED, AND UNAMBIGUOUS
AGREEMENT TO ALLOW THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA RELATING TO THE
CONSUMER FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

(2) “CONSENT” INCLUDES:

(I) A WRITTEN STATEMENT;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A WRITTEN STATEMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS; OR

(III) ANY OTHER UNAMBIGUOUS AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.

(3) “CONSENT” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) ACCEPTANCE OF A GENERAL OR BROAD TERMS OF USE OR
SIMILAR DOCUMENT THAT CONTAINS DESCRIPTIONS OF PERSONAL DATA
PROCESSING ALONG WITH OTHER UNRELATED INFORMATION;

(II) HOVERING OVER, MUTING, PAUSING, OR CLOSING A PIECE
OF CONTENT; OR

(III) AGREEMENT OBTAINED THROUGH THE USE OF DARK
PATTERNS.

(H) (1) “CONSUMER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS A RESIDENT OF THE
STATE.

(2) “CONSUMER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) AN INDIVIDUAL ACTING IN A COMMERCIAL OR
EMPLOYMENT CONTEXT; OR

(II) AN INDIVIDUAL ACTING AS AN EMPLOYEE, AN OWNER, A
DIRECTOR, AN OFFICER, OR A CONTRACTOR OF A COMPANY, A PARTNERSHIP, A SOLE
PROPRIETORSHIP, A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION, OR A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT
WHOSE COMMUNICATIONS OR TRANSACTIONS WITH A CONTROLLER OCCUR ONLY
WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S ROLE WITH THE COMPANY,
PARTNERSHIP, SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP, NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION, OR
GOVERNMENTAL UNIT.

(I) (1) “CONSUMER HEALTH DATA” MEANS PERSONAL DATA THAT A
CONTROLLER USES TO IDENTIFY A CONSUMER’S PHYSICAL OR MENTAL HEALTH
STATUS.

(2) “CONSUMER HEALTH DATA” INCLUDES DATA RELATED TO:

(I) GENDER–AFFIRMING CARE TREATMENT; OR

(II) REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH CARE.

(J) “CONTROL” MEANS:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(1) OWNERSHIP OF OR THE POWER TO VOTE MORE THAN 50% OF THE
OUTSTANDING SHARES OF ANY CLASS OF VOTING SECURITY OF A BUSINESS;

(2) ANY MANNER OF CONTROL OVER THE ELECTION OF A MAJORITY
OF THE DIRECTORS OF A BUSINESS, OR INDIVIDUALS EXERCISING SIMILAR
FUNCTIONS; OR

(3) THE POWER TO EXERCISE A CONTROLLING INFLUENCE OVER THE
MANAGEMENT OF A BUSINESS.

(K) “CONTROLLER” MEANS A PERSON THAT, ALONE OR JOINTLY WITH
OTHERS, DETERMINES THE PURPOSE AND MEANS OF PROCESSING PERSONAL DATA.

(L) (1) “COPPA” MEANS THE FEDERAL CHILDREN’S ONLINE PRIVACY
PROTECTION ACT OF 1998 AND THE REGULATIONS, RULES, GUIDANCE, AND
EXEMPTIONS ADOPTED UNDER THE ACT, AND AS THE ACT AND THE REGULATIONS,
RULES, GUIDANCE, AND EXEMPTIONS MAY BE AMENDED.

(2) “COPPA” INCLUDES REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THE
FEDERAL CHILDREN’S ONLINE PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT OF 1998.

(M) “COVERED ENTITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN HIPAA.

(N) (1) “DARK PATTERN” MEANS A USER INTERFACE DESIGNED OR
MANIPULATED WITH THE SUBSTANTIAL EFFECT OF SUBVERTING USER AUTONOMY,
DECISION MAKING, OR CHOICE.

(2) “DARK PATTERN” INCLUDES ANY PRACTICE THE FEDERAL
TRADE COMMISSION REFERS TO AS A “DARK PATTERN”.

(O) “DECISIONS THAT PRODUCE LEGAL OR SIMILARLY SIGNIFICANT
EFFECTS CONCERNING THE CONSUMER” MEANS DECISIONS THAT RESULT IN THE
PROVISION OR DENIAL OF:

(1) FINANCIAL OR LENDING SERVICES;

(2) HOUSING;

~~(3)~~ ~~INSURANCE;~~

(4) (3) EDUCATION ENROLLMENT OR OPPORTUNITY;

~~(5)~~ (4) CRIMINAL JUSTICE;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(6)~~ (5) EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES;

(7) (6) HEALTH CARE SERVICES; OR

(8) (7) ACCESS TO ESSENTIAL GOODS OR SERVICES.

(P) “DE–IDENTIFIED DATA” MEANS DATA THAT CANNOT REASONABLY BE
~~USED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~INFER~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~ABOUT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~BE~~ ~~LINKED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~ ~~IDENTIFIED~~
OR IDENTIFIABLE CONSUMER, OR A DEVICE THAT MAY BE LINKED TO AN IDENTIFIED
OR IDENTIFIABLE CONSUMER, IF THE CONTROLLER THAT POSSESSES THAT
~~INFORMATION:~~

(1) TAKES REASONABLE MEASURES TO ENSURE THAT THE
INFORMATION CANNOT BE LINKED WITH A CONSUMER;

(2) COMMITS IN PUBLICLY AVAILABLE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OR IN
~~A~~ ~~PUBLICLY~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~PRIVACY~~ ~~POLICY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAINTAIN~~ ~~AND~~ ~~USE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INFORMATION~~
IN DE–IDENTIFIED FORM; AND

(3) CONTRACTUALLY OBLIGES ANY RECIPIENTS OF THE
~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COMPLY~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~PROVISIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBSECTION~~ HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 14–4401 OF THIS TITLE.

(Q) “GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
15–151(A) OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(Q) (R) (1) “GENETIC DATA” MEANS DATA IN ANY FORMAT THAT
CONCERNS THE GENETIC CHARACTERISTICS OF A CONSUMER.

~~(2)~~ ~~“GENETIC~~ ~~DATA”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(I) RAW SEQUENCE DATA THAT RESULTS FROM SEQUENCING
OF A CONSUMER’S COMPLETE EXTRACTED DNA OR A PORTION OF THE CONSUMER’S
COMPLETE EXTRACTED DNA;

(II) GENOTYPIC AND PHENOTYPIC INFORMATION THAT
RESULTS FROM ANALYZING RAW SEQUENCE DATA;

(III) INFORMATION EXTRAPOLATED, DERIVED, OR INFERRED
FROM THE ANALYSIS OF RAW SEQUENCE DATA; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(IV) SELF–REPORTED HEALTH INFORMATION SUBMITTED TO A
DIRECT–TO–CONSUMER GENETIC TESTING COMPANY BY A CONSUMER REGARDING
THE CONSUMER’S HEALTH CONDITIONS:

1. THAT IS USED FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH OR
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT; AND

2. ANALYZED IN CONNECTION WITH THE CONSUMER’S
RAW SEQUENCE DATA HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 14–4401 OF THIS TITLE.

(R) (S) (1) “GEOFENCE” MEANS TECHNOLOGY THAT ESTABLISHES A
VIRTUAL GEOGRAPHICAL BOUNDARY.

(2) “GEOFENCE” INCLUDES BOUNDARIES THAT ARE ESTABLISHED
OR MONITORED THROUGH THE USE OF:

(I) GLOBAL POSITIONING TECHNOLOGY;

(II) CELL TOWER CONNECTIVITY;

(III) CELLULAR DATA;

(IV) RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION;

(V) WIRELESS FIDELITY TECHNOLOGY; OR

(VI) ANY OTHER FORM OF LOCATION DETERMINATION
TECHNOLOGY.

(S) (T) “HIPAA” MEANS THE FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE
PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996.

(T) (U) “IDENTIFIED OR IDENTIFIABLE CONSUMER” MEANS A CONSUMER
WHO CAN READILY BE IDENTIFIED, EITHER DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY.

(U) (V) “MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY” MEANS A HEALTH CARE FACILITY IN
WHICH NOT LESS THAN 70% OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES OFFERED ARE MENTAL
HEALTH SERVICES.

(V) (W) (1) “PERSONAL DATA” MEANS ANY INFORMATION THAT IS
LINKED OR CAN BE REASONABLY LINKED TO AN IDENTIFIED OR IDENTIFIABLE
CONSUMER.

(2) “PERSONAL DATA” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) DE–IDENTIFIED DATA; OR

(II) PUBLICLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION.

(W) (X) (1) “PRECISE GEOLOCATION DATA” MEANS INFORMATION
DERIVED FROM TECHNOLOGY THAT CAN PRECISELY AND ACCURATELY IDENTIFY
THE SPECIFIC LOCATION OF A CONSUMER WITHIN A RADIUS OF 1,750 FEET.

(2) “PRECISE GEOLOCATION DATA” INCLUDES GLOBAL POSITIONING
SYSTEM LEVEL LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE COORDINATES OR OTHER SIMILAR
MECHANISMS.

(3) “PRECISE GEOLOCATION DATA” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) THE CONTENT OF COMMUNICATIONS DATA;

(II) DATA GENERATED BY OR CONNECTED TO AN ADVANCED
UTILITY METERING INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEM; OR

(II) (III) EQUIPMENT DATA GENERATED BY EQUIPMENT USED
BY A UTILITY COMPANY.

(X) (Y) (1) “PROCESS” MEANS AN OPERATION OR SET OF OPERATIONS
PERFORMED BY MANUAL OR AUTOMATED MEANS ON PERSONAL DATA.

(2) “PROCESS” INCLUDES COLLECTING, USING, STORING,
DISCLOSING, ANALYZING, DELETING, OR MODIFYING PERSONAL DATA.

(Y) (Z) “PROCESSOR” MEANS A PERSON THAT PROCESSES PERSONAL
DATA ON BEHALF OF A CONTROLLER.

(Z) (AA) “PROFILING” MEANS ANY FORM OF AUTOMATED PROCESSING
PERFORMED ON PERSONAL DATA TO EVALUATE, ANALYZE, OR PREDICT PERSONAL
ASPECTS RELATED TO AN IDENTIFIED OR IDENTIFIABLE CONSUMER’S ECONOMIC
SITUATION, HEALTH, DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS, PERSONAL PREFERENCES,
INTERESTS, RELIABILITY, BEHAVIOR, LOCATION, OR MOVEMENTS.

(AA) (BB) “PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED
IN HIPAA.

(BB) (CC) (1) “PUBLICLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION” MEANS
INFORMATION THAT A PERSON:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(I) IS LAWFULLY MADE READILY AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL
PUBLIC THROUGH FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL GOVERNMENT RECORDS; OR

(II) A CONTROLLER HAS A REASONABLE BASIS TO BELIEVE
~~THAT~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~LAWFULLY~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~PUBLIC~~
THROUGH WIDELY DISTRIBUTED MEDIA.

(I) LAWFULLY OBTAINS FROM A RECORD OF A GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY;

(II) REASONABLY BELIEVES A CONSUMER OR WIDELY
DISTRIBUTED MEDIA HAS LAWFULLY MADE AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC;
OR

(III) IF THE CONSUMER HAS NOT RESTRICTED THE
INFORMATION TO A SPECIFIC AUDIENCE, OBTAINS FROM A PERSON TO WHOM THE
CONSUMER DISCLOSED THE INFORMATION.

(2) “PUBLICLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE
BIOMETRIC DATA COLLECTED BY A BUSINESS ABOUT A CONSUMER WITHOUT THE
CONSUMER’S KNOWLEDGE.

(CC) (DD) (1) “REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH CARE” MEANS CARE
RELATED TO A HEALTH CARE–RELATED SERVICE OR PRODUCT RENDERED OR
PROVIDED CONCERNING A CONSUMER’S REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM OR SEXUAL
WELL–BEING., INCLUDING:

(2) “REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH CARE” INCLUDES:

(I) (1) A SERVICE OR PRODUCT PROVIDED RELATED TO AN
INDIVIDUAL HEALTH CONDITION, STATUS, DISEASE, DIAGNOSIS, TEST, OR
TREATMENT;

(II) (2) A SOCIAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, BEHAVIORAL, OR
MEDICAL INTERVENTION;

(III) (3) A SURGERY OR PROCEDURE;

(IV) (4) THE PURCHASE OR USE OF A MEDICATION,
INCLUDING A MEDICATION PURCHASED OR USED FOR THE PURPOSES OF AN
ABORTION;

(V) (5) A SERVICE OR PRODUCT RELATED TO A BODILY
FUNCTION, VITAL SIGN, OR MEASUREMENT THEREOF SYMPTOM;
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) A MEASUREMENT OF A BODILY FUNCTION, VITAL SIGN, OR
SYMPTOM; AND

(VI) (7) AN ABORTION, WHETHER SURGICAL OR MEDICAL;
~~AND~~

(VII) A SERVICE RELATED TO AN ABORTION AND MEDICAL AND
NONMEDICAL SERVICES, PRODUCTS, DIAGNOSTICS, COUNSELING, AND FOLLOW–UP
SERVICES FOR AN ABORTION.

(DD) (EE) “REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH FACILITY” MEANS A
HEALTH CARE FACILITY WHERE NOT LESS THAN 70% OF SERVICES OFFERED ARE
REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

(EE) (FF) (1) “SALE OF PERSONAL DATA” MEANS THE EXCHANGE OF
PERSONAL DATA BY A CONTROLLER, A PROCESSOR, OR AN AFFILIATE OF A
CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR TO A THIRD PARTY FOR MONETARY OR OTHER
VALUABLE CONSIDERATION.

(2) “SALE OF PERSONAL DATA” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) THE DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL DATA TO A PROCESSOR
THAT PROCESSES PERSONAL DATA ON BEHALF OF A CONTROLLER IF LIMITED TO
THE PURPOSES OF THE PROCESSING;

(II) THE DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL DATA TO A THIRD PARTY
FOR PURPOSES OF PROVIDING A PRODUCT OR SERVICE AFFIRMATIVELY
REQUESTED BY THE CONSUMER;

(III) THE DISCLOSURE OR TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA TO AN
AFFILIATE OF THE CONTROLLER ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PURPOSE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~OR~~
SERVICE AFFIRMATIVELY REQUESTED BY THE CONSUMER;

(IV) THE DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL DATA WHERE THE
CONSUMER:

1. DIRECTS THE CONTROLLER TO DISCLOSE THE
PERSONAL DATA; OR

2. INTENTIONALLY USES THE CONTROLLER TO
INTERACT WITH A THIRD PARTY;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(V) THE DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL DATA THAT THE
CONSUMER:

1. INTENTIONALLY MADE AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL
PUBLIC THROUGH A CHANNEL OF MASS MEDIA; AND

2. DID NOT RESTRICT TO A SPECIFIC AUDIENCE; OR

(VI) THE DISCLOSURE OR TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA TO A
THIRD PARTY AS AN ASSET THAT IS PART OF AN ACTUAL OR PROPOSED MERGER,
ACQUISITION, BANKRUPTCY, OR OTHER TRANSACTION WHERE THE THIRD PARTY
ASSUMES CONTROL OF ALL OR PART OF THE CONTROLLER’S ASSETS.

(FF) (GG) “SENSITIVE DATA” MEANS PERSONAL DATA THAT INCLUDES:

(1) DATA REVEALING:

(I) RACIAL OR ETHNIC ORIGIN;

(II) RELIGIOUS BELIEFS;

(III) CONSUMER HEALTH DATA;

(IV) SEX LIFE;

(V) SEXUAL ORIENTATION;

(VI) STATUS AS TRANSGENDER OR NONBINARY;

(VII) NATIONAL ORIGIN; OR

(VIII) CITIZENSHIP OR IMMIGRATION STATUS;

(2) GENETIC DATA OR BIOMETRIC DATA;

(3) PERSONAL DATA OF A CONSUMER THAT THE CONTROLLER KNOWS
OR HAS REASON TO KNOW IS A CHILD; OR

(4) PRECISE GEOLOCATION DATA.

(GG) (HH) (1) “TARGETED ADVERTISING” MEANS DISPLAYING
ADVERTISEMENTS TO A CONSUMER OR ON A DEVICE IDENTIFIED BY A UNIQUE
IDENTIFIER, WHERE THE ADVERTISEMENT IS SELECTED BASED ON PERSONAL DATA
OBTAINED OR INFERRED FROM THE CONSUMER’S ACTIVITIES OVER TIME AND

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

ACROSS NONAFFILIATED WEBSITES OR ONLINE APPLICATIONS THAT ARE
UNAFFILIATED WITH EACH OTHER, IN ORDER TO PREDICT THE CONSUMER’S
PREFERENCES OR INTERESTS.

(2) “TARGETED ADVERTISING” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) ADVERTISEMENTS BASED ON THE CONTEXT IN WHICH THE
~~ADVERTISEMENT~~ ~~APPEARS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~DOES~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~VARY~~ ~~BASED~~ ~~ON~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~IS~~ ~~VIEWING~~ ~~THE~~
ADVERTISEMENT OF A CONSUMER’S CURRENT SEARCH QUERY, VISIT TO A WEBSITE,
OR ONLINE APPLICATION;

(II) ADVERTISEMENTS BASED ON A CONSUMER’S ACTIVITIES
WITHIN A CONTROLLER’S WEBSITES OR ONLINE APPLICATIONS;

(III) ADVERTISEMENTS DIRECTED TO A CONSUMER IN
RESPONSE TO THE CONSUMER’S REQUEST FOR INFORMATION OR FEEDBACK; OR

(IV) PROCESSING PERSONAL DATA SOLELY TO MEASURE OR
REPORT ADVERTISING FREQUENCY, PERFORMANCE, OR REACH.

(HH) (II) “THIRD PARTY” MEANS A PERSON OTHER THAN THE RELEVANT
CONSUMER, CONTROLLER, PROCESSOR, OR AFFILIATE OF THE CONTROLLER OR
PROCESSOR OF RELEVANT PERSONAL DATA.

(II) (JJ) (1) “TRADE SECRET” MEANS INFORMATION THAT:

(I) DERIVES INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC VALUE, ACTUAL OR
POTENTIAL, FROM NOT BEING GENERALLY KNOWN TO, AND NOT BEING READILY
ASCERTAINABLE BY PROPER MEANS BY, OTHER PERSONS WHO COULD OBTAIN
ECONOMIC VALUE FROM THE INFORMATION’S DISCLOSURE OR USE; AND

(II) IS THE SUBJECT OF EFFORTS THAT ARE REASONABLE
UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES TO MAINTAIN THE SECRECY OF THE INFORMATION.

(2) “TRADE SECRET” INCLUDES A FORMULA, PATTERN,
COMPILATION, PROGRAM, DEVICE, METHOD, TECHNIQUE, OR PROCESS HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 11–1201 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(KK) “TRANSFER” MEANS TO DISCLOSE, RELEASE, DISSEMINATE, MAKE
AVAILABLE, LICENSE, RENT, OR SHARE PERSONAL DATA ORALLY, IN WRITING,
ELECTRONICALLY, OR BY ANY OTHER MEANS.

14–4602.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES TO A PERSON THAT CONDUCTS BUSINESS IN THE
STATE OR PROVIDES PRODUCTS OR SERVICES THAT ARE TARGETED TO RESIDENTS
OF THE STATE, AND THAT DURING THE PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR DID ANY OF
THE FOLLOWING:

(1) CONDUCTS BUSINESS IN THE STATE; OR

(2) (I) PRODUCES SERVICES OR PRODUCTS THAT ARE TARGETED
TO RESIDENTS OF THE STATE; AND

(II) DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING CALENDAR YEAR:

1. (1) CONTROLLED OR PROCESSED THE PERSONAL DATA
OF AT LEAST 35,000 CONSUMERS, EXCLUDING PERSONAL DATA CONTROLLED OR
PROCESSED SOLELY FOR THE PURPOSE OF COMPLETING A PAYMENT TRANSACTION;
OR

2. (2) CONTROLLED OR PROCESSED THE PERSONAL DATA
OF AT LEAST 10,000 CONSUMERS AND DERIVED MORE THAN 20% OF ITS GROSS
REVENUE FROM THE SALE OF PERSONAL DATA.

14–4603.

(A) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(1) A REGULATORY, ADMINISTRATIVE, ADVISORY, EXECUTIVE,
APPOINTIVE, LEGISLATIVE, OR JUDICIAL BODY OR INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE
STATE, INCLUDING A BOARD, BUREAU, COMMISSION, OR UNIT OF THE STATE OR A
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE;

(2) A NATIONAL SECURITIES ASSOCIATION THAT IS REGISTERED
UNDER § 15 OF THE FEDERAL SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 OR A
REGISTERED FUTURES ASSOCIATION DESIGNATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 17 OF
THE FEDERAL COMMODITY EXCHANGE ACT; OR

(3) A FINANCIAL INSTITUTION OR, AN AFFILIATE OF A FINANCIAL
INSTITUTION, OR DATA THAT IS SUBJECT TO TITLE V OF THE FEDERAL
GRAMM–LEACH–BLILEY ACT AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THAT ACT; OR

(4) A NONPROFIT CONTROLLER THAT PROCESSES OR SHARES
PERSONAL DATA SOLELY FOR THE PURPOSES OF ASSISTING:

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES IN INVESTIGATING
CRIMINAL OR FRAUDULENT ACTS RELATING TO INSURANCE; OR

(II) FIRST RESPONDERS IN RESPONDING TO CATASTROPHIC
EVENTS.

(B) THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION AND DATA ARE EXEMPT FROM THIS
SUBTITLE:

(1) PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION UNDER HIPAA;

(2) PATIENT–IDENTIFYING INFORMATION FOR PURPOSES OF 42
U.S.C. § 290DD–2;

(3) IDENTIFIABLE PRIVATE INFORMATION THAT IS USED FOR
PURPOSES OF THE FEDERAL POLICY FOR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH 45 C.F.R. § 46;

(4) IDENTIFIABLE PRIVATE INFORMATION TO THE EXTENT THAT IT IS
COLLECTED AND USED AS PART OF HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE ICH 36 GOOD CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES ISSUED BY THE
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HARMONISATION OF TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
FOR PHARMACEUTICALS FOR HUMAN USE OR THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN
SUBJECTS UNDER 21 C.F.R. §§ 50 AND 56;

(5) PATIENT SAFETY WORK PRODUCT THAT IS CREATED AND USED
FOR PURPOSES OF PATIENT SAFETY IMPROVEMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH 42
C.F.R. § 3, ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH 42 U.S.C. §§ 299B–21 THROUGH
299B–26;

(6) (I) INFORMATION TO THE EXTENT IT IS USED FOR PUBLIC
HEALTH, COMMUNITY HEALTH, OR POPULATION HEALTH ACTIVITIES AND
PURPOSES, AS AUTHORIZED BY HIPAA, WHEN PROVIDED BY OR TO A COVERED
ENTITY OR WHEN PROVIDED BY OR TO A BUSINESS ASSOCIATE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE BUSINESS ASSOCIATE AGREEMENT WITH A COVERED ENTITY; AND

(II) INFORMATION COLLECTED, USED, OR DISCLOSED BY AN
ENTITY IF:

1. THE ENTITY IS A COVERED ENTITY OR BUSINESS
ASSOCIATE UNDER HIPAA BECAUSE IT COLLECTS, USES, OR DISCLOSES
PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION; AND

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

2. THE ENTITY APPLIES THE SAME FEDERAL AND STATE
STANDARDS FOR THE COLLECTION, USE, AND DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION AS
PROVIDED TO PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION UNDER HIPAA AND LEGALLY
PROTECTED HEALTH CARE UNDER § 4–301 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE
FOR INFORMATION THAT:

A. IS CONSIDERED A MEDICAL RECORD UNDER § 4–301
OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE; AND

B. IS NOT CONSIDERED PROTECTED HEALTH
INFORMATION UNDER HIPAA;

(II) INFORMATION THAT IS A MEDICAL RECORD UNDER § 4–301
OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE IF:

1. THE INFORMATION IS HELD BY AN ENTITY THAT IS A
COVERED ENTITY OR BUSINESS ASSOCIATE UNDER HIPAA BECAUSE IT COLLECTS,
USES, OR DISCLOSES PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION; AND

2. THE ENTITY APPLIES THE SAME STANDARDS FOR THE
COLLECTION, USE, AND DISCLOSURE OF THE INFORMATION AS REQUIRED FOR
PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION UNDER HIPAA AND MEDICAL RECORDS UNDER
§ 4–301 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE, INCLUDING SPECIFIC STANDARDS
REGARDING LEGALLY PROTECTED HEALTH CARE; AND

(III) INFORMATION THAT IS DE–IDENTIFIED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE REQUIREMENTS FOR DE–IDENTIFICATION SET FORTH IN 45 C.F.R.
164.514 THAT IS DERIVED FROM INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE HEALTH
INFORMATION AS DESCRIBED IN HIPAA OR PERSONAL INFORMATION CONSISTENT
WITH THE HUMAN SUBJECT PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS OF THE U.S. FOOD AND
DRUG ADMINISTRATION;

(7) THE COLLECTION, MAINTENANCE, DISCLOSURE, SALE,
COMMUNICATION, OR USE OF PERSONAL INFORMATION BEARING ON A CONSUMER’S
CREDITWORTHINESS, CREDIT STANDING, CREDIT CAPACITY, CHARACTER, GENERAL
REPUTATION, PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS, OR MODE OF LIVING BY A CONSUMER
REPORTING AGENCY, FURNISHER, OR USER THAT PROVIDES INFORMATION FOR USE
IN A CONSUMER REPORT, AND BY A USER OF A CONSUMER REPORT, BUT ONLY TO
THE EXTENT THAT THE ACTIVITY IS REGULATED BY AND AUTHORIZED UNDER THE
FEDERAL FAIR CREDIT REPORTING ACT;

(8) PERSONAL DATA COLLECTED, PROCESSED, SOLD, OR DISCLOSED
IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL DRIVER’S PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT OF 1994;

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(9) PERSONAL DATA REGULATED BY THE FEDERAL FAMILY
EDUCATIONAL RIGHTS AND PRIVACY ACT;

(10) PERSONAL DATA COLLECTED, PROCESSED, SOLD, OR DISCLOSED
IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE FEDERAL FARM CREDIT ACT;

(11) DATA PROCESSED OR MAINTAINED:

(I) IN THE COURSE OF AN INDIVIDUAL APPLYING TO,
EMPLOYED BY, OR ACTING AS AN AGENT OR INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR OF A
CONTROLLER, PROCESSOR, OR THIRD PARTY, TO THE EXTENT THAT THE DATA IS
COLLECTED AND USED WITHIN THE CONTEXT OF THE ROLE;

(II) AS THE EMERGENCY CONTACT INFORMATION OF A
CONSUMER IF THE DATA IS USED FOR EMERGENCY CONTACT PURPOSES; OR

(III) THAT IS:

1. NECESSARY TO RETAIN TO ADMINISTER BENEFITS
FOR ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL RELATING TO THE CONSUMER WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF
THE INFORMATION UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS ITEM; AND

2. USED FOR THE PURPOSES OF ADMINISTERING THE
BENEFITS; AND

(12) PERSONAL DATA COLLECTED, PROCESSED, SOLD, OR DISCLOSED
IN RELATION TO PRICE, ROUTE, OR SERVICE BY AN AIR CARRIER SUBJECT TO THE
FEDERAL AIRLINE DEREGULATION ACT TO THE EXTENT THIS SUBTITLE IS
PREEMPTED BY THE FEDERAL AIRLINE DEREGULATION ACT; AND

(13) PERSONAL DATA COLLECTED BY OR ON BEHALF OF A PERSON
REGULATED UNDER THE INSURANCE ARTICLE OR AN AFFILIATE OF SUCH A PERSON,
IN FURTHERANCE OF THE BUSINESS OF INSURANCE.

(C) CONTROLLERS AND PROCESSORS THAT COMPLY WITH THE VERIFIABLE
PARENTAL CONSENT REQUIREMENTS OF COPPA SHALL BE CONSIDERED
COMPLIANT WITH AN OBLIGATION TO OBTAIN PARENTAL CONSENT IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THIS SUBTITLE WITH RESPECT TO A CONSUMER WHO IS A CHILD.

14–4604.

A PERSON MAY NOT:

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(1) PROVIDE AN EMPLOYEE OR CONTRACTOR ACCESS TO CONSUMER
HEALTH DATA UNLESS THE:

(I) THE EMPLOYEE OR CONTRACTOR IS SUBJECT TO A
CONTRACTUAL OR STATUTORY DUTY OF CONFIDENTIALITY; OR

(II) CONFIDENTIALITY IS REQUIRED AS A CONDITION OF
EMPLOYMENT OF THE EMPLOYEE;

(2) PROVIDE A PROCESSOR ACCESS TO CONSUMER HEALTH DATA
UNLESS THE PERSON PROVIDING ACCESS TO THE CONSUMER HEALTH DATA AND
THE PROCESSOR COMPLY WITH § 14–4607 14–4608 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(3) USE A GEOFENCE:

(I) TO IDENTIFY, TRACK, COLLECT DATA FROM, OR SEND A
NOTIFICATION TO A CONSUMER REGARDING THE CONSUMER’S CONSUMER HEALTH
DATA; AND

(II) WITHIN 1,750 FEET OF A MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY OR
REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH FACILITY; OR

(4) SELL OR OFFER TO SELL CONSUMER HEALTH DATA WITHOUT THE
~~CONSENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~WHOSE~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~DATA~~ ~~IS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~SOLD~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OFFERED~~ ~~TO~~
BE SOLD TO ESTABLISH A VIRTUAL BOUNDARY THAT IS WITHIN 1,750 FEET OF ANY
MENTAL HEALTH FACILITY OR REPRODUCTIVE OR SEXUAL HEALTH FACILITY FOR
THE PURPOSE OF IDENTIFYING, TRACKING, COLLECTING DATA FROM, OR SENDING
ANY NOTIFICATION TO A CONSUMER REGARDING THE CONSUMER’S CONSUMER
HEALTH DATA.

14–4605.

(A) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A
CONTROLLER TO REVEAL A TRADE SECRET.

(B) A CONSUMER SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO:

(1) CONFIRM WHETHER A CONTROLLER IS PROCESSING THE
CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA, UNLESS THAT CONFIRMATION WOULD REQUIRE THE
DISCLOSURE OF A TRADE SECRET;

(2) IF A CONTROLLER IS PROCESSING A CONSUMER’S PERSONAL
DATA, ACCESS THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA UNLESS THAT ACCESS WOULD
REQUIRE THE DISCLOSURE OF A TRADE SECRET;
– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) CONSIDERING THE NATURE OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL
DATA AND THE PURPOSES OF THE PROCESSING OF THE PERSONAL DATA, CORRECT
INACCURACIES IN THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA;

(4) REQUIRE A CONTROLLER TO DELETE PERSONAL DATA PROVIDED
BY, OR OBTAINED ABOUT, THE CONSUMER UNLESS RETENTION OF THE PERSONAL
DATA IS REQUIRED BY LAW;

(5) IF THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA IS DONE BY AUTOMATIC
MEANS, OBTAIN A COPY OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA PROCESSED BY THE
CONTROLLER IN A PORTABLE AND, TO THE EXTENT TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE,
READILY USABLE FORMAT THAT ALLOWS THE CONSUMER TO EASILY TRANSMIT THE
DATA TO ANOTHER CONTROLLER WITHOUT HINDRANCE;

(6) OBTAIN A LIST OF THE CATEGORIES OF THIRD PARTIES TO WHICH
THE CONTROLLER HAS DISCLOSED THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA OR A LIST OF
THE CATEGORIES OF THIRD PARTIES TO WHICH THE CONTROLLER HAS DISCLOSED
ANY CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA IF THE CONTROLLER DOES NOT MAINTAIN THIS
INFORMATION IN A FORMAT SPECIFIC TO THE CONSUMER; AND

(7) OPT OUT OF THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA FOR PURPOSES
OF:

(I) TARGETED ADVERTISING;

(II) THE SALE OF PERSONAL DATA; OR

(III) PROFILING IN FURTHERANCE OF SOLELY AUTOMATED
DECISIONS THAT PRODUCE LEGAL OR SIMILARLY SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS
CONCERNING THE CONSUMER.

(C) (1) A CONTROLLER SHALL ESTABLISH A SECURE AND RELIABLE
METHOD FOR A CONSUMER TO EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) A CONSUMER MAY EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT UNDER THIS
SECTION BY THE METHOD ESTABLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(D) (1) A CONSUMER MAY DESIGNATE AN AUTHORIZED AGENT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 14–4606 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO OPT OUT OF THE PROCESSING
OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(7) OF THIS SECTION
ON BEHALF OF A CONSUMER.

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(2) A PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF A CHILD MAY EXERCISE A
CONSUMER RIGHT LISTED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION ON THE CHILD’S
BEHALF REGARDING THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA.

(3) A GUARDIAN OR CONSERVATOR OF A CONSUMER SUBJECT TO A
GUARDIANSHIP, CONSERVATORSHIP, OR OTHER PROTECTIVE ARRANGEMENT MAY
EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT LISTED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION ON THE
CONSUMER’S BEHALF REGARDING THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA.

(E) (1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, A
CONTROLLER SHALL COMPLY WITH A REQUEST BY A CONSUMER TO EXERCISE A
CONSUMER RIGHT LISTED IN THIS SECTION.

(2) (I) A CONTROLLER SHALL RESPOND TO A CONSUMER REQUEST
NOT LATER THAN 45 DAYS AFTER THE CONTROLLER RECEIVES THE CONSUMER
REQUEST.

(II) A CONTROLLER MAY EXTEND THE COMPLETION PERIOD BY
AN ADDITIONAL 45 DAYS IF:

1. IT IS REASONABLY NECESSARY TO COMPLETE THE
REQUEST BASED ON THE COMPLEXITY AND NUMBER OF THE CONSUMER’S
REQUESTS; AND

2. THE CONTROLLER INFORMS THE CONSUMER OF THE
EXTENSION AND THE REASON FOR THE EXTENSION WITHIN THE INITIAL 45–DAY
RESPONSE PERIOD.

(III) A CONTROLLER SHALL NOTIFY THE CONSUMER WITHIN 30
DAYS AFTER COMPLYING WITH THE CONSUMER’S REQUEST THAT THE CONTROLLER
HAS COMPLIED WITH THE CONSUMER’S REQUEST.

(3) IF A CONTROLLER DECLINES TO ACT REGARDING A CONSUMER’S
REQUEST, THE CONTROLLER SHALL:

(I) INFORM THE CONSUMER WITHOUT UNDUE DELAY, BUT NOT
LATER THAN 45 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE REQUEST, OF THE JUSTIFICATION FOR
DECLINING TO ACT; AND

(II) PROVIDE INSTRUCTIONS FOR HOW TO APPEAL THE
DECISION.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) (I) A CONTROLLER SHALL PROVIDE INFORMATION TO A
CONSUMER IN RESPONSE TO A CONSUMER’S REQUEST TO EXERCISE RIGHTS UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE FREE OF CHARGE ONCE DURING ANY 12–MONTH PERIOD.

(II) IF REQUESTS FROM A CONSUMER ARE MANIFESTLY
UNFOUNDED, EXCESSIVE, TECHNICALLY INFEASIBLE, OR REPETITIVE, A
CONTROLLER MAY:

1. CHARGE THE CONSUMER A REASONABLE FEE TO
COVER THE ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF COMPLYING WITH THE REQUEST; OR

2. DECLINE TO ACT ON THE REQUEST.

(III) THE CONTROLLER HAS THE BURDEN OF DEMONSTRATING
THE MANIFESTLY UNFOUNDED, EXCESSIVE, TECHNICALLY INFEASIBLE, OR
REPETITIVE NATURE OF THE REQUEST.

(5) IF A CONTROLLER IS UNABLE TO AUTHENTICATE A REQUEST TO
EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT AFFORDED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(1) THROUGH (5)
OF THIS SECTION USING COMMERCIALLY REASONABLE EFFORTS, THE
CONTROLLER:

(I) MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH A REQUEST TO
INITIATE AN ACTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION; AND

(II) SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE TO THE CONSUMER THAT THE
CONTROLLER IS UNABLE TO AUTHENTICATE THE REQUEST TO EXERCISE THE RIGHT
UNTIL THE CONSUMER PROVIDES ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REASONABLY
NECESSARY TO AUTHENTICATE THE CONSUMER AND THE CONSUMER’S REQUEST TO
EXERCISE THE CONSUMER’S RIGHTS.

(6) A CONTROLLER MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO AUTHENTICATE AN
OPT–OUT REQUEST.

(7) A CONTROLLER THAT HAS OBTAINED PERSONAL DATA ABOUT A
CONSUMER FROM A SOURCE OTHER THAN THE CONSUMER SHALL BE CONSIDERED
COMPLIANT WITH THE CONSUMER’S REQUEST TO DELETE THE CONSUMER’S DATA IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B)(4) OF THIS SECTION BY RETAINING A RECORD
OF THE DELETION REQUEST AND THE MINIMUM DATA NECESSARY FOR THE
PURPOSE OF ENSURING THAT THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA:

(I) REMAINS DELETED FROM THE CONTROLLER’S RECORDS;
AND

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(II) IS NOT BEING USED FOR ANY OTHER PURPOSE.

(F) (1) A CONTROLLER SHALL ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR A CONSUMER
TO APPEAL THE CONTROLLER’S REFUSAL TO ACT ON A CONSUMER RIGHTS REQUEST
WITHIN A REASONABLE PERIOD AFTER THE CONSUMER RECEIVES THE DECISION.

(2) THE APPEAL PROCESS SHALL BE:

(I) CONSPICUOUSLY AVAILABLE; AND

(II) SIMILAR TO THE PROCESS FOR SUBMITTING REQUESTS TO
INITIATE AN ACTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(3) NOT LATER THAN 60 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING AN APPEAL, A
CONTROLLER SHALL INFORM THE CONSUMER IN WRITING OF ANY ACTION TAKEN OR
NOT TAKEN IN RESPONSE TO THE APPEAL, INCLUDING A WRITTEN EXPLANATION OF
THE REASONS FOR THE DECISIONS.

(4) IF A CONTROLLER DENIES AN APPEAL, THE CONTROLLER SHALL
PROVIDE THE CONSUMER WITH AN ONLINE MECHANISM, IF AVAILABLE, THROUGH
WHICH THE CONSUMER MAY CONTACT THE DIVISION TO SUBMIT A COMPLAINT.

14–4606.

(A) (1) A CONSUMER MAY DESIGNATE AN INDIVIDUAL TO SERVE AS THE
CONSUMER’S AUTHORIZED AGENT AND ACT ON THE CONSUMER’S BEHALF TO OPT
OUT OF THE PROCESSING OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA FOR ONE OR MORE
OF THE PURPOSES SPECIFIED IN § 14–4605(B)(7) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) A CONSUMER MAY DESIGNATE AN AUTHORIZED AGENT BY AN
INTERNET LINK OR A BROWSER SETTING, BROWSER EXTENSION, GLOBAL DEVICE
SETTING, OR OTHER SIMILAR TECHNOLOGY, INDICATING A CONSUMER’S INTENT TO
OPT OUT OF THE PROCESSING OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA.

(B) A CONTROLLER SHALL COMPLY WITH AN OPT–OUT REQUEST RECEIVED
FROM AN AUTHORIZED AGENT IF, USING COMMERCIALLY REASONABLE EFFORTS,
THE CONTROLLER IS ABLE TO AUTHENTICATE THE:

(1) IDENTITY OF THE CONSUMER; AND

(2) AUTHORIZED AGENT’S AUTHORITY TO ACT ON THE CONSUMER’S
BEHALF.

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

14–4607.

(A) A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR MAY NOT:

(1) COLLECT PERSONAL DATA FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF CONTENT
~~PERSONALIZATION~~ ~~OR~~ ~~MARKETING~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSUMER~~
WHOSE PERSONAL DATA IS COLLECTED;

(2) (1) EXCEPT WHERE THE COLLECTION OR PROCESSING IS
STRICTLY NECESSARY TO PROVIDE OR MAINTAIN A SPECIFIC PRODUCT OR SERVICE
REQUESTED BY THE CONSUMER TO WHOM THE PERSONAL DATA PERTAINS ~~AND~~
UNLESS THE CONTROLLER OBTAINS THE CONSUMER’S CONSENT, COLLECT,
PROCESS, OR SHARE SENSITIVE DATA CONCERNING A CONSUMER;

(3) (2) SELL SENSITIVE DATA;

(4) (3) PROCESS PERSONAL DATA IN VIOLATION OF STATE OR
FEDERAL LAWS THAT PROHIBIT UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION;

(5) (4) PROCESS THE PERSONAL DATA OF A CONSUMER FOR THE
PURPOSES OF TARGETED ADVERTISING IF THE CONTROLLER KNEW OR SHOULD
HAVE KNOWN THAT THE CONSUMER IS AT LEAST 13 YEARS OLD AND UNDER THE AGE
OF 18 YEARS;

(6) (5) SELL THE PERSONAL DATA OF A CONSUMER WITHOUT THE
CONSUMER’S CONSENT IF THE CONTROLLER KNEW OR SHOULD HAVE KNOWN THAT
THE CONSUMER IS AT LEAST 13 YEARS OLD AND UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS;

(7) (6) DISCRIMINATE AGAINST A CONSUMER FOR EXERCISING A
CONSUMER RIGHT CONTAINED IN THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING DENYING GOODS OR
SERVICES, CHARGING DIFFERENT PRICES OR RATES FOR GOODS OR SERVICES, OR
PROVIDING A DIFFERENT LEVEL OF QUALITY OF GOODS OR SERVICES TO THE
CONSUMER;

(8) (7) COLLECT, PROCESS, OR TRANSFER PERSONAL DATA OR
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATA IN A MANNER THAT UNLAWFULLY DISCRIMINATES IN OR
OTHERWISE UNLAWFULLY MAKES UNAVAILABLE THE EQUAL ENJOYMENT OF GOODS
OR SERVICES ON THE BASIS OF RACE, COLOR, RELIGION, NATIONAL ORIGIN, SEX,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, OR DISABILITY, UNLESS THE
COLLECTION, PROCESSING, OR TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA IS FOR:

(I) THE CONTROLLER’S SELF–TESTING TO PREVENT OR
MITIGATE UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION;

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(II) THE CONTROLLER’S DIVERSIFYING OF AN APPLICANT,
PARTICIPANT, OR CUSTOMER POOL; OR

(III) A PRIVATE CLUB OR GROUP NOT OPEN TO THE PUBLIC, AS
DESCRIBED IN § 201(E) OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964; OR

(9) (8) UNLESS THE CONTROLLER OBTAINS THE CONSUMER’S
CONSENT, PROCESS PERSONAL DATA FOR A PURPOSE THAT IS NEITHER
REASONABLY NECESSARY TO, NOR COMPATIBLE WITH, THE DISCLOSED PURPOSES
FOR WHICH THE PERSONAL DATA IS PROCESSED, AS DISCLOSED TO THE CONSUMER.

(B) (1) A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR SHALL:

(I) LIMIT THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL DATA TO WHAT IS
REASONABLY NECESSARY AND PROPORTIONATE TO PROVIDE OR MAINTAIN A
SPECIFIC PRODUCT OR SERVICE REQUESTED BY THE CONSUMER TO WHOM THE
DATA PERTAINS;

(II) ESTABLISH, IMPLEMENT, AND MAINTAIN REASONABLE
ADMINISTRATIVE, TECHNICAL, AND PHYSICAL DATA SECURITY PRACTICES TO
PROTECT THE CONFIDENTIALITY, INTEGRITY, AND ACCESSIBILITY OF PERSONAL
DATA APPROPRIATE TO THE VOLUME AND NATURE OF THE PERSONAL DATA AT
ISSUE; AND

(III) PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE MECHANISM FOR A CONSUMER TO
REVOKE THE CONSUMER’S CONSENT UNDER THIS SECTION THAT IS AT LEAST AS
EASY AS THE MECHANISM BY WHICH THE CONSUMER PROVIDED THE CONSUMER’S
CONSENT.

(2) IF A CONSUMER REVOKES CONSENT UNDER THIS SECTION, THE
CONTROLLER SHALL STOP PROCESSING THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA AS SOON
AS PRACTICABLE, BUT NOT LATER THAN 15 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE
REQUEST.

(C) NOTHING IN SUBSECTION (A) OR (B) OF THIS SECTION MAY BE
CONSTRUED TO:

(1) REQUIRE A CONTROLLER TO PROVIDE A PRODUCT OR SERVICE
THAT REQUIRES THE PERSONAL DATA OF A CONSUMER THAT THE CONTROLLER
DOES NOT COLLECT OR MAINTAIN; OR

(2) PROHIBIT A CONTROLLER FROM OFFERING A DIFFERENT PRICE,
RATE, LEVEL, QUALITY, OR SELECTION OF GOODS OR SERVICES TO A CONSUMER,
– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

INCLUDING OFFERING GOODS OR SERVICES FOR NO FEE, IF THE OFFERING IS IN
CONNECTION WITH A CONSUMER’S VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION IN A BONA FIDE
LOYALTY, REWARDS, PREMIUM FEATURES, DISCOUNTS, OR CLUB CARD PROGRAM
THAT DOES NOT:

(I) PROVIDE FOR THE TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA TO A
THIRD PARTY AS PART OF THE PROGRAM UNLESS:

1. THE TRANSFER IS FUNCTIONALLY NECESSARY TO
~~ENABLE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~THIRD~~ ~~PARTY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~A~~ ~~BENEFIT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~IS~~
~~ENTITLED;~~

2. THE TRANSFER OF PERSONAL DATA TO THE THIRD
PARTY IS CLEARLY DISCLOSED IN THE TERMS OF THE PROGRAM; AND

3. THE THIRD PARTY USES THE PERSONAL DATA ONLY
~~FOR~~ ~~PURPOSES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FACILITATING~~ ~~A~~ ~~BENEFIT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~IS~~ ~~ENTITLED~~
~~AND~~ ~~DOES~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~PROCESS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TRANSFER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERSONAL~~ ~~DATA~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~OTHER~~
PURPOSE; OR

(II) USE FINANCIAL INCENTIVE PRACTICES THAT ARE UNJUST,
UNREASONABLE, COERCIVE, OR USURIOUS IN NATURE.

(3) A SALE OF PERSONAL DATA MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED
~~FUNCTIONALLY~~ ~~NECESSARY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~MEETS~~ ~~THE~~
DESCRIPTION UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION, PROVIDED THAT THE
SELLING OF PERSONAL DATA IS NOT A CONDITION OF PARTICIPATION IN THE
PROGRAM.

(D) A CONTROLLER SHALL PROVIDE A CONSUMER WITH A REASONABLY
ACCESSIBLE, CLEAR, AND MEANINGFUL PRIVACY NOTICE THAT INCLUDES:

(1) THE CATEGORIES OF PERSONAL DATA PROCESSED BY THE
CONTROLLER, INCLUDING SENSITIVE DATA;

(2) THE CONTROLLER’S PURPOSE FOR PROCESSING PERSONAL DATA;

(3) HOW A CONSUMER MAY EXERCISE THE CONSUMER’S RIGHTS
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING HOW A CONSUMER MAY APPEAL A
CONTROLLER’S DECISION REGARDING THE CONSUMER’S REQUEST OR MAY REVOKE
CONSENT;

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(4) THE CATEGORIES OF THIRD PARTIES WITH WHICH THE
CONTROLLER SHARES PERSONAL DATA WITH A LEVEL OF DETAIL THAT ENABLES A
CONSUMER TO UNDERSTAND WHAT TYPE OF ENTITY EACH THIRD PARTY IS AND, TO
THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, HOW EACH THIRD PARTY MAY PROCESS THE PERSONAL
DATA THE TYPE OF, BUSINESS MODEL OF, OR PROCESSING CONDUCTED BY THE
EACH THIRD PARTY;

(5) THE CATEGORIES OF PERSONAL DATA, INCLUDING SENSITIVE
DATA, THAT THE CONTROLLER SHARES WITH THIRD PARTIES; AND

(6) AN ACTIVE E–MAIL ADDRESS OR OTHER ONLINE MECHANISM
THAT A CONSUMER MAY USE TO CONTACT THE CONTROLLER.

(E) (1) IF A CONTROLLER SELLS PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD PARTIES OR
PROCESSES PERSONAL DATA FOR TARGETED ADVERTISING OR FOR THE PURPOSES
OF PROFILING THE CONSUMER IN FURTHERANCE OF DECISIONS THAT PRODUCE
LEGAL OR SIMILARLY SIGNIFICANT EFFECTS, THE CONTROLLER SHALL CLEARLY
AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSE THE SALE OR PROCESSING, AS WELL AS THE
MANNER IN WHICH A CONSUMER MAY EXERCISE THE RIGHT TO OPT OUT OF THE
SALE OR PROCESSING.

(2) THE DISCLOSURE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL BE PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED, AND USE CLEAR, EASY TO
UNDERSTAND, AND UNAMBIGUOUS LANGUAGE, TO STATE WHETHER THE
CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA WILL BE SOLD OR SHARED WITH A THIRD PARTY.

(F) (1) THE PRIVACY NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL ESTABLISH ONE OR MORE SECURE AND RELIABLE METHODS FOR A
CONSUMER TO SUBMIT A REQUEST TO EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE THAT TAKE INTO ACCOUNT:

(I) THE WAYS IN WHICH CONSUMERS NORMALLY INTERACT
WITH THE CONTROLLER;

(II) THE NEED FOR SECURE AND RELIABLE COMMUNICATION
OF CONSUMER REQUESTS; AND

(III) THE ABILITY OF THE CONTROLLER TO VERIFY THE
IDENTITY OF A CONSUMER MAKING THE REQUEST.

(2) (I) A CONTROLLER MAY NOT REQUIRE A CONSUMER TO
CREATE A NEW ACCOUNT IN ORDER TO EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A CONTROLLER MAY REQUIRE A CONSUMER TO USE AN
EXISTING ACCOUNT TO EXERCISE A CONSUMER RIGHT.

(3) A CONTROLLER MAY UTILIZE THE FOLLOWING METHODS TO
SATISFY PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) PROVIDING A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS LINK ON THE
CONTROLLER’S WEBSITE TO A WEBPAGE THAT ALLOWS A CONSUMER, OR AN
AUTHORIZED AGENT OF THE CONSUMER, TO OPT OUT OF THE TARGETED
ADVERTISING OR THE SALE OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA; OR

(II) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, ALLOWING A CONSUMER
TO OPT OUT OF ANY PROCESSING OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA FOR THE
PURPOSES OF TARGETED ADVERTISING, OR ANY SALE OF PERSONAL DATA,
THROUGH AN OPT–OUT PREFERENCE SIGNAL SENT, WITH THE CONSUMER’S
CONSENT, BY A PLATFORM, TECHNOLOGY, OR MECHANISM TO THE CONTROLLER
INDICATING THE CONSUMER’S INTENT TO OPT OUT OF THE PROCESSING OR SALE.

(4) A PLATFORM, TECHNOLOGY, OR MECHANISM USED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) BE CONSUMER–FRIENDLY AND EASY TO USE BY THE
AVERAGE CONSUMER;

(II) USE CLEAR, EASY TO UNDERSTAND, AND UNAMBIGUOUS
LANGUAGE;

(III) BE AS CONSISTENT AS POSSIBLE WITH ANY OTHER SIMILAR
PLATFORM, TECHNOLOGY, OR MECHANISM REQUIRED BY ANY FEDERAL OR STATE
LAW OR REGULATION;

(IV) ENABLE THE CONTROLLER TO REASONABLY DETERMINE
WHETHER THE CONSUMER:

1. IS A RESIDENT OF THE STATE; AND

2. HAS MADE A LEGITIMATE REQUEST TO OPT OUT OF
ANY SALE OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA OR TARGETED ADVERTISING; AND

(V) REQUIRE A CONSUMER TO MAKE AN AFFIRMATIVE,
UNAMBIGUOUS, AND VOLUNTARY CHOICE IN ORDER TO OPT OUT OF ANY
PROCESSING OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA.

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(5) A PLATFORM, TECHNOLOGY, OR MECHANISM USED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT:

(I) UNFAIRLY DISADVANTAGE ANOTHER CONTROLLER; OR

(II) USE A DEFAULT SETTING TO OPT A CONSUMER OUT OF ANY
PROCESSING OF THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA.

(G) (1) IF A CONSUMER’S DECISION TO OPT OUT OF THE PROCESSING OF
THE CONSUMER’S PERSONAL DATA FOR THE PURPOSES OF TARGETED
ADVERTISING, OR THE SALE OF PERSONAL DATA THROUGH AN OPT–OUT
PREFERENCE SIGNAL SENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (F)(3) OF THIS
SECTION CONFLICTS WITH THE CONSUMER’S EXISTING CONTROLLER–SPECIFIC
PRIVACY SETTING OR THE CONSUMER’S VOLUNTARY PARTICIPATION IN A
CONTROLLER’S BONA FIDE LOYALTY, REWARDS, PREMIUM FEATURES, DISCOUNTS,
OR CLUB CARD PROGRAM, THE CONTROLLER MAY NOTIFY THE CONSUMER OF A
CONFLICT AND PROVIDE THE CHOICE TO CONFIRM CONTROLLER–SPECIFIC
PRIVACY SETTINGS OR PARTICIPATION IN A PROGRAM LISTED IN THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) A CONTROLLER THAT RECOGNIZES SIGNALS APPROVED BY
OTHER STATES SHALL BE CONSIDERED IN COMPLIANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

14–4608.

(A) (1) IF A CONTROLLER USES A PROCESSOR TO PROCESS THE
PERSONAL DATA OF CONSUMERS, THE CONTROLLER AND THE PROCESSOR SHALL
ENTER INTO A CONTRACT THAT GOVERNS THE PROCESSOR’S DATA PROCESSING
PROCEDURES WITH RESPECT TO PROCESSING PERFORMED ON BEHALF OF THE
CONTROLLER.

(2) THE CONTRACT SHALL BE BINDING AND CLEARLY SET FORTH
INSTRUCTIONS FOR:

(I) PROCESSING INSTRUCTIONS FOR PROCESSING DATA;

(II) THE NATURE AND PURPOSE OF PROCESSING;

(III) THE TYPE OF DATA SUBJECT TO PROCESSING;

(IV) THE DURATION OF PROCESSING; AND

(V) THE RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF BOTH PARTIES.

(3) THE CONTRACT SHALL REQUIRE THAT THE PROCESSOR:
– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) ENSURE THAT EACH PERSON PROCESSING PERSONAL DATA
IS SUBJECT TO A DUTY OF CONFIDENTIALITY WITH RESPECT TO THE PERSONAL
DATA;

(II) ESTABLISH, IMPLEMENT, AND MAINTAIN REASONABLE
ADMINISTRATIVE, TECHNICAL, AND PHYSICAL DATA SECURITY PRACTICES TO
PROTECT THE CONFIDENTIALITY, INTEGRITY, AND ACCESSIBILITY OF PERSONAL
DATA, CONSIDERING THE VOLUME AND NATURE OF THE PERSONAL DATA;

(III) STOP PROCESSING DATA ON REQUEST BY THE CONTROLLER
MADE IN ACCORDANCE WITH A CONSUMER’S AUTHENTICATED REQUEST;

(IV) AT THE CONTROLLER’S DIRECTION, DELETE OR RETURN
ALL PERSONAL DATA TO THE CONTROLLER AS REQUESTED AT THE END OF THE
PROVISION OF SERVICE, UNLESS RETENTION OF THE PERSONAL DATA IS REQUIRED
BY LAW;

(V) ON THE REASONABLE REQUEST OF THE CONTROLLER,
MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE CONTROLLER ALL INFORMATION IN THE PROCESSOR’S
POSSESSION NECESSARY TO DEMONSTRATE THE PROCESSOR’S COMPLIANCE WITH
THE OBLIGATIONS IN THIS SUBTITLE;

(VI) AFTER PROVIDING THE CONTROLLER AN OPPORTUNITY TO
OBJECT, ENGAGE A SUBCONTRACTOR TO ASSIST WITH PROCESSING PERSONAL DATA
ON THE CONTROLLER’S BEHALF ONLY IN ACCORDANCE WITH A WRITTEN CONTRACT
THAT REQUIRES THE SUBCONTRACTOR TO MEET THE PROCESSOR’S OBLIGATIONS
REGARDING THE PERSONAL DATA UNDER THE PROCESSOR’S CONTRACT WITH THE
CONTROLLER; AND

(VII) ALLOW AND COOPERATE WITH REASONABLE ASSESSMENTS
BY THE CONTROLLER, THE CONTROLLER’S DESIGNATED ASSESSOR, OR A QUALIFIED
AND INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR ARRANGED FOR BY THE PROCESSOR TO ASSESS THE
PROCESSOR’S POLICIES AND TECHNICAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEASURES IN
SUPPORT OF THE OBLIGATIONS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) (I) ON REQUEST, THE PROCESSOR SHALL PROVIDE A REPORT
OF AN ASSESSMENT REQUIRED BY PARAGRAPH (3)(V) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO THE
CONTROLLER.

(II) AN ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
PARAGRAPH (3)(V) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CONDUCTED USING AN

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

APPROPRIATE AND ACCEPTED CONTROL STANDARD OR FRAMEWORK AND
ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE FOR THE ASSESSMENTS.

(B) (1) IF A CONTROLLER USES A PROCESSOR TO PROCESS THE
PERSONAL DATA OF CONSUMERS, THE CONTROLLER SHALL PROVIDE THE
PROCESSOR WITH INSTRUCTIONS ON HOW TO PROCESS PERSONAL DATA.

(2) A PROCESSOR SHALL:

(I) (1) ADHERE TO THE CONTRACT AND INSTRUCTIONS OF A
CONTROLLER;

(II) (2) ASSIST THE CONTROLLER IN MEETING THE
CONTROLLER’S OBLIGATIONS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING, CONSIDERING
~~THE~~ ~~NATURE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PROCESSING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
~~PROCESSOR:~~

1. (I) BY APPROPRIATE TECHNICAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
MEASURES AS MUCH AS REASONABLY PRACTICABLE TO FULFILL THE
CONTROLLER’S OBLIGATION TO RESPOND TO CONSUMER RIGHTS REQUESTS,
CONSIDERING THE NATURE OF PROCESSING AND THE INFORMATION AVAILABLE TO
THE PROCESSOR; AND

2. (II) BY ASSISTING THE CONTROLLER IN MEETING THE
CONTROLLER’S OBLIGATIONS IN RELATION TO THE SECURITY OF PROCESSING THE
PERSONAL DATA AND IN RELATION TO THE NOTIFICATION OF A BREACH OF THE
SECURITY OF A SYSTEM, AS DEFINED IN § 14–3504 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(III) (3) PROVIDE NECESSARY INFORMATION TO ENABLE THE
CONTROLLER TO CONDUCT AND DOCUMENT DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENTS.

(C) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO RELIEVE A
CONTROLLER OR A PROCESSOR FROM THE LIABILITIES IMPOSED ON THE
CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR BY VIRTUE OF THE CONTROLLER’S OR PROCESSOR’S
ROLE IN THE PROCESSING RELATIONSHIP IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(D) (1) THE DETERMINATION OF WHETHER A PERSON IS ACTING AS A
CONTROLLER OR A PROCESSOR WITH RESPECT TO A SPECIFIC PROCESSING OF DATA
IS A FACT–BASED DETERMINATION THAT DEPENDS ON THE CONTEXT IN WHICH
PERSONAL DATA IS BEING PROCESSED.

(2) A PERSON IS CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTROLLER IF THE PERSON:

– 29 –
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) IS NOT LIMITED IN THE PERSON’S PROCESSING OF SPECIFIC
PERSONAL DATA IN ACCORDANCE WITH A CONTROLLER’S INSTRUCTIONS; OR

(II) FAILS TO ADHERE TO A CONTROLLER’S INSTRUCTIONS
WITH RESPECT TO A SPECIFIC PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA.

(3) A PROCESSOR THAT CONTINUES TO ADHERE TO A CONTROLLER’S
INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT TO A SPECIFIC PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA
REMAINS A PROCESSOR.

(4) IF A PROCESSOR OR THIRD PARTY BEGINS, ALONE OR JOINTLY
WITH OTHERS, DETERMINING THE PURPOSES AND MEANS OF THE PROCESSING OF
PERSONAL DATA, THE PROCESSOR:

(I) IS A CONTROLLER WITH RESPECT TO THE PROCESSING; AND

(II) MAY BE SUBJECT TO AN ENFORCEMENT ACTION UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO ALTER A
CONTROLLER’S OBLIGATION TO LIMIT A PERSON’S PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA
OR TO TAKE STEPS TO ENSURE THAT A PROCESSOR ADHERES TO THE CONTROLLER’S
INSTRUCTIONS.

14–4609.

(A) IF A THIRD PARTY USES OR SHARES A CONSUMER’S INFORMATION IN A
MANNER INCONSISTENT WITH PROMISES MADE TO THE CONSUMER AT THE TIME OF
COLLECTION OF THE INFORMATION, THE THIRD PARTY SHALL PROVIDE AN
AFFECTED CONSUMER WITH NOTICE OF THE NEW OR CHANGED PRACTICE BEFORE
IMPLEMENTING THE NEW OR CHANGED PRACTICE.

(B) THE NOTICE PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL BE PROVIDED IN A MANNER AND AT A TIME REASONABLY CALCULATED TO
ALLOW A CONSUMER TO EXERCISE THE RIGHTS PROVIDED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

14–4610.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROCESSING ACTIVITIES THAT PRESENT A
HEIGHTENED RISK OF HARM TO A CONSUMER” MEANS:

(1) THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA FOR THE PURPOSES OF
TARGETED ADVERTISING;

– 30 –
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(2) THE SALE OF PERSONAL DATA;

(3) THE PROCESSING OF SENSITIVE DATA; AND

(4) THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA FOR THE PURPOSES OF
PROFILING, IN WHICH THE PROFILING PRESENTS A REASONABLY FORESEEABLE
RISK OF:

(I) UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TREATMENT OF A
CONSUMER;

(II) HAVING AN UNLAWFUL DISPARATE IMPACT ON A
CONSUMER;

(III) FINANCIAL, PHYSICAL, OR REPUTATIONAL INJURY TO A
CONSUMER;

(IV) A PHYSICAL OR OTHER INTRUSION ON THE SOLITUDE OR
SECLUSION OR THE PRIVATE AFFAIRS OR CONCERNS OF A CONSUMER IN WHICH THE
INTRUSION WOULD BE OFFENSIVE TO A REASONABLE PERSON; OR

(V) OTHER SUBSTANTIAL INJURY TO A CONSUMER.

(B) A CONTROLLER SHALL CONDUCT AND DOCUMENT, ON A REGULAR
BASIS, A DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT FOR EACH OF THE CONTROLLER’S
PROCESSING ACTIVITIES THAT PRESENT A HEIGHTENED RISK OF HARM TO A
CONSUMER, INCLUDING AN ASSESSMENT FOR EACH ALGORITHM THAT IS USED.

(C) (1) A DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THIS SECTION SHALL IDENTIFY AND WEIGH THE BENEFITS THAT MAY FLOW
DIRECTLY AND INDIRECTLY FROM THE PROCESSING TO THE CONTROLLER, THE
CONSUMER, OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES, AND THE PUBLIC AGAINST:

(I) THE POTENTIAL RISKS TO THE RIGHTS OF THE CONSUMER
ASSOCIATED WITH THE PROCESSING AS MITIGATED BY SAFEGUARDS THAT MAY BE
EMPLOYED BY THE CONTROLLER TO REDUCE THESE RISKS; AND

(II) THE NECESSITY AND PROPORTIONALITY OF PROCESSING IN
RELATION TO THE STATED PURPOSE OF THE PROCESSING.

(2) THE CONTROLLER SHALL FACTOR INTO A DATA PROTECTION
ASSESSMENT:

– 31 –
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE USE OF DE–IDENTIFIED DATA;

(II) THE REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF CONSUMERS;

(III) THE CONTEXT OF THE PROCESSING; AND

(IV) THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CONTROLLER AND THE
CONSUMER WHOSE PERSONAL DATA WILL BE PROCESSED.

(D) (1) THE DIVISION MAY REQUIRE THAT A CONTROLLER MAKE
AVAILABLE TO THE DIVISION A DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT THAT IS RELEVANT
TO AN INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED BY THE DIVISION.

(2) (I) THE DIVISION MAY EVALUATE A DATA PROTECTION
ASSESSMENT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH THE RESPONSIBILITIES ESTABLISHED IN THIS
SUBTITLE.

(II) A CONTROLLER’S DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT MAY BE
USED IN AN ACTION TO ENFORCE THIS SUBTITLE.

(3) A DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT IS CONFIDENTIAL AND IS
EXEMPT FROM DISCLOSURE UNDER THE FEDERAL FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
OR THE PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT.

(E) A SINGLE DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT MAY ADDRESS A
COMPARABLE SET OF PROCESSING OPERATIONS THAT INCLUDE SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES.

(F) IF A CONTROLLER CONDUCTS A DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT FOR
THE PURPOSE OF COMPLYING WITH ANOTHER APPLICABLE LAW OR REGULATION,
THE DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT SHALL BE CONSIDERED TO SATISFY THE
REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED IN THIS SECTION IF THE DATA PROTECTION
ASSESSMENT IS REASONABLY SIMILAR IN SCOPE AND EFFECT TO THE DATA
PROTECTION ASSESSMENT THAT WOULD OTHERWISE BE CONDUCTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(G) TO THE EXTENT THAT ANY INFORMATION CONTAINED IN A DATA
PROTECTION ASSESSMENT DISCLOSED TO THE DIVISION INCLUDES INFORMATION
SUBJECT TO ATTORNEY–CLIENT PRIVILEGE OR WORK PRODUCT PROTECTION, THE
DISCLOSURE MAY NOT CONSTITUTE A WAIVER OF THAT PRIVILEGE OR PROTECTION.

(H) A DATA PROTECTION ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED UNDER THIS SECTION:

– 32 –
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(1) SHALL APPLY TO PROCESSING ACTIVITIES THAT OCCUR ON OR
AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2025; AND

(2) IS NOT REQUIRED FOR PROCESSING ACTIVITIES THAT OCCUR
BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025.

14–4611.

(A) NOTHING IN THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A
CONTROLLER OR A PROCESSOR TO:

(1) RE–IDENTIFY DE–IDENTIFIED DATA;

(2) MAINTAIN DATA IN AN IDENTIFIABLE FORM; OR

(3) COLLECT, OBTAIN, RETAIN, OR ACCESS ANY DATA OR
TECHNOLOGY IN ORDER TO BE CAPABLE OF ASSOCIATING AN AUTHENTICATED
CONSUMER REQUEST WITH PERSONAL DATA.

(B) NOTHING IN THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A
CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR TO COMPLY WITH AN AUTHENTICATED CONSUMER
RIGHTS REQUEST IF THE CONTROLLER:

(1) IS NOT REASONABLY CAPABLE OF ASSOCIATING THE REQUEST
WITH THE PERSONAL DATA OR IT WOULD BE UNREASONABLY BURDENSOME FOR THE
CONTROLLER TO ASSOCIATE THE REQUEST WITH THE PERSONAL DATA;

(2) DOES NOT USE THE PERSONAL DATA TO RECOGNIZE OR RESPOND
TO THE SPECIFIC CONSUMER WHO IS THE SUBJECT OF THE PERSONAL DATA OR
ASSOCIATE THE PERSONAL DATA WITH OTHER PERSONAL DATA ABOUT THE SAME
SPECIFIC CONSUMER; AND

(3) DOES NOT SELL THE PERSONAL DATA TO A THIRD PARTY OR
OTHERWISE VOLUNTARILY DISCLOSE THE PERSONAL DATA TO A THIRD PARTY
OTHER THAN A PROCESSOR, EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE ALLOWED IN THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) (1) A CONTROLLER THAT DISCLOSES DE–IDENTIFIED DATA SHALL:

(I) EXERCISE REASONABLE OVERSIGHT TO MONITOR
COMPLIANCE WITH ANY CONTRACTUAL COMMITMENTS TO WHICH THE
DE–IDENTIFIED DATA IS SUBJECT; AND

(II) TAKE APPROPRIATE STEPS TO ADDRESS ANY BREACHES OF
ANY CONTRACTUAL COMMITMENTS.
– 33 –
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE DETERMINATION OF WHETHER OVERSIGHT IS REASONABLE
AND WHETHER APPROPRIATE STEPS WERE TAKEN IN ACCORDANCE WITH
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL TAKE INTO ACCOUNT WHETHER THE
DISCLOSED DATA INCLUDES DATA THAT WOULD BE CONSIDERED SENSITIVE DATA IF
THE DATA WERE RE–IDENTIFIED.

14–4612.

(A) NOTHING IN THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CONSTRUED TO RESTRICT A
CONTROLLER’S OR PROCESSOR’S ABILITY TO:

(1) COMPLY WITH FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAWS OR
REGULATIONS;

(2) COMPLY WITH A CIVIL, CRIMINAL, OR REGULATORY INQUIRY,
INVESTIGATION, SUBPOENA, OR SUMMONS BY A FEDERAL, STATE, LOCAL, OR OTHER
GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITY;

(3) COOPERATE WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES CONCERNING
CONDUCT OR ACTIVITY THAT THE CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR REASONABLY AND
IN GOOD FAITH BELIEVES MAY VIOLATE FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAWS OR
REGULATIONS;

(4) INVESTIGATE, ESTABLISH, EXERCISE, PREPARE FOR, OR DEFEND
A LEGAL CLAIM;

(5) PROVIDE A PRODUCT OR SERVICE SPECIFICALLY REQUESTED BY
A CONSUMER;

(6) PERFORM UNDER A CONTRACT TO WHICH A CONSUMER IS A
PARTY, INCLUDING FULFILLING THE TERMS OF A WRITTEN WARRANTY;

(7) TAKE STEPS AT THE REQUEST OF A CONSUMER BEFORE
ENTERING INTO A CONTRACT;

(8) TAKE IMMEDIATE STEPS TO PROTECT AN INTEREST THAT IS
ESSENTIAL FOR THE LIFE OR PHYSICAL SAFETY OF A CONSUMER OR ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL AND WHEN THE PROCESSING CANNOT BE MANIFESTLY BASED ON
ANOTHER LEGAL BASIS;

(9) PREVENT, DETECT, PROTECT AGAINST, INVESTIGATE,
PROSECUTE THOSE RESPONSIBLE, OR OTHERWISE RESPOND TO A SECURITY

– 34 –
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

INCIDENT, IDENTITY THEFT, FRAUD, HARASSMENT, MALICIOUS OR DECEPTIVE
ACTIVITY, OR ANY OTHER TYPE OF ILLEGAL ACTIVITY;

(10) PRESERVE THE INTEGRITY OR SECURITY OF SYSTEMS; OR

(11) ASSIST ANOTHER CONTROLLER, PROCESSOR, OR THIRD PARTY
WITH AN OBLIGATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN OBLIGATION
REQUIRED UNDER § 14–4611 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) AN OBLIGATION IMPOSED ON A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT RESTRICT A CONTROLLER’S OR PROCESSOR’S
ABILITY TO COLLECT, USE, OR RETAIN PERSONAL DATA FOR INTERNAL USE TO:

(I) EFFECTUATE A PRODUCT RECALL;

(II) IDENTIFY AND REPAIR TECHNICAL ERRORS THAT IMPAIR
EXISTING OR INTENDED FUNCTIONALITY; OR

(III) PERFORM INTERNAL OPERATIONS THAT ARE:

1. REASONABLY ALIGNED WITH THE EXPECTATIONS OF
THE CONSUMER OR CAN BE REASONABLY ANTICIPATED BASED ON THE CONSUMER’S
EXISTING RELATIONSHIP WITH THE CONTROLLER; OR

2. OTHERWISE COMPATIBLE WITH PROCESSING DATA IN
FURTHERANCE OF:

A. THE PROVISION OF A PRODUCT OR SERVICE
SPECIFICALLY REQUESTED BY A CONSUMER; OR

B. THE PERFORMANCE OF A CONTRACT TO WHICH THE
CONSUMER IS A PARTY.

(C) (1) AN OBLIGATION IMPOSED ON A CONTROLLER OR A PROCESSOR
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY WHEN COMPLIANCE BY THE CONTROLLER
OR PROCESSOR WITH THE SUBTITLE WOULD VIOLATE AN EVIDENTIARY PRIVILEGE
UNDER STATE LAW.

(2) NOTHING IN THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CONSTRUED TO PREVENT A
CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR FROM PROVIDING PERSONAL DATA CONCERNING A
CONSUMER TO A PERSON COVERED BY AN EVIDENTIARY PRIVILEGE UNDER STATE
LAW AS PART OF A PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATION.
– 35 –
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (1) A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR THAT DISCLOSES PERSONAL DATA
TO A PROCESSOR OR A THIRD–PARTY CONTROLLER IN COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
SUBTITLE IS NOT IN VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE IF THE PROCESSOR OR
THIRD–PARTY CONTROLLER THAT RECEIVES THE PERSONAL DATA VIOLATES THIS
SUBTITLE AND:

(I) AT THE TIME THE DISCLOSING CONTROLLER OR
PROCESSOR DISCLOSED THE PERSONAL DATA, THE DISCLOSING CONTROLLER OR
PROCESSOR DID NOT HAVE ACTUAL KNOWLEDGE THAT THE RECEIVING PROCESSOR
OR THIRD–PARTY CONTROLLER WOULD VIOLATE THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) THE DISCLOSING CONTROLLER WAS, AND REMAINED, IN
COMPLIANCE WITH ITS OBLIGATIONS AS THE DISCLOSER OF THE PERSONAL DATA.

(2) A THIRD–PARTY CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR THAT RECEIVES
PERSONAL DATA FROM A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR IN COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
SUBTITLE IS NOT IN VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR THE INDEPENDENT
MISCONDUCT OF THE CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR FROM WHICH THE
THIRD–PARTY CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR RECEIVED THE PERSONAL DATA.

(E) NOTHING IN THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE CONSTRUED TO:

(1) IMPOSE AN OBLIGATION ON A CONTROLLER OR A PROCESSOR
THAT ADVERSELY AFFECTS THE RIGHTS OR FREEDOMS OF ANY PERSON, INCLUDING
THE RIGHTS OF A PERSON TO FREEDOM OF SPEECH OR FREEDOM OF THE PRESS AS
GUARANTEED IN THE FIRST AMENDMENT TO THE U.S. CONSTITUTION; OR

(2) APPLY TO A PERSON’S PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA DURING
THE PERSON’S PERSONAL OR HOUSEHOLD ACTIVITIES.

(F) IF A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR PROCESSES PERSONAL DATA IN
ACCORDANCE WITH AN EXEMPTION UNDER THIS SECTION, THE CONTROLLER OR
PROCESSOR SHALL DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PROCESSING:

(1) QUALIFIES FOR AN EXEMPTION; AND

(2) COMPLIES WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS
SECTION.

(G) PERSONAL DATA PROCESSED BY A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION:

– 36 –
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

(1) SHALL BE SUBJECT TO REASONABLE ADMINISTRATIVE,
TECHNICAL, AND PHYSICAL MEASURES TO:

(I) PROTECT THE CONFIDENTIALITY, INTEGRITY, AND
ACCESSIBILITY OF THE PERSONAL DATA; AND

(II) REDUCE REASONABLY FORESEEABLE RISKS OF HARM TO
CONSUMERS RELATING TO THE COLLECTION, USE, OR RETENTION OF PERSONAL
DATA; AND

(2) MAY BE PROCESSED TO THE EXTENT THAT THE PROCESSING IS:

(I) REASONABLY NECESSARY AND PROPORTIONATE TO THE
PURPOSES LISTED IN THIS SECTION; AND

(II) ADEQUATE, RELEVANT, AND LIMITED TO WHAT IS
NECESSARY IN RELATION TO THE SPECIFIC PURPOSES LISTED IN THIS SECTION.

(H) A PERSON THAT PROCESSES PERSONAL DATA FOR A PURPOSE
EXPRESSLY IDENTIFIED IN THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED A CONTROLLER
SOLELY BASED ON THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA.

14–4613.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A
VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE IS:

(1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN
THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(2) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS
CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE, EXCEPT FOR § 13–408 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT PREVENT A CONSUMER FROM PURSUING ANY
OTHER REMEDY PROVIDED BY LAW.

14–4614.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO AN ENFORCEMENT ACTION UNDER § 14–4613
OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR AN ALLEGED VIOLATION THAT OCCURS ON OR BEFORE APRIL
1, 2027.

– 37 –
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
Ch. 454 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) BEFORE INITIATING ANY ACTION UNDER § 14–4613 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
THE DIVISION MAY ISSUE A NOTICE OF VIOLATION TO THE CONTROLLER OR
PROCESSOR IF THE DIVISION DETERMINES THAT A CURE IS POSSIBLE.

(C) (1) IF THE DIVISION ISSUES A NOTICE OF VIOLATION UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR SHALL HAVE
AT LEAST 60 DAYS TO CURE THE VIOLATION AFTER RECEIPT OF THE NOTICE.

(2) IF THE CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR FAILS TO CURE THE
VIOLATION WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD SPECIFIED BY THE DIVISION, THE DIVISION
MAY BRING AN ENFORCEMENT ACTION UNDER § 14–4613 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) IN DETERMINING WHETHER TO GRANT A CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR
AN OPPORTUNITY TO CURE AN ALLEGED VIOLATION, THE DIVISION MAY CONSIDER
THE FOLLOWING FACTORS:

(1) THE NUMBER OF VIOLATIONS;

(2) THE SIZE AND COMPLEXITY OF THE CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR;

(3) THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE CONTROLLER’S OR
PROCESSOR’S PROCESSING ACTIVITIES;

(4) THE LIKELIHOOD OF INJURY TO THE PUBLIC;

(5) THE SAFETY OF PERSONS OR PROPERTY;

(6) WHETHER THE ALLEGED VIOLATION WAS LIKELY CAUSED BY
HUMAN OR TECHNICAL ERROR; AND

(7) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE CONTROLLER OR PROCESSOR HAS
VIOLATED THIS SUBTITLE OR SIMILAR LAWS IN THE PAST.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That § 14–4612 of the Commercial
Law Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall be construed to apply only
prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or application to
any personal data processing activities before April 1, ~~2025~~ 2026.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other
application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared severable.

– 38 –
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 454

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, ~~2024~~ 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 39 –
END OF PAGE 39