START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 552 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 552 
(Delegate Boyce) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Automated Enforcement Citations and Notices - Mailing 
Addresses 
 
 
This bill requires that citations and notices issued as a result of automated enforcement 
under the Maryland Vehicle Law be sent to (1) the current mailing address on file with the 
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) or (2) the current residential address on file with 
MVA if a mailing address is unavailable.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MVA can make necessary reprogramming changes with existing resources. 
State revenues are likely not materially affected.      
  
Local Effect:  Local finances and operations are likely not materially affected.     
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law currently authorizes the use of various automated enforcement 
systems, including traffic control signal monitoring systems, speed monitoring systems, 
school bus monitoring systems, vehicle height monitoring systems, and work zone speed 
control systems. 
 
Although the exact requirements for issuing citations vary by the type of automated 
enforcement system, generally, the relevant agency must mail to the owner liable for a 
violation a citation that includes specified information, including the name and address of 
the registered owner of the vehicle.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 552/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 672 (Senator Charles) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford, Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2