START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1006

Chapter 1006

(House Bill 588)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Municipal Golf Course License

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Frederick County
to issue a municipal golf course license to an official of the City of Frederick
designated by the Mayor of the City of Frederick; authorizing the Board to transfer
the license to a different city official designated by the Mayor under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Frederick
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–1009.3
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

20–1009.3.

(a) This section applies only to a municipal golf course that is operated by a
municipal golf course manager or a golf course manager under a management agreement
with the City of Frederick.

(b) There is a Class M–G beer, wine, and liquor license for use at a municipal golf
course.

(c) The Board may issue the license to:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1006 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) a manager of a municipal golf course; OR

(2) AN OFFICIAL OF THE CITY OF FREDERICK DESIGNATED BY THE
MAYOR OF THE CITY OF FREDERICK.

(d) The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for
on–premises consumption on the land and in the facilities used for golfing purposes.

(e) (1) The license holder may designate an agent to sell beer, wine, and liquor
at the municipal golf course.

(2) The agent shall be considered the vendor for purposes of collecting and
remitting the sales and use tax.

(f) On request of the City of Frederick, the Board may transfer the license to a
different:

(1) golf course manager; OR

(2) CITY OFFICIAL DESIGNATED BY THE MAYOR.

(g) The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor during the hours and days
as set out for a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license under § 20–2005 of this title.

(h) The annual license fee is $600.

(i) The Board shall adopt regulations to carry out this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2