START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 548 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 548 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Task Force on Responsible Use of Natural Psychedelic Substances 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force on Responsible Use of Natural Psychedelic Substances. 
The Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) must provide staff for the task force, and 
the Governor must designate the chair of the task force. Members of the task force may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the standard 
State travel regulations. The task force must report its findings and recommendations to 
the Governor and the General Assembly by July 31, 2025. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024, and terminates December 31, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MCA can provide staff support to the task force using existing budgeted 
resources. Any expense reimbursements for members of the task force are assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must generally (1) study the use of natural psychedelic 
substances (including naturally derived psilocybin, psilocin, dimethyltryptamine, 
mescaline, and any other substance the task force determines to be a natural psychedelic 
substance, but not including peyote), as specified; (2) make recommendations regarding 
any changes to State law, policy, and practices needed to create a Maryland Natural 
Psychedelic Substance Access Program, as specified; and (3) make recommendations to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 548/ Page 2 
transition from criminalizing conduct involving natural psychedelic substances, as 
specified. The task force may consult with experts and stakeholders in conducting its 
duties. 
 
Current Law:  Controlled dangerous substances (CDS) are listed on one of five schedules 
(Schedules I through V) set forth in statute depending on their potential for abuse and 
acceptance for medical use. Under the federal Controlled Substances Act, for a drug or 
substance to be classified as Schedule I, the following findings must be made:  (1) the 
substance has a high potential for abuse; (2) the drug or other substance has no currently 
accepted medical use in the United States; and (3) there is a lack of accepted safety for use 
of the drug or other substance under medical supervision. 
 
The following substances are listed as Schedule I CDS:  psilocybin and psilocin (better 
known as “magic mushrooms”); dimethyltryptamine (better known as DMT); and 
mescaline (a constituent of “peyote” cacti). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1009 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Cannabis Administration; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2