START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 501 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 501 
(Delegate Fennell, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Charter Counties - Enforcement of Local Laws 
 
 
This bill increases, from $1,000 to $5,000, the maximum civil and criminal fines that may 
be imposed by a charter county for the enforcement of an ordinance, a resolution, a bylaw, 
or a regulation adopted by the county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The revenues of a charter county may increase to the extent that a county 
utilizes its authority under the bill to increase civil and criminal fines. Local government 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
  
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Title 10, Subtitle 2 of the Local Government Article describes the express 
powers granted to charter counties under Article XI-A, § 2 of the Maryland Constitution. 
The Express Powers Act grants powers to charter counties to legislate and administer over 
local affairs. 
 
A charter county may provide for the enforcement of an ordinance, a resolution, a bylaw, 
or a regulation through the imposition of civil and criminal fines and penalties. Civil fines 
up to $1,000 and criminal fines and penalties up to $1,000 and imprisonment not exceeding 
six months may be imposed for any offense. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 501/ Page 2 
Additionally, charter counties may enforce: 
 
 
local fair housing laws by fines or penalties that do not exceed the fines or penalties 
provided in the federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988 for enforcement of 
similar federal fair housing laws; and 
 
local employment discrimination or public accommodations discrimination laws by 
civil fines not exceeding $5,000 for any offense. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill increases, from $1,000 to $5,000, the maximum civil and 
criminal fines that may be imposed by a charter county under Local Government Article 
§ 10-202, as specified. Judiciary advises that the increased criminal fines, under the bill, 
for a violation of Local Government Article § 10-202 may result in an increase in jury 
trials. However, no significant fiscal or operational impact is anticipated. 
 
Local Revenues:  The bill’s impact on revenues of a charter county depends on whether 
or not a county increases its civil and/or criminal fines under the bill. The Maryland 
Association of Counties advises the legislation could potentially increase revenues for 
charter counties that levy these fines, as the maximum fines for specified civil and criminal 
offenses increase by $4,000 each under the bill. The extent of any impact cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 522 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2