START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

Chapter 123

(House Bill 599)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Community Investment Corporation – Establishment
(Housing and Community Development Financing Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Community Investment Corporation as an
independent unit to make investments in certain low–income communities;
authorizing the Board of Directors of the Corporation to establish a certain advisory
committee and requiring the Corporation to establish an investment committee;
requiring the Corporation to apply for an allocation of federal new markets tax
credits; establishing eligible uses of money of the Corporation; expanding the eligible
uses of the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund to include grants
and loans for ~~debt~~ ~~payments~~ ~~and~~ ~~for~~ credit enhancement for certain projects; and
generally relating to community investment, the Maryland Community Investment
Corporation, and the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 9–101(a), (c), and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–1101 through 10–1123 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 11.
Maryland Community Investment Corporation”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–508
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

9–101.

(a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) “Department” means the Department of Commerce.

(e) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Commerce.

SUBTITLE 11. MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT CORPORATION.

10–1101.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE CORPORATION.

(C) “CORPORATION” MEANS THE MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT
CORPORATION.

(D) “INVESTMENT COMMITTEE” MEANS A COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY THE
BOARD TO ADVISE ON AND APPROVE INVESTMENTS AS REQUIRED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE.

(E) “LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY” MEANS A COMMUNITY IN THE STATE THAT
MEETS THE DEFINITION OF A LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY UNDER 26 U.S.C. §
45D(E)(1).

(F) “NEW MARKETS TAX CREDIT” MEANS THE FEDERAL TAX CREDITS
ALLOCATED UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 45D.

(G) “QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY” MEANS AN ENTITY
THAT MEETS THE DEFINITION OF A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY
UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 45D(C)(1).

(H) “QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT” MEANS AN INVESTMENT THAT
MEETS THE DEFINITION OF A QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENT UNDER 26 U.S.C. §
45D(B)(1).

10–1102.

THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE LIBERALLY CONSTRUED TO CARRY OUT THE
PURPOSES OF THIS SUBTITLE.

10–1103.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT CORPORATION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(B) THE CORPORATION IS A BODY POLITIC AND CORPORATE AND IS AN
INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE.

10–1104.

THE PURPOSES OF THE CORPORATION ARE TO:

(1) DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY TO QUALIFY AS A QUALIFIED
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY;

(2) APPLY TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY TO BE
DESIGNATED AS A QUALIFIED COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY;

(3) APPLY TO THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY FOR AN
ALLOCATION OF NEW MARKETS TAX CREDITS;

(4) RECEIVE, MAKE, AND FACILITATE QUALIFIED EQUITY
INVESTMENTS AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AVAILABLE IN LOW–INCOME
COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE;

(5) ALLOCATE ANY NEW MARKETS TAX CREDITS RECEIVED BY THE
CORPORATION;

(6) COORDINATE WITH OTHER QUALIFIED COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT ENTITIES IN THE STATE TO HELP ENSURE THAT LOW–INCOME
COMMUNITIES ARE RECEIVING THE MAXIMUM BENEFIT OF QUALIFIED EQUITY
INVESTMENTS IN THE STATE;

(7) MAKE INVESTMENTS AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AVAILABLE TO
LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE FROM THE CORPORATION’S MONEY OR
FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE;

(8) BUILD A LONG–TERM FINANCIAL CAPACITY AND SUSTAINED
INVESTMENT IN LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE;

(9) COORDINATE AND CREATE PATHWAYS TO FOLLOW–ON FINANCING
IN THE STATE; AND

(10) FOSTER INCLUSIVE AND DIVERSE ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND
INNOVATION THROUGHOUT THE STATE, WHICH MAY INCLUDE INITIATIVES TO RAISE
AWARENESS OF PROGRAMS TO ASSIST LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES.

10–1105.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) A BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL MANAGE THE CORPORATION AND ITS
UNITS AND EXERCISE ITS CORPORATE POWERS.

(B) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) THE COMPTROLLER OR THE COMPTROLLER’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE SECRETARY OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(3) THE SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE SECRETARY OF PLANNING OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE SECRETARY OF GENERAL SERVICES OR THE SECRETARY’S
DESIGNEE; AND

(6) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH
THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE:

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF NONPROFIT ENTITIES IN THE
STATE; AND

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES.

(C) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD SHALL RESIDE IN THE STATE.

(D) IN MAKING APPOINTMENTS TO THE BOARD, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
CONSIDER:

(1) DIVERSITY; AND

(2) ALL GEOGRAPHIC REGIONS OF THE STATE.

(E) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD;
BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(F) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(2) THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS
REQUIRED BY THE TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS ON OCTOBER 1, 2024.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, AN APPOINTED MEMBER CONTINUES TO
SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
ONLY FOR THE REST OF THE TERM AND UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND
QUALIFIES.

(G) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED BY
THE GOVERNOR UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(6) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE AN APPOINTED MEMBER FOR
INCOMPETENCE, MISCONDUCT, OR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE
POSITION.

10–1106.

THE BOARD SHALL ELECT A CHAIR FROM AMONG ITS MEMBERS.

10–1107.

(A) FOUR MEMBERS OF THE BOARD ARE A QUORUM.

(B) A MAJORITY VOTE OF THE MEMBERS PRESENT AT A MEETING HAVING A
QUORUM IS NEEDED FOR THE CORPORATION TO ACT.

10–1108.

(A) THE BOARD SHALL APPOINT MEMBERS OF AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(B) THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE SHALL BE COMPOSED
OF MEMBERS WHO ARE:

(1) REQUIRED FOR THE CORPORATION TO QUALIFY AS A QUALIFIED
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ENTITY UNDER 26 U.S.C. § 45D(C)(1);

(2) RESIDENTS OF THE STATE; AND

(3) GEOGRAPHICALLY REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LOCATIONS OF
LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT POLICIES ESTABLISHING THE
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(D) THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE SHALL PRIORITIZE PROJECTS OWNED OR
OPERATED BY ENTITIES THAT HAVE THEIR PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE
STATE WHEN ADVISING ON INVESTMENTS MADE IN LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES IN
THE STATE.

10–1109.

(A) THE CORPORATION SHALL ESTABLISH AN INVESTMENT COMMITTEE.

(B) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS ESTABLISHING:

(1) THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INVESTMENT COMMITTEE; AND

(2) THE PROCEDURES FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF INVESTMENT
COMMITTEE MEMBERS.

(C) MEMBERS OF THE INVESTMENT COMMITTEE SHALL BE
GEOGRAPHICALLY REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LOCATIONS OF LOW–INCOME
COMMUNITIES IN THE STATE.

(D) THE INVESTMENT COMMITTEE SHALL PRIORITIZE PROJECTS THAT ARE
OWNED OR OPERATED BY ENTITIES THAT HAVE THEIR PRINCIPAL PLACE OF
BUSINESS IN THE STATE.

10–1110.

(A) THE CORPORATION SHALL EMPLOY A CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.

(B) THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER SHALL HAVE EXPERIENCE WITH AND
POSSESS QUALIFICATIONS RELEVANT TO THE ACTIVITIES AND PURPOSES OF THE
CORPORATION.

(C) THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER MAY NOT BE A MEMBER OF THE
BOARD.

10–1111.

(A) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL IS THE LEGAL ADVISOR TO THE
CORPORATION.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(B) (1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL ASSIGN TO THE CORPORATION
ASSISTANT ATTORNEYS GENERAL.

(2) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL DESIGNATE ONE ASSISTANT
ATTORNEY GENERAL AS GENERAL COUNSEL TO THE CORPORATION.

(3) (I) THE GENERAL COUNSEL TO THE CORPORATION SHALL:

1. ADVISE THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE
BOARD, AND ANY OTHER OFFICIAL OF THE CORPORATION AS REQUESTED BY THE
CORPORATION;

2. SUPERVISE THE OTHER ASSISTANT ATTORNEYS
GENERAL ASSIGNED TO THE CORPORATION; AND

3. PERFORM FOR THE CORPORATION OTHER DUTIES
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ASSIGNS.

(II) THE GENERAL COUNSEL MAY NOT PROVIDE ANY OTHER
ASSISTANCE NOT SPECIFIED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(C) WITH THE APPROVAL OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, THE CORPORATION
MAY RETAIN ANY ADDITIONAL NECESSARY ATTORNEYS.

10–1112.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MAY PROVIDE STAFF TO THE CORPORATION AS
PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(B) THE CORPORATION MAY RETAIN ANY NECESSARY ACCOUNTANTS,
ENGINEERS, FINANCIAL ADVISORS, OR OTHER CONSULTANTS.

10–1113.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (B), (C), AND (E) OF THIS
SECTION, THE CORPORATION IS EXEMPT FROM TITLE 10 AND DIVISION II OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(B) THE CORPORATION IS SUBJECT TO THE PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT.

(C) THE BOARD, THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CORPORATION,
MEMBERS OF THE INVESTMENT COMMITTEE, AND MEMBERS OF ANY ADVISORY
COMMITTEE APPOINTED ARE SUBJECT TO THE PUBLIC ETHICS LAW.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CORPORATION ARE NOT
SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF DIVISION I OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND
PENSIONS ARTICLE THAT GOVERN THE STATE PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.

(E) (1) THE CORPORATION, THE BOARD, AND EMPLOYEES OF THE
CORPORATION ARE SUBJECT TO TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE BOARD, THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE
CORPORATION, THE MEMBERS OF THE INVESTMENT COMMITTEE, AND THE
MEMBERS OF ANY ADVISORY COMMITTEE APPOINTED SHALL DISCLOSE TO THE
STATE ETHICS COMMISSION WHETHER THEY ARE EMPLOYED BY OR HAVE A
FINANCIAL INTEREST IN AN ENTITY THAT CURRENTLY HAS OR WILL APPLY FOR
FUNDS OR AN INVESTMENT IN A PROGRAM ADMINISTERED BY THE CORPORATION.

(F) FOR PURPOSES OF THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT, A PROJECT SITE VISIT OR
EDUCATIONAL FIELD TOUR MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED A MEETING OF THE
CORPORATION IF NO ORGANIZATIONAL BUSINESS IS CONDUCTED.

10–1114.

(A) THE CORPORATION SHALL ESTABLISH A SYSTEM OF FINANCIAL
ACCOUNTING, CONTROLS, AUDITS, AND REPORTS.

(B) THE FISCAL YEAR OF THE CORPORATION BEGINS ON JULY 1 AND ENDS
ON THE FOLLOWING JUNE 30.

10–1115.

(A) THE CORPORATION MAY CREATE AND ADMINISTER THE ACCOUNTS
THAT IT REQUIRES.

(B) THE CORPORATION SHALL DEPOSIT ITS MONEY INTO A STATE OR
NATIONAL BANK OR A FEDERALLY INSURED SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION THAT
HAS A TOTAL PAID–IN CAPITAL OF AT LEAST $1,000,000.

(C) THE CORPORATION MAY DESIGNATE THE TRUST DEPARTMENT OF A
STATE BANK, NATIONAL BANK, OR SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION AS A
DEPOSITORY TO RECEIVE SECURITIES THAT THE CORPORATION OWNS OR
ACQUIRES.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(D) UNLESS AN AGREEMENT OR COVENANT BETWEEN THE CORPORATION
AND THE HOLDERS OF ITS OBLIGATIONS LIMITS CLASSES OF INVESTMENTS, THE
CORPORATION MAY INVEST ITS MONEY IN BONDS OR OTHER OBLIGATIONS OF, OR
GUARANTEED AS TO PRINCIPAL AND INTEREST BY, THE UNITED STATES, THE
STATE, OR A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT.

(E) ANY INCOME FROM THE INVESTMENT OF MONEY OF THE CORPORATION,
INCLUDING INVESTMENT PROCEEDS AND EARNINGS, SHALL BE CREDITED TO THE
CORPORATION.

10–1116.

THE CORPORATION MAY:

(1) ADOPT BYLAWS FOR THE CONDUCT OF ITS BUSINESS;

(2) ADOPT A SEAL;

(3) MAINTAIN OFFICES AT A PLACE IT DESIGNATES IN THE STATE;

(4) ACCEPT LOANS, GRANTS, INVESTMENTS, OR ASSISTANCE OF ANY
KIND FROM THE FEDERAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT, A LOCAL GOVERNMENT, A
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY, OR A PRIVATE SOURCE;

(5) ENTER INTO CONTRACTS AND OTHER LEGAL INSTRUMENTS;

(6) SUE OR BE SUED;

(7) ACQUIRE, PURCHASE, HOLD, LEASE AS LESSEE, AND USE:

(I) A FRANCHISE, PATENT, OR LICENSE;

(II) ANY REAL, PERSONAL, MIXED, TANGIBLE, OR INTANGIBLE
PROPERTY; OR

(III) AN INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY LISTED IN THIS ITEM;

(8) SELL, LEASE AS LESSOR, TRANSFER, LICENSE, ASSIGN, OR
DISPOSE OF PROPERTY OR A PROPERTY INTEREST THAT IT ACQUIRES;

(9) FIX AND COLLECT RATES, RENTALS, FEES, ROYALTIES, AND
CHARGES FOR SERVICES AND RESOURCES IT PROVIDES OR MAKES AVAILABLE;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(10) CREATE, OWN, CONTROL, OR BE A MEMBER OF A CORPORATION,
LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, PARTNERSHIP, OR OTHER ENTITY, WHETHER
OPERATED FOR PROFIT OR NOT FOR PROFIT;

(11) EXERCISE POWER USUALLY POSSESSED BY A PRIVATE
CORPORATION IN PERFORMING SIMILAR FUNCTIONS UNLESS TO DO SO WOULD
CONFLICT WITH STATE LAW; AND

(12) DO ALL THINGS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO CARRY OUT THIS
SUBTITLE.

10–1117.

THE BOARD SHALL:

(1) DEVELOP A PUBLIC AND INTERNAL STRATEGIC PLAN THAT
INCLUDES:

(I) PERFORMANCE GOALS AND MEASURES;

(II) A MISSION STATEMENT AND CORE VALUES;

(III) AN ANALYSIS OF STRENGTHS, WEAKNESSES,
OPPORTUNITIES, AND THREATS;

(IV) ACTION PLANS; AND

(V) YEARLY AND LONG–TERM GOALS AND OBJECTIVES;

(2) REVIEW STRATEGIC PLANS AND UPDATE THE PLANS ANNUALLY
TO MEASURE PERFORMANCE;

(3) APPROVE COMPENSATION PLANS FOR THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CORPORATION;

(4) DESIGNATE A PERSON TO REVIEW AND APPROVE EXPENSE
REIMBURSEMENTS OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND EMPLOYEES OF THE
CORPORATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH STANDARDS ESTABLISHED BY THE BOARD;

(5) DESIGNATE A PERSON TO RECEIVE ETHICS COMPLAINTS AND ANY
COMPLAINTS INVOLVING THE BOARD, THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AND
EMPLOYEES OF THE CORPORATION;

(6) ESTABLISH POLICIES THAT GOVERN:

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(I) SEVERANCE PACKAGES FOR EMPLOYEES THAT
INVOLUNTARILY LEAVE EMPLOYMENT;

(II) TUITION REIMBURSEMENT AND LIMITS FOR EMPLOYEES;

(III) ELIGIBLE EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT REQUIREMENTS
THAT INCLUDE:

1. THE TYPES OF EXPENSES THAT ARE CONSIDERED
PART OF CORPORATION FUNCTIONS;

2. LIMITS ON REIMBURSEMENTS AND TIME FRAMES FOR
SUBMISSION; AND

3. ALLOWABLE TRAVEL EXPENSES INCLUDING ANY
OUT–OF–STATE TRAVEL;

(IV) THE USE OF ALL CORPORATION EQUIPMENT, PERSONAL
PROPERTY, AND REAL PROPERTY AND WHETHER ANY PROPERTY MAY BE
TRANSFERRED TO A DEPARTING EMPLOYEE; AND

(V) WHISTLEBLOWER COMPLAINTS AND PROTECTIONS FOR
THOSE FILING COMPLAINTS; AND

(7) CONDUCT AN ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF THE CHIEF
OPERATING OFFICER.

10–1118.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE
CORPORATION MAY MAKE QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENTS AND OTHER FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE AVAILABLE TO PROJECTS IN LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES IF THE
INVESTMENTS ARE MADE ON REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A WRITTEN APPLICATION
THAT CONTAINS:

(1) SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO VERIFY THAT THE PROJECT IS IN
THE STATE; AND

(2) A CERTIFICATION OF THE VERACITY OF THE INFORMATION BY AN
AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY OF THE APPLICANT.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) IN REGARD TO ANY AND ALL PROGRAMS OF THE CORPORATION, EXCEPT
AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBTITLE, THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS TO GOVERN INVESTMENTS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION THAT SPECIFY:

(1) THE TYPES OF BUSINESSES AND PROJECTS IN WHICH AN
INVESTMENT MAY BE MADE;

(2) THE BASIC STANDARDS AN ENTERPRISE SHALL MEET TO QUALIFY
FOR AN INVESTMENT;

(3) THE AMOUNT OF MONEY AVAILABLE FOR INVESTMENT;

(4) THE INVESTMENT POLICY STATEMENT OF THE CORPORATION
THAT DESCRIBES THE PROCEDURES, CRITERIA, INVESTMENT PHILOSOPHY, AND
GUIDELINES FOR HOW THE CORPORATION’S INVESTMENT DECISIONS WILL BE
MADE; AND

(5) A PROCESS FOR CONSIDERING WHETHER INVESTMENTS HELP TO
FOSTER INCLUSIVE AND DIVERSE ENTREPRENEURSHIP, INCLUDING THE
CORPORATION’S SUPPORT FOR LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES.

(C) THE CORPORATION MAY MAKE INVESTMENTS UNDER AN AGREEMENT
WITH THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR THE STATE RETIREMENT AND PENSION
SYSTEM UNDER § 21–123.2 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS ARTICLE.

10–1119.

THE CORPORATION MAY:

(1) PROVIDE EQUITY INVESTMENT TO A QUALIFIED BUSINESS OR
PROJECT IN THE FORM OF A GRANT, LOAN, TAX CREDIT ALLOCATION, OR ANY OTHER
FORM OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO CARRY OUT ITS PURPOSES;

(2) ACQUIRE, DEVELOP, IMPROVE, MANAGE, MARKET, LICENSE,
SUBLICENSE, MAINTAIN, LEASE AS LESSOR OR LESSEE, OR OPERATE A PROJECT IN
THE STATE TO CARRY OUT ITS PURPOSES; AND

(3) ACQUIRE, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, FROM A PERSON OR
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION, BY PURCHASE, GIFT, OR DEVISE, ANY PROPERTY,
RIGHTS–OF–WAY, FRANCHISES, EASEMENTS, OR OTHER INTERESTS IN LAND,
INCLUDING SUBMERGED LAND AND RIPARIAN RIGHTS:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(I) AS NECESSARY OR CONVENIENT TO IMPROVE OR OPERATE
A PROJECT TO CARRY OUT ITS PURPOSES; AND

(II) ON THE TERMS AND AT THE PRICES THAT THE
CORPORATION CONSIDERS REASONABLE.

10–1120.

A DEBT, CLAIM, OBLIGATION, OR LIABILITY OF THE CORPORATION OR ANY
SUBSIDIARY IS NOT:

(1) A DEBT, CLAIM, OBLIGATION, OR LIABILITY OF THE STATE, A UNIT
OR INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE, OR OF A STATE OFFICER OR STATE
EMPLOYEE; OR

(2) A PLEDGE OF THE CREDIT OF THE STATE.

10–1121.

THE CORPORATION IS EXEMPT FROM STATE AND LOCAL TAXES.

10–1122.

(A) THE BOOKS AND RECORDS OF THE CORPORATION ARE SUBJECT TO
AUDIT:

(1) AT ANY TIME BY THE STATE; AND

(2) EACH YEAR BY AN INDEPENDENT AUDITOR, INCLUDING AN
ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENT UNDER GENERALLY ACCEPTED ACCOUNTING
PRINCIPLES.

(B) THE CORPORATION SHALL CONDUCT AN INDEPENDENT ASSESSMENT
OF THE BOARD AND THE CORPORATION EVERY 5 YEARS.

10–1123.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE CORPORATION
SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE:

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) A COMPLETE OPERATING AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT
COVERING THE CORPORATION’S OPERATIONS;

(II) A SUMMARY OF THE CORPORATION’S ACTIVITIES DURING
THE PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR;

(III) INFORMATION ON ALL SALARIES AND ANY INCENTIVES
APPROVED BY THE BOARD FOR CORPORATION EMPLOYEES;

(IV) INFORMATION ON OUTREACH, TRAINING, MENTORSHIP,
SUPPORT, AND INVESTMENT IN MINORITY– AND WOMEN–OWNED QUALIFIED
BUSINESSES, INCLUDING SUPPORT FOR MARKETING BY THE MARYLAND SMALL
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT FINANCING AUTHORITY;

(V) INFORMATION ON ENTITIES THAT HAVE CURRENT
INVESTMENTS AND ENTITIES THAT RECEIVED FUNDING OR INVESTMENTS IN THE
CURRENT YEAR ON:

1. THE PRINCIPAL BUSINESS OPERATIONS;

2. THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN THE STATE AND THE
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES OUTSIDE THE STATE;

3. THE CAPITAL OR OTHER INVESTMENTS MADE IN THE
STATE; AND

4. THE PROPOSED AND ACTUAL JOB CREATION OR
CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN THE STATE AS A RESULT OF THE INVESTMENT OR
SUPPORT;

(VI) INFORMATION ON THE CREATION OF AND APPOINTMENTS
MADE TO AN ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ADVISORY
COMMITTEE AND MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE; AND

(VII) THE POLICIES OF THE BOARD AND ANY CHANGES TO
EXISTING POLICIES.

(B) (1) ON A QUARTERLY BASIS, THE CORPORATION SHALL REPORT TO
THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE JOINT AUDIT AND EVALUATION COMMITTEE AND THE GENERAL
ASSEMBLY.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE A LIST OF THE BUSINESSES AND PROJECTS RECEIVING SUPPORT THROUGH
PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE CORPORATION, INCLUDING THOSE RECEIVING
INVESTMENTS MADE UNDER § 21–123.2 OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND PENSIONS
ARTICLE.

(3) THE LIST OF BUSINESSES AND PROJECTS RECEIVING SUPPORT
SHALL INCLUDE FOR EACH:

(I) THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN THE STATE;

(II) THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES OUTSIDE THE STATE;

(III) THE CAPITAL OR OTHER INVESTMENTS MADE IN THE STATE;
AND

(IV) PROPOSED JOB CREATION OR CAPITAL INVESTMENT IN THE
STATE AS A RESULT OF THE INVESTMENT OR SUPPORT.

(C) THE CORPORATION SHALL PUBLISH ANNUAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS,
AUDIT REPORTS, AND POLICIES OF THE BOARD VISIBLY ON ITS WEBSITE.

Article – Housing and Community Development

4–508.

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth
Impact Fund.

(b) There is a Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund.

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to provide grants and loans to assist in
predevelopment activities, including interior and exterior demolition, land assembly,
architecture and engineering, [and] site development, DEBT PAYMENTS, AND CREDIT
ENHANCEMENT for revitalization projects in designated areas of the State.

(d) The Department shall administer the Fund.

(e) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(f) The Fund consists of:

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 123 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

(2) repayments of loans made from the Fund;

(3) interest earnings of the Fund; and

(4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(g) (1) The Fund may be used only to provide grants and loans to government
agencies and community development organizations for interior and exterior demolition,
land assembly, architecture and engineering, [and] site development, DEBT PAYMENTS,
AND CREDIT ENHANCEMENT for revitalization projects in an area designated as:

(i) a Sustainable Community; or

(ii) a qualified opportunity zone designated under § 1400Z–1 of the
Internal Revenue Code in Allegany County, Garrett County, Somerset County, or Wicomico
County.

(2) (i) For fiscal years 2017 through 2019, to be eligible for a grant or
loan from the Fund, a government agency or community development organization shall
provide evidence of a matching fund that is equal to $1 for every $4 in State funding that
the agency or organization is applying for from the Fund.

(ii) The matching fund required under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph may include:

1. money from the federal government, local government, or
any other public or private source;

2. real property;

3. in–kind contributions; and

4. funds expended before the date the grant or loan is
awarded.

(3) For fiscal year 2020 and each fiscal year thereafter, to be eligible for a
grant or loan from the Fund, a government agency or community development organization
is not required to provide evidence of a matching fund.

(4) The Department shall award grants and loans from the Fund on a
competitive basis.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 123

(h) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(i) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

(j) (1) For fiscal year 2018, the Governor shall include in the annual budget
bill or capital budget bill an appropriation of $25,625,000 from general funds or the
proceeds from the sale of State general obligation bonds to the Fund, which shall be
allocated as follows:

(i) $22,125,000 for projects in Baltimore City; and

(ii) $3,500,000 for projects throughout the State.

(2) For fiscal year 2019, the Governor shall include in the annual budget
bill or capital budget bill an appropriation of $28,500,000 from general funds or the
proceeds from the sale of State general obligation bonds to the Fund, which shall be
allocated as follows:

(i) $25,000,000 for projects in Baltimore City; and

(ii) $3,500,000 for projects throughout the State.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17