START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 557 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 557 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Sales and Use Tax Exemption - Aircraft Parts and Equipment - Repeal of 
Reporting Requirement and Extension of Sunset 
 
 
This bill extends, from June 30, 2025, to June 30, 2030, the termination date of Chapter 638 
of 2020, which exempted the sale of specified aircraft parts and equipment from the State 
sales and use tax. The bill also repeals a specified reporting requirement. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and special fund revenues continue to decrease through 
FY 2030. The amount of the decrease depends on the cost of exempt materials and parts 
used to repair or maintain aircraft and the amount sold each year. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Small businesses involved in the repair and 
maintenance of aircraft may benefit due to more competitive pricing as the State sales and 
use tax rate for materials and parts will remain comparable to the sales and use tax rates in 
surrounding states. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 638 provided an exemption from the State sales and use tax for 
the sale of materials, parts, or equipment used to repair, maintain, or upgrade aircraft or the 
avionics systems of aircraft if installed on an aircraft that has (1) a maximum gross takeoff 
weight of less than 12,500 pounds or (2) a maximum gross takeoff weight of 12,500 pounds 
or more and is primarily used in interstate or foreign commerce. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 557/ Page 2 
Chapter 638 required the Comptroller to report to the General Assembly by December 31 
of each year on (1) the amount of sales and use tax revenue lost from the exemption and 
(2) any change to the number of aviation technicians employed in the State as a result of 
the exemption. 
 
A copy of the report, submitted in January 2022, can be found here. 
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $5.9 billion in fiscal 2024 and $6.1 billion in fiscal 2025, 
according to the December 2023 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax 
rates in surrounding states and the District of Columbia.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks; 14.95% for transient 
accommodations; 18% for motor vehicle parking in commercial 
lots 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
* An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, Patrick, and 
Pittsylvania counties and the City of Danville; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in James City County, York County, 
and Williamsburg (Historic Triangle). The sales and use tax rate for food and personal hygiene products 
decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 557/ Page 3 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) the following percentage of 
the remaining sales and use tax revenues: 
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out-of-state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund and special fund revenues continue to decrease through 
fiscal 2030. The amount of the decrease depends on the cost of exempt materials and parts 
used to repair or maintain aircraft and the amount sold each year. Based on the most recent 
report prepared by the Comptroller’s Office, specific information on the revenue loss 
resulting from the tax exemption cannot be provided. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 574 (Senator Corderman, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3