START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 522 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 522 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Schools - Student Telehealth Appointments - State Guidelines, Policies, 
and Access 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), by December 31, 2024, to develop State guidelines for 
school health services regarding the availability for student participation in telehealth 
appointments during the school day on the premises of public middle and high schools. In 
developing the guidelines, MSDE and MDH must consult with a broad range of 
stakeholders and consider operational, legal, and financial issues. The State Board of 
Education must adopt the State guidelines as developed by MSDE and MDH, and, before 
the start of the 2025-2026 school year, each local board of education must adopt and 
implement a policy in accordance with the State guidelines. Each local board must ensure 
that the local school system publishes the student telehealth policy in the student handbook 
and makes school personnel aware of student telehealth policy objectives and 
requirements. On request, MSDE must provide technical assistance to local boards to 
establish telehealth policies. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE general fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2025 only for 
contractual support, as discussed below. MSDE can provide technical assistance to local 
boards to establish telehealth policies with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease=  
 
Local Effect:  Local boards of education can adopt and implement policies in accordance 
with MSDE and MDH guidelines using existing budgeted resources; local school systems 
may face operational challenges, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 522/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Telehealth” means a mode of delivering health care services through the 
use of telecommunications technologies by a health care practitioner to a patient at a 
different physical location than the health care practitioner. 
 
MSDE and MDH must consult with a broad range of stakeholders, including (1) local 
school systems; (2) middle and high school principals; (3) school nurses, other 
school-based health and behavioral health providers, and other support personnel; 
(4) health care providers of various practice areas; (5) parents; and (6) the Maryland 
Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports.  
 
In developing the guidelines, MSDE and MDH must consider operational, legal, and 
financial issues, including:   
 
 
equity and prioritization of access; 
 
student and parental rights and responsibilities, including student privacy, informed 
consent, parental consent, and communications with parents; 
 
school system rights and responsibilities;  
 
the role and responsibilities of health care providers providing telehealth services, 
including informed consent, collection of medical history and insurance 
information, follow-up care, and patient communications; 
 
the role and responsibilities of school nurses and other school-based health, 
behavioral health, and other support personnel; 
 
the role of the student health plan; 
 
telehealth services related to a student’s individualized education program or 
Section 504 plan; 
 
protocols to provide in-person support if telehealth appointments create a challenge 
to a student returning to the classroom, especially relating to mental health 
counseling or treatment; 
 
protocols for missed instruction due to standing or consistently scheduled 
appointments; 
 
operational issues, including coordination of services, approval and verification of 
appointments (including appointments without parental knowledge or consent), 
school resource allocation, and the use of treatment space; 
 
school system, parent, and health care provider liability; 
 
health insurance, including Medicaid; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 522/ Page 3 
 
the feasibility of designating a school building space that is private and safe to allow 
for confidential conversation between a health care provider and a student, has 
Internet access, includes at least one seating option with a flat surface and a nearby 
electrical outlet to accommodate placement of a laptop device, and is not a bathroom 
or closet; and 
 
any other issues determined to be relevant by MSDE, MDH, or a stakeholder. 
 
The bill may not be construed to (1) require a school to construct an addition to or a new 
space in a school building to provide a private space to comply with the student telehealth 
policy or (2) alter the responsibilities of a health care provider regarding the disclosure of 
medical records under current law, including the authority to disclose a medical record in 
the case of an emergency. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 15 and 16 of 2020 authorize a health care practitioner to establish 
a practitioner-patient relationship through either a synchronous telehealth interaction or an 
asynchronous telehealth interaction, if the health care practitioner (1) verifies the identity 
of the patient receiving health care services through telehealth; (2) discloses to the patient 
the health care practitioner’s name, contact information, and the type of health occupation 
license held by the health care practitioner; and (3) obtains oral or written consent from the 
patient (or the patient’s parent or guardian if required). 
 
A health care practitioner must perform a clinical evaluation (which can be through a 
synchronous or an asynchronous telehealth interaction) that is appropriate for the patient 
and the condition with which the patient presents before providing treatment or issuing a 
prescription through telehealth. 
 
The Acts prohibit regulations adopted by a health occupations board from establishing a 
separate standard of care for telehealth and specify that such regulations must allow for the 
establishment of a practitioner-patient relationship through a synchronous or an 
asynchronous telehealth interaction provided by a health care practitioner who is 
complying with the health care practitioner’s standard of care. 
 
School-based health centers (SBHCs) are health centers located in a school or on a school 
campus that provide on-site comprehensive preventive and primary health services. 
Services may also include behavioral health, oral health, ancillary, and supportive services. 
Chapter 384 of 2021 expanded the authorization of SBHCs to provide telehealth services. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that it has limited staff with appropriate expertise to 
consult with stakeholders as required under the bill. Therefore, general fund expenditures 
increase by $100,000 in fiscal 2025 only to retain contractual services to coordinate 
stakeholder engagement, conduct research, facilitate meetings, and develop final materials 
for the State telehealth guidelines by December 31, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 522/ Page 4 
MDH similarly advises that the department requires additional resources to engage 
stakeholders in the creation of guidelines – specifically, one part-time contractual nursing 
program consultant in fiscal 2025 only at a total cost of $39,865 (for a six-month period as 
the guidelines must be developed by December 31, 2024). However, the Department of 
Legislative Services advises that, since MSDE plans to contract for additional support to 
engage stakeholders in the completion of guidelines, MDH can rely on the contractual 
support hired by MSDE such that any impact to MDH is likely absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local boards can adopt and implement telehealth policies with 
existing budgeted resources. Likewise, local school systems can make school personnel 
aware of the new telehealth policies developed by the board with existing budgeted 
resources. However, depending on the guidelines adopted by MSDE and MDH relating to 
the feasibility of designating space for telehealth appointments, local school systems may 
face operational challenges in designating an appropriate space and implementing 
measures to ensure the safety and privacy of students participating in a telehealth 
appointment. 
 
For example, Anne Arundel County Public Schools, Baltimore County Public Schools, and 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools advise that significant expenditures may be incurred to 
hire additional staff to supervise students on telehealth calls and prevent situations where 
a student enters crisis during a telehealth appointment. However, school systems can likely 
meet the bill’s requirement to implement a policy in accordance with MSDE and MDH 
guidelines without hiring additional staff, and any staffing costs are dependent on the exact 
guidelines established by MSDE and MDH and policies subsequently adopted by each 
local board. 
 
Further, Baltimore City Public Schools and St. Mary’s County Public Schools advise that, 
while the bill does not require the construction of additional space for telehealth 
appointments, some schools may be particularly challenged in finding sufficient and 
appropriate space for telehealth appointments. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 878 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 492 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 522/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Department of Health; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Baltimore 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Anne 
Arundel 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5