START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 588 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 588 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Municipal Golf Course License 
 
   
This bill authorizes the Frederick County Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
Class M-G beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license to an official of the City of Frederick 
designated by the Mayor of the City of Frederick. The board may transfer the license to a 
different city official designated by the Mayor, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Frederick County finances or operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Frederick County Board of License Commissioners may issue the 
Class M-G BWL license for use at a municipal golf course operated by a municipal golf 
course manager or a golf course manager under a management agreement with the 
City of Frederick. The board may issue the license to a manger of a municipal golf course. 
The license authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises 
consumption on the land and in the facilities used for golfing purposes on (1) Monday 
through Saturday from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day and (2) Sunday from 
6:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. the following day or for a specific event the board has approved, 
subject to hours set by the board. The annual license fee is $600.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 588/ Page 2 
The Class M-G license holder may designate an agent to sell beer, wine, and liquor at the 
municipal golf course, and the agent must collect and remit the sales and use tax. On request 
of the City of Frederick, the board may transfer the Class M-G license to a different golf 
course manager.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 560 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; City of Frederick; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2