START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 625 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 625 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Board of Trustees - Responsibilities and 
Duties 
 
 
This bill (1) expands the list of topics included in the annual training that each member of 
the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) must complete 
and (2) requires the SRPS board to satisfy an existing requirement to provide specified 
annual statements to members on its website or through a secure access portal, as described 
below. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect governmental finances, but SRPS may 
experience administrative efficiencies due to the bill. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, members of the SRPS board must 
complete at least eight hours of investment and fiduciary training each year, including 
training on fiduciary conduct and board governance. Under the bill, they must complete at 
least eight hours of educational training, including on existing topics and on investments, 
retirement administration and operations, and other relevant topics that the chair of the 
board deems appropriate. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 625/ Page 2 
Under current law, the SRPS board annually must provide each member and retiree with 
a statement that:   
 
 
summarizes information in the system’s Annual Comprehensive Financial Report 
(CFR); 
 
shows (1) the member’s vested benefits or the benefits the member will be entitled 
to on vesting; (2) the date when the member was or will be vested; and (3) the 
present value of any annuity; and 
 
explains any material modifications to the applicable State system during the period 
covered by the annual report. 
 
Under the bill, the SRPS board must provide the CFR summary and the explanation of 
system changes on its website and the annual statement of member/retiree benefits through 
a secure access portal. 
 
In February 2020, SRPS launched MySRPS, an online portal that allows members and 
retirees to access their accounts, including information on vested benefits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 489 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2