START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 607 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 607 
(Delegate Harris) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Community Colleges - Maryland Community College Promise Scholarship - 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Community College Promise (MCCP) 
Scholarship by specifying that certain applicants are exempt from the GPA and Free 
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) submission requirements in current law 
(unless enrolling in a noncredit program for which a federal Pell Grant may be used). The 
exemption includes individuals who (1) enroll in a noncredit vocational certificate 
program; (2) enroll in a sequence of noncredit courses leading to licensure or certification; 
or (3) participate in a registered apprenticeship program. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility does not require additional spending; however, without 
additional spending, more individuals may be added to the waiting list or fewer 
scholarships may be awarded. Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) can alter 
eligibility criteria on applications using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local community colleges can alter eligibility criteria on applications using 
existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 554 of 2018 created a scholarship program in Maryland to provide 
tuition assistance to students who attend a community college in the State and who meet 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 607/ Page 2 
specified eligibility criteria, including an income limitation. The MCCP Scholarship is a 
last-dollar award that is applied after State or federal non-loan aid to eligible recipients has 
been applied; an award cannot exceed $5,000 annually or actual tuition, whichever is less. 
Chapter 464 of 2019 specified that, if a local community college offers a Promise 
Scholarship, an award from the statewide program must be applied before the award of the 
local scholarship. 
 
To be eligible for the program, a student must:   
 
 
be eligible for in-state tuition and enroll at a community college, in an eligible 
program; 
 
have earned at least a 2.3 high school GPA at the end of the first semester or the end 
of the senior year unless the applicant graduated from high school five or more years 
before the date of application, for an initial award, or have earned at least a 2.5 GPA 
while enrolled at a community college in the State; and 
 
have a gross adjusted income of $100,000 or less if the applicant is single or resides 
in a single-parent household or of $150,000 or less if married or resides in a 
two-parent household. 
 
An applicant also has to attend the applicant’s local community college, except under 
specified circumstances. In addition, an applicant must either enroll as a candidate for a 
vocational certificate, a certificate, or an associate degree or participate in a registered 
apprenticeship at a community college in the State. Further, an applicant must enroll in at 
least six credits per semester or a sequence of credit or noncredit courses that leads to 
licensure or certificate. 
 
The Governor must appropriate at least $15.0 million annually for the program. Under 
Chapter 634 of 2023, each community college in the State, rather than the Maryland Higher 
Education Commission (MHEC) Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA), is 
responsible for the selection and distribution of awards. Nevertheless, annually, OSFA 
must allocate MCCP Scholarship funding to each community college in the State based on 
the proportion of Pell Grant-eligible students at each community college. If a community 
college does not award all funding allocated, the community college must distribute the 
remaining funding to other community colleges to make MCCP Scholarship awards in the 
award year. 
 
Initial awards are made based on greatest demonstrated need. Eligible applicants who do 
not receive an award are placed on a waiting list. For non-initial awards, priority must be 
given to prior-year recipients who remain eligible for the program as well as all eligible 
students who are enrolled in either at least 12 credits per semester or a sequence of credit 
or noncredit courses that lead to licensure or certification. Then, if any funds remain to be 
allocated, students enrolled in at least 6 credits per semester may be awarded scholarships. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 607/ Page 3 
A recipient can receive the award for a total of three years. To maintain the award, the 
recipient must complete 6 credits per semester or make satisfactory progress toward a 
vocational certificate and earn a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5. The recipient must meet 
the designated income requirements for the program, remain eligible for in-state tuition, 
apply annually, and continue to make satisfactory academic progress as determined by the 
community college. 
 
MHEC must contact each school counselor at each public high school in the State with 
information on the MCCP Scholarship, including eligibility, availability, and deadlines for 
the scholarship. In addition, MHEC and each community college must post this 
information in a readily accessible location on their respective websites. Finally, MHEC 
must annually report to the General Assembly on specified aspects of its implementation 
of the MCCP Scholarship, including its outreach activities. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although individuals enrolled as a candidate for vocational 
certificates, enrolled in noncredit courses leading to licensure or certification, or 
participating in registered degree apprenticeships are already eligible for an award under 
current law, the bill relaxes GPA and FAFSA requirements for individuals enrolled in such 
programs. Nevertheless, these expanded eligibility provisions do not alter the overall level 
of State funding for the program, which is set in the State operating budget subject to the 
requirement that the Governor must appropriate at least $15.0 million annually. The 
fiscal 2023 budget and the fiscal 2024 budget both included a $15.0 million appropriation 
for the program; in fiscal 2023, the program made approximately $9.6 million in awards to 
3,043 recipients for an average award amount of approximately $3,100. To the extent that 
expanded eligibility would cause awards to exceed the available $15.0 million in funding 
(such as is in the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced), more individuals may be added to the 
waiting list or fewer scholarships may be awarded. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not alter the funding amount or distribution processes 
for MCCP scholarships. Each community college (including State-funded BCCC) 
continues to receive a portion of the MCCP allocation in the State budget based on a 
calculation of each college’s Pell Grant-eligible population. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1141 (Senators Lewis Young and Rosapepe) - Rules. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 607/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City 
Community College; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 19, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4