START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 666 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 666 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program - State Supplement 
 
   
This bill lowers the age, from 62 to 60, that an individual must be for their household to 
receive the State supplemental benefit under the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance 
Program (SNAP). The bill also increases the supplemental benefit to ensure that 
households with an individual age 60 or older receive a total benefit of $50 per month.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $4.2 million in FY 2025 to expand 
eligibility and increase the minimum benefit for the State supplemental benefit; the 
FY 2025 budget includes $4.2 million in general funds, contingent on enactment of 
House Bill 666 or Senate Bill 35 of 2024. General fund expenditures increase by an 
estimated $3.9 million annually beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
4.2 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
3.9 
Net Effect 
($4.2) 
($3.9) 
($3.9) 
($3.9) 
($3.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 666/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  SNAP is a federally funded benefit that helps low-income households 
purchase food. Program rules and requirements are issued by the federal government, while 
administrative costs are split equally between the State and federal government. 
Participants must meet income and resource requirements. The minimum federal SNAP 
benefit is $23 per month. In fiscal 2024, the average SNAP benefit provided to Maryland 
households was approximately $307 per month.  
 
Chapter 696 of 2016 established a State supplemental benefit for households with a 
member who is at least 62 years old to ensure that these households receive at least $30 per 
month. Chapter 324 of 2022 increased the benefit to ensure that these households receive 
at least $40 per month. 
 
The federal Families First Coronavirus Response Act of 2020 authorized an increase in 
SNAP benefits to the maximum allowable level for a household size (known as emergency 
allotments). This action significantly increased average benefits per case in Maryland and 
effectively suspended the State supplemental benefit from April 2020 through 
February 2023. The Department of Human Services (DHS) resumed issuing the State 
supplemental benefit in March 2023.  
 
In December 2023, there were approximately 26,652 monthly recipients of the State 
supplemental benefit for households with a member who is at least age 62. An average 
monthly payment of $16.42 was distributed to ensure these households received a total 
benefit of $40 per month.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2025 budget includes $4.2 million in general funds for the 
SNAP supplemental benefit, contingent on enactment of House Bill 666 or Senate Bill 35 
of 2024 expanding eligibility and increasing the minimum benefit for the program. As the 
bill satisfies this contingency, general fund expenditures increase by $4.2 million in 
fiscal 2025. Funds not expended for this purpose may not be transferred by budget 
amendment or otherwise to any other purpose and must revert to the general fund.  
 
Under the bill, general fund expenditures increase to ensure that all households that include 
an individual who is at least age 60 receive a total SNAP benefit of $50 per month.  
 
DHS advises that, as of December 2023, there were approximately 29,998 households with 
a member who is at least age 60 that received a SNAP benefit of less than $50 per month. 
To ensure a total benefit of $50 per month, the State supplemental benefit would need to 
provide an average of $25.34 per month to these households at a total annual cost of 
$9.1 million.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 666/ Page 3 
The annual cost to provide the current State supplemental benefit ($40 per month) to 
households with a member who is at least age 62 is $5,252,052. Thus, the net annual cost 
to provide the State supplemental benefit to ensure 29,998 eligible households receive a 
total SNAP benefit of $50 per month is $3.9 million. Given the bill’s October 1, 2024 
effective date, the net annual cost is an estimated $2.9 million in fiscal 2025, increasing to 
$3.9 million in fiscal 2026 and thereafter. To the extent that the number of qualified 
households is higher or lower, general fund expenditures increase or decrease accordingly.  
 
As noted above, the fiscal 2025 budget includes $4.2 million in general funds for the SNAP 
supplemental benefit.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 957 and HB 456 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 35 (Senator McCray) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  U.S. Department of Agriculture; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3