START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 375

Chapter 375

(House Bill 666)

AN ACT concerning

Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program – State Supplement

FOR the purpose of ~~repealing~~ lowering the minimum age that a member of a household
must be for eligibility for a State–provided supplemental benefit under the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program; increasing the amount of the
supplemental benefit that the State must provide; and generally relating to the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 5–501
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

5–501.

(a) (1) The Department may implement a Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program in accordance with the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.

(2) The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program shall include:

(i) a Restaurant Meals Program in accordance with § 5–505 of this
subtitle; and

(ii) a Heat and Eat Program in accordance with § 5–506 of this
subtitle.

(b) The State shall bear the nonfederal portion of the administrative costs of the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program for each county.

(c) Each local department shall administer the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program:

(1) under the supervision and control of the Department; and

(2) in accordance with the regulations of the Department and federal law.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 375 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) If a household includes an individual who [is at least 62 60 years old and]
receives a federally funded benefit in an amount less than [$40] $95 $50 per month under
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, the State shall provide a supplement to
increase the total benefit to [$40] $95 $50 per month.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2