START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 630 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 630 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Service Credit 
 
 
This bill repeals provisions of State pension law that require that benefits paid to an 
individual for service credit transferred to another State or local pension system not exceed 
the benefits that would have been payable by the previous system for that credit if the 
individual retires within five years of transferring the credit. It also entitles specified 
employees of the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) to eligibility and service credit 
for periods of contractual employment with DLS under specified conditions. Finally, the 
bill corrects an incorrect reference to the member contribution rate for the Law 
Enforcement Officers’ Pension System (better known as LEOPS). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024; uncodified provisions related to service credit for DLS employees 
terminate December 31, 2024.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The purchase of service credit provisions are expected to apply only to 
two individuals and, therefore, have no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or 
contribution rates. Moreover, the payment of member contributions mitigates the 
fiscal effect. The bill otherwise conforms statute to current practice, as discussed below.     
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill conforms relevant provisions of statute to current practice, 
as discussed below.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 630/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A member of the Employees’ Pension System (EPS) is entitled to 
eligibility and service credit for periods of contractual employment if the member: 
 
 
is employed by DLS on July 1, 2024; 
 
was previously employed as a contractual employee by DLS before July 1, 2024; 
 
was employed as a contractual employee for more than five years; and 
 
has not been employed by another unit of State government after first being 
employed by DLS. 
 
Eligibility and service credit awarded under these provisions may not exceed 10 years. A 
member receiving service credit under the bill must, before retirement, pay to the State 
Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) the member contributions (and interest) that would 
have been due for the contractual period of employment. If the member does not deposit 
the member contributions, the member’s retirement allowance must be reduced by the 
actuarial equivalent of the accumulated contributions (plus interest). 
 
Current Law:  Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs the conditions 
under which members of State or local retirement and pension plans can transfer service 
credit from one system to another. It applies to all forms of service credit transfer, including 
those between State and local retirement and pension plans. Provisions in Title 37 specify 
that if an individual transfers service credit from one plan to another and then retires before 
five years have passed, the benefits paid for the transferred credit cannot exceed the 
benefits that would have been paid under the previous system (i.e., the system from which 
the member transferred credit). The bill repeals these provisions.  
 
Contractual employees are not eligible for membership in EPS and, therefore, do not accrue 
eligibility or service credit for contractual periods of employment with the State. However, 
in the year of retirement, an EPS member may purchase credit for periods of employment 
with the State for which the member is not otherwise entitled to service credit. A purchase 
of service credit may not exceed 10 years, and the member must pay to SRPS an amount 
equal to one-half of the amount necessary to fund the additional allowance.        
 
State/Local Expenditures:  The State Retirement Agency (SRA) advises that its records 
of service credit do not distinguish among sources of credit once credit has been transferred 
from one system to another. In other words, once credit transfers into a new system, it 
becomes indistinguishable in the agency’s records from credit earned in that system. As a 
result, SRA has not been able to implement these provisions, and it is not aware of any 
local retirement or pension plans that have requested data on transferred service credit from 
State plans for the purpose of implementing the provision. As a result, SRA requested that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 630/ Page 3 
the Joint Committee on Pensions (JCP) sponsor legislation to repeal these provisions, and 
JCP agreed. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 491 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3