START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

Chapter 414

(House Bill 664)

AN ACT concerning

Court Personnel – Protection of Personal Information
(Judge Andrew F. Wilkinson Judicial Security Act)

FOR the purpose of authorizing a certain protected individual or the Office of Information
Privacy in the Administrative Office of the Courts to request that a governmental
entity or person not publish personal information of the individual on the Internet,
social media, or social networks or that the governmental entity or person remove
the information from any existing publication; specifying certain procedures for the
protection of personal information of a protected individual; authorizing certain
relief for a violation of this Act; establishing a criminal penalty for publicly posting
personal information of a protected individual under certain circumstances;
establishing the Judicial Address Confidentiality Program; establishing the Task
Force to Ensure the Safety of Judicial Facilities; and generally relating to court
personnel and the protection of personal information.

BY adding to
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–2301 through 3–2304 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 23. Protected
Individuals – Protected Information”; and 3–2401 through 3–2407 to be under
the new subtitle “Subtitle 24. Protected Individuals – Judicial Address
Confidentiality Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 3–114
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Judge Andrew F. Wilkinson was appointed to the Circuit Court for
Washington County in January 2020, and served the Maryland Judiciary and the citizens
of this State with distinction until his untimely death on October 19, 2023; and

WHEREAS, On October 19, 2023, Judge Wilkinson calmly and even–handedly
presided over a divorce and custody case involving extensive testimony of abuse inflicted
on one of the litigants and her children; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

WHEREAS, Judge Wilkinson should have been able to peacefully return home to his
family in Hagerstown after having appropriately met his professional obligations; and

WHEREAS, Judge Wilkinson left the courthouse after issuing his ruling and was
shot and killed in the driveway of his personal residence by the abusive litigant over whose
case he had just presided; and

WHEREAS, Protecting the safety and security of judicial officers throughout
Maryland and the United States has become an issue of critical importance due to threats,
assaults, and murders of judicial officers and their family members; and

WHEREAS, The National Center for State Courts reports Judge Wilkinson’s murder
as the third targeted shooting of a state court judge in the last 3 years; and

WHEREAS, The United States Congress passed the Daniel Anderl Judicial Security
and Privacy Act in 2020, after an aggrieved litigant murdered U.S. District Judge Esther
Salas’s only son at her personal residence; and

WHEREAS, The General Assembly acknowledges these increasing threats to
judicial officers and seeks to ensure the protection, safety, and security of judicial officers
and their families throughout Maryland; now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

SUBTITLE 23. PROTECTED INDIVIDUALS – PROTECTED INFORMATION.

3–2301.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–1501 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(C) “OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY” MEANS THE OFFICE OF
INFORMATION PRIVACY IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE COURTS.

(D) (1) “PERSONAL INFORMATION” MEANS:

(I) A HOME ADDRESS;

(II) A HOME TELEPHONE NUMBER;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

(III) A MOBILE TELEPHONE NUMBER;

(IV) A PERSONAL E–MAIL ADDRESS;

(V) A SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER;

(VI) A DRIVER’S LICENSE NUMBER;

(VII) A FEDERAL TAX IDENTIFICATION NUMBER;

(VIII) A BANK ACCOUNT NUMBER;

(IX) A CREDIT OR DEBIT CARD NUMBER;

(X) A LICENSE PLATE NUMBER OR UNIQUE IDENTIFIER OF A
VEHICLE;

(XI) A BIRTH OR MARITAL RECORD;

(XII) A CHILD’S NAME;

(XIII) A SCHOOL OR DAYCARE;

(XIV) A PLACE OF WORSHIP; OR

(XV) A PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT OF AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED
IN SUBSECTION (E)(6) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) “PERSONAL INFORMATION” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) INFORMATION THAT HAS BEEN PUBLICLY DISCLOSED WITH
THE CONSENT OF THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL; OR

(II) INFORMATION THAT IS RELEVANT TO AND DISPLAYED AS
PART OF A NEWS STORY, COMMENTARY, AN EDITORIAL, OR ANY OTHER SPEECH ON
MATTERS OF PUBLIC CONCERN.

(E) “PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL” MEANS:

(1) A CURRENT OR RETIRED JUSTICE OR JUDGE OF A COURT
ESTABLISHED UNDER ARTICLE IV OF THE MARYLAND CONSTITUTION;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A CURRENT OR RETIRED JUSTICE OR JUDGE OF A FEDERAL
COURT, INCLUDING A U.S. BANKRUPTCY COURT, DOMICILED IN THE STATE;

(3) A CURRENT OR RETIRED MAGISTRATE APPOINTED BY A CIRCUIT
COURT OF THE STATE;

(4) A CURRENT OR RETIRED UNITED STATES MAGISTRATE JUDGE
DOMICILED IN THE STATE;

(5) A CURRENT OR RETIRED COMMISSIONER OF THE DISTRICT
COURT OF MARYLAND; OR

(6) A SPOUSE, A CHILD, OR A DEPENDENT WHO RESIDES IN THE SAME
HOUSEHOLD AS AN INDIVIDUAL DESCRIBED IN ITEMS (1) THROUGH (5) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(F) “PUBLISH” MEANS TO POST OR OTHERWISE MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE
GENERAL PUBLIC ON THE INTERNET, SOCIAL MEDIA, OR SOCIAL NETWORKS.

3–2302.

(A) A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL, OR THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY
ON BEHALF OF A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL, MAY REQUEST THAT A GOVERNMENTAL
ENTITY:

(1) NOT PUBLISH THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL
INFORMATION; OR

(2) REMOVE THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL
INFORMATION FROM ANY EXISTING PUBLICATION.

(B) A REQUEST MADE UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) BE IN WRITING;

(2) BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR BY E–MAIL;

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION,
PROVIDE SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO CONFIRM THAT THE REQUESTER IS A
PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL; AND

(4) ADEQUATELY IDENTIFY THE DOCUMENT, POSTING, OR OTHER
PUBLICATION CONTAINING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

(C) A REQUEST MADE BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY
CERTIFIES THAT A REQUESTER IS A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL AND NO FURTHER
INFORMATION MAY BE REQUIRED TO CONFIRM THAT THE REQUESTER IS A
PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL.

(D) ON RECEIPT OF A REQUEST UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY SHALL PROMPTLY ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF THE
REQUEST IN WRITING BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR BY E–MAIL AND:

(1) TAKE STEPS REASONABLY NECESSARY TO ENSURE THAT THE
PERSONAL INFORMATION IS NOT PUBLISHED; OR

(2) IF THE PERSONAL INFORMATION IS ALREADY PUBLISHED,
PROVIDE FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN 72 HOURS
AFTER RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST.

(E) A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL OR THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY
MAY BRING AN ACTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION AGAINST A
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY FOR:

(1) DECLARATORY RELIEF;

(2) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; OR

(3) REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

3–2303.

(A) A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL, OR THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY
ON BEHALF OF A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL, MAY REQUEST THAT A PERSON WHO HAS
PUBLISHED THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL INFORMATION REMOVE THE
PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL’S PERSONAL INFORMATION FROM PUBLICATION.

(B) A REQUEST MADE UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL:

(1) BE IN WRITING;

(2) BE SENT BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR BY E–MAIL;

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION,
PROVIDE SUFFICIENT INFORMATION TO CONFIRM THAT THE REQUESTER IS A
PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) ADEQUATELY IDENTIFY THE DOCUMENT, POSTING, OR OTHER
PUBLICATION CONTAINING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION.

(C) A REQUEST MADE BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY
CERTIFIES THAT A REQUESTER IS A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL AND NO FURTHER
INFORMATION MAY BE REQUIRED TO CONFIRM THAT THE REQUESTER IS A
PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL.

(D) THE PERSON TO WHOM THE REQUEST IS MADE SHALL:

(1) PROVIDE FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE PERSONAL INFORMATION
WITHIN 72 HOURS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST; AND

(2) NOTIFY THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL OR THE OFFICE OF
INFORMATION PRIVACY BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR BY E–MAIL OF THE REMOVAL.

(E) (1) A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL OR THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION
PRIVACY MAY BRING AN ACTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION AGAINST A
PERSON FOR:

(I) DECLARATORY RELIEF;

(II) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF;

(III) DAMAGES INCURRED AS THE RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF
THIS SECTION; OR

(IV) REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

(2) IN ADDITION TO THE RELIEF PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF A COURT FINDS THAT A PERSON WILLFULLY REFUSED TO
PROVIDE FOR THE REMOVAL OF PERSONAL INFORMATION KNOWING THAT THE
INDIVIDUAL ON BEHALF OF WHOM THE REQUEST WAS MADE WAS A PROTECTED
INDIVIDUAL, THE COURT MAY AWARD PUNITIVE DAMAGES.

3–2304.

(A) A PERSON AN INDIVIDUAL MAY NOT KNOWINGLY PUBLISH THE
PERSONAL INFORMATION OF A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL IF:

(1) THE PERSON INDIVIDUAL KNOWS OR REASONABLY SHOULD KNOW
THAT PUBLISHING THE PERSONAL INFORMATION POSES AN IMMINENT AND SERIOUS
THREAT TO THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

(2) THE PUBLISHING OF THE PERSONAL INFORMATION RESULTS IN:

(I) AN ASSAULT IN ANY DEGREE;

(II) HARASSMENT;

(III) TRESPASS; OR

(IV) MALICIOUS DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.

(B) A PERSON AN INDIVIDUAL WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF
A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT
EXCEEDING 18 MONTHS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $5,000 OR BOTH.

SUBTITLE 24. PROTECTED INDIVIDUALS – JUDICIAL ADDRESS CONFIDENTIALITY
PROGRAM.

3–2401.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ACTUAL ADDRESS” MEANS A RESIDENTIAL STREET ADDRESS,
INCLUDING PRIMARY RESIDENCE OR SECONDARY RESIDENCE, OF A PROTECTED
INDIVIDUAL AS SPECIFIED ON THE PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL’S APPLICATION TO BE A
PROGRAM PARTICIPANT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) “GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–1501 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(D) “OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY” MEANS THE OFFICE OF
INFORMATION PRIVACY IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE COURTS.

(E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE JUDICIAL ADDRESS CONFIDENTIALITY
PROGRAM.

(F) “PROGRAM PARTICIPANT” MEANS A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL
DESIGNATED AS A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(G) “PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3–2301 OF
THIS TITLE.

3–2402.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE PURPOSE OF THIS SUBTITLE IS TO:

(1) ENABLE STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES TO RESPOND TO REQUESTS
FOR PUBLIC RECORDS WITHOUT DISCLOSING THE ACTUAL ADDRESS OF A PROGRAM
PARTICIPANT;

(2) ENCOURAGE INTERAGENCY COOPERATION IN PROVIDING
ADDRESS CONFIDENTIALITY FOR PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS;

(3) ALLOW GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES AND PERSONS TO ACCEPT A
PROGRAM PARTICIPANT’S USE OF AN ADDRESS DESIGNATED BY THE OFFICE OF
INFORMATION PRIVACY AS A SUBSTITUTE ADDRESS; AND

(4) PROVIDE A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT WITH PROTECTIONS IN
ADDITION TO THOSE PROVIDED UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 23 OF THIS ARTICLE.

3–2403.

THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY SHALL ESTABLISH AND ADMINISTER
A JUDICIAL ADDRESS CONFIDENTIALITY PROGRAM FOR PROTECTED INDIVIDUALS.

3–2404.

(A) A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL MAY APPLY TO PARTICIPATE IN THE
PROGRAM IN THE MANNER REQUIRED BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY.

(B) ON RECEIPT OF AN APPLICATION TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM,
THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER THE
APPLICANT QUALIFIES AS A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT.

3–2405.

(A) THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY MAY:

(1) REQUEST THAT A PERSON OR GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY USE A
SUBSTITUTE ADDRESS DESIGNATED BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY AS
THE PROGRAM PARTICIPANT’S ADDRESS;

(2) REQUEST THE SHIELDING OF REAL PROPERTY RECORDS ON
BEHALF OF A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT WHO HAS AN OWNERSHIP INTEREST IN REAL
PROPERTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 1, PART II OF THE REAL
PROPERTY ARTICLE; AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

(3) REQUEST THAT A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT’S ACTUAL ADDRESS BE
SHIELDED FROM PUBLIC INSPECTION IN A RECORD MAINTAINED BY A
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.

(B) A REQUEST MADE BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE CERTIFIES THAT A REQUESTER IS A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT.

(C) ON RECEIPT OF A REQUEST BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY,
A PERSON OR GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY SHALL:

(1) PROMPTLY ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF THE REQUEST IN
WRITING BY CERTIFIED MAIL OR BY E–MAIL; AND

(2) TAKE STEPS REASONABLY NECESSARY TO COMPLY.

(D) NOTWITHSTANDING THE PROVISIONS OF SUBSECTION (A)(3) OF THIS
SECTION, A CUSTODIAN OF RECORD MAY:

(1) MAINTAIN A COPY OF A RECORD CONTAINING A PROGRAM
PARTICIPANT’S ACTUAL ADDRESS IN A SEPARATE SECURE AREA TO WHICH PERSONS
WHO DO NOT HAVE A LEGITIMATE REASON FOR ACCESS ARE DENIED ACCESS;

(2) PERMIT PUBLIC INSPECTION OF A RECORD WITH THE CONSENT
OF THE PROGRAM PARTICIPANT;

(3) PERMIT PUBLIC INSPECTION OF A RECORD WITH THE ACTUAL
ADDRESS REDACTED FROM THE RECORD; OR

(4) AFTER NOTIFICATION TO THE PROGRAM PARTICIPANT, PERMIT
PUBLIC INSPECTION OF A RECORD IF THE INSPECTION WILL FURTHER A
SUBSTANTIAL PUBLIC INTEREST OR A LEGITIMATE BUSINESS NEED.

3–2406.

A RECORD OF A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT’S ACTUAL ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE
NUMBER MAINTAINED BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY OR A
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY IS NOT A PUBLIC RECORD WITHIN THE MEANING OF §
4–101 OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE.

3–2407.

(A) A PERSON MAY NOT KNOWINGLY DISCLOSE A PROGRAM PARTICIPANT’S
ACTUAL ADDRESS.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) A PROTECTED INDIVIDUAL OR THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY
MAY BRING AN ACTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION FOR:

(1) DECLARATORY RELIEF;

(2) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; OR

(3) REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

Article – Real Property

3–114.

(a) In this part the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “ACP number” means the unique identification number assigned to each
program participant by the Secretary OR BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY.

(c) “Actual address” means a residential street address, school address, or work
address of an individual, as specified on the individual’s application to be a program
participant under Title 7, Subtitle 3 of the State Government Article.

(d) “Address Confidentiality Program” means the Address Confidentiality
Program for survivors of threatened, attempted, or actual domestic violence, sexual assault,
stalking, harassment, or human trafficking administered by the Secretary under Title 7,
Subtitle 3 of the State Government Article AND THE JUDICIAL ADDRESS
CONFIDENTIALITY PROGRAM ADMINISTERED BY THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF
THE COURTS UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 24 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE.

(e) (1) “Identity information” means information that may be used to identify
a program participant.

(2) “Identity information” includes a program participant’s:

(i) Name;

(ii) Phone number;

(iii) E–mail address;

(iv) Social Security number; and

(v) Driver’s license number.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

(F) “OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY” MEANS THE OFFICE OF
INFORMATION PRIVACY IN THE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE COURTS.

[(f)] (G) “Program participant” means an individual designated by the Secretary
OR BY THE OFFICE OF INFORMATION PRIVACY as a participant in an address
confidentiality program.

[(g)] (H) “Real Property ACP Notice” means the notice required under this part
for a program participant to request the shielding of real property records.

[(h)] (I) “Real property record” means any record or data maintained by a clerk
of the circuit court or a State or local agency as part of the land or tax records.

[(i)] (J) “Secretary” means the Secretary of State.

[(j)] (K) “Shield” means to remove real property records from public inspection
in accordance with this part.

[(k)] (L) “Shielding” means, with respect to a real property record accepted for
recording by a clerk of the circuit court or a State or local agency, removing the record to a
separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate reason for access are
denied access.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) There is a Task Force to Ensure the Safety of Judicial Facilities.

(b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

(1) the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland;

(2) the Chief Judge of the Appellate Court of Maryland;

(3) the Chair of the Conference of Circuit Judges, or the Chair’s designee;

(4) two circuit court administrative judges from counties with varying
population densities, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland;

(5) the Chief Judge of the District Court of Maryland;

(6) two District Court administrative judges from counties with varying
population densities, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland;

(7) three members of county leadership or their designees, from counties
with varying population densities, appointed by the Governor;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(8) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate;

(9) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of the
House;

(10) three sheriffs or their designees, from counties with varying population
densities, appointed by the Governor;

(11) the Superintendent of the Maryland State Police, or the
Superintendent’s designee;

(12) the Secretary of General Services, or the Secretary’s designee;

(13) the Secretary of Budget and Management, or the Secretary’s designee;

(14) the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, or the
Secretary’s designee;

(15) three chiefs of police or their designees, from counties with varying
population densities, appointed by the Governor;

(16) a magistrate from a circuit court, appointed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of Maryland;

(17) one clerk of a circuit court, appointed by the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of Maryland;

(18) the Director of Commissioners for the District Court of Maryland;

(19) the Chief of Security Administration for the Administrative Office of
the Courts;

(20) one District Court bailiff, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of Maryland; ~~and~~

(21) one representative of the Maryland Association of Counties, appointed
by the Governor;

(22) the president of the Maryland State Bar Association, or the president’s
designee;

(23) the Public Defender, or the Public Defender’s designee;

(24) the president of the Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association, or the
president’s designee; and

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 414

(25) the chair of the Conference of Orphans’ Court Judges, or the chair’s
designee.

(c) The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland shall chair the Task
Force.

(d) The Administrative Office of the Courts shall provide staff for the Task Force.

(e) A member of the Task Force:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Task Force; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Task Force shall:

(1) identify minimum requirements for courthouse safety, including:

(i) the minimum number of security officers that should be present
in each type of judicial proceeding in a circuit court or in the District Court;

(ii) the minimum qualifications for security officers;

(iii) minimum standards for secure entry and exit of judicial officers
from court facilities, including for secure parking and, if such parking is not connected to
the courthouse, secure transit between parking and the courthouse; and

(iv) minimum standards for safe public areas of courthouses,
including for the protection of judicial officers who are required to enter public areas of the
courthouse in the performance of their public duties;

(2) develop a legislative proposal to ensure that the requirements
identified under item (1) of this subsection can be met; and

(3) identify physical security deficiencies that currently exist in
courthouses and develop a plan to address these deficiencies.

(g) A member of the Task Force serves at the pleasure of the person who
appointed the member.

(h) At the Task Force’s first meeting, the Task Force shall vote to adopt a code of
conduct providing for the acceptable conduct of Task Force members.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 414 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(g)~~ (i) On or before January 1, 2025, the Task Force shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland and, in accordance
with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall take
effect October 1, 2024.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
3 of this Act, this Act shall take effect June 1, 2024. Section 2 of this Act shall remain
effective for a period of 2 years and 1 month and, at the end of June 30, 2026, Section 2 of
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14