START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

Chapter 622

(House Bill 685)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission in
the Department of Commerce to promote innovation in the fields of space exploration
and commercial aerospace opportunities; ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Aerospace~~ ~~and~~
~~Technology~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~special,~~ ~~nonlapsing~~ ~~fund;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~
~~Fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~credited~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund;~~ and generally relating to the Maryland Aerospace
and Technology Commission.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section ~~10–1101~~ ~~through~~ ~~10–1115~~ 5–2501 through 5–2508 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle ~~11.~~ 25. Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(i)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)189.~~ ~~and~~ ~~190.~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~6–226(a)(2)(ii)191.~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

SUBTITLE 11. 25. MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~10–1101.~~ 5–2501.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BOARD” MEANS THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE COMMISSION.

(C) “COLLABORATIVE” MEANS THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE RESEARCH
AND SPACE ECONOMY COLLABORATIVE.

(D) (B) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND
TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION.

(E) “FUND” MEANS THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY FUND.

(F) (C) “INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION” MEANS AN EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION IN THE STATE THAT:

(1) BY LAW OR CHARTER:

(I) IS A PUBLIC OR NONPROFIT EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION;
AND

(II) IS AUTHORIZED TO PROVIDE:

1. A PROGRAM OF EDUCATION BEYOND THE HIGH
SCHOOL LEVEL AND AWARD A BACHELOR’S OR ADVANCED DEGREE; OR

2. A PROGRAM OF 2 OR MORE YEARS’ DURATION THAT IS
ACCEPTED FOR FULL CREDIT TOWARD A BACHELOR’S DEGREE; AND

(2) MEETS THE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS THAT THE MARYLAND
HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION PRESCRIBES AND IS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE A
CERTIFICATE, DIPLOMA, OR DEGREE UNDER TITLE 12 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE.

(G) (D) “ZONE” MEANS THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY
ZONE AN AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY ZONE DESIGNATED UNDER § 10–1110 §
5–2507 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~10–1102.~~ 5–2502.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
IN THE DEPARTMENT.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

(B) THE COMMISSION IS A BODY POLITIC AND CORPORATE AND IS A PUBLIC
INSTRUMENTALITY OF THE STATE.

(C) (B) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO PROMOTE INNOVATION
IN THE FIELDS OF SPACE EXPLORATION AND COMMERCIAL AEROSPACE
OPPORTUNITIES, INCLUDING THE INTEGRATION OF SPACE, AERONAUTICS, AND
AVIATION INDUSTRIES INTO THE ECONOMY OF THE STATE.

~~10–1103.~~ 5–2503.

(A) A BOARD OF DIRECTORS SHALL MANAGE THE COMMISSION AND
EXERCISE ITS POWERS.

(B) (A) THE BOARD COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING
MEMBERS:

(1) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) A MEMBER OF THE SENATE, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE SENATE, WHO SHALL SERVE AS AN EX OFFICIO NONVOTING MEMBER;

(3) A MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE, WHO SHALL SERVE AS AN EX OFFICIO NONVOTING
MEMBER;

(4) THE DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION’S GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER, OR THE DIRECTOR’S
DESIGNEE, WHO SHALL SERVE AS AN EX OFFICIO NONVOTING MEMBER;

(5) THE DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION’S WALLOPS FLIGHT FACILITY, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(6) (5) THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND
ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, OR THE ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE, WHO
SHALL SERVE AS AN EX OFFICIO NONVOTING MEMBER;

(7) (6) THE DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE, WHO SHALL SERVE AS AN EX
OFFICIO NONVOTING MEMBER;

(8) (7) THE PRESIDENT OF THE GODDARD CONTRACTORS’
ASSOCIATION, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(8) THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND BALTIMORE
COUNTY, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(9) THE PRESIDENT OF THE SOUTHERN MARYLAND NAVY ALLIANCE,
OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(9) (10) THE PRESIDENT OF THE MARYLAND SPACE BUSINESS
ROUNDTABLE, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(10) (11) THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND,
COLLEGE PARK, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(11) (12) THE DIRECTOR OF THE JOHNS HOPKINS APPLIED PHYSICS
LABORATORY, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(12) (13) THE DIRECTOR OF THE ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITIES
FOR RESEARCH IN ASTRONOMY, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(13) (14) THE DIRECTOR OF THE SPACE TELESCOPE SCIENCE
INSTITUTE, OR THE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE; AND

(14) (15) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR
WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE:

(I) A REPRESENTATIVE OF INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER
EDUCATION;

(II) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL SOCIETY OF BLACK
ENGINEERS;

(I) (III) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE
MANUFACTURING COMMUNITY; AND

(II) (IV) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE AEROSPACE
TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY.

(C) (B) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

(C) THE COMMISSION AND ITS MEMBERS ARE SUBJECT TO THE MARYLAND
PUBLIC ETHICS LAW.

(D) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS
REQUIRED BY THE TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS ON OCTOBER 1, 2024.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
ONLY FOR THE REST OF THE TERM UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND
QUALIFIES.

(E) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED BY
THE GOVERNOR UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE AN APPOINTED MEMBER FOR
INCOMPETENCE, MISCONDUCT, OR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE
POSITION A MEMBER APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR WITH OR WITHOUT CAUSE.

(F) FROM AMONG ITS MEMBERS, THE BOARD COMMISSION SHALL ELECT A
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR.

~~10–1104.~~

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL OF THE GOVERNOR, THE BOARD
SHALL APPOINT AN EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
~~BOARD.~~

(3) THE BOARD SHALL DETERMINE THE SALARY OF THE EXECUTIVE
~~DIRECTOR.~~

(B) (1) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR IS THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE
OFFICER OF THE COMMISSION.

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL MANAGE THE
ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS AND TECHNICAL ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMISSION IN
ACCORDANCE WITH POLICIES AND PROCEDURES THAT THE BOARD ESTABLISHES.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S
~~DESIGNEE,~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) ATTEND ALL MEETINGS OF THE BOARD;

(2) ACT AS SECRETARY OF THE BOARD;

(3) KEEP MINUTES OF ALL PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD;

(4) APPROVE ALL SALARIES, PER DIEM PAYMENTS, AND ALLOWABLE
EXPENSES OF THE COMMISSION, ITS EMPLOYEES, AND ITS CONSULTANTS;

(5) APPROVE ANY EXPENSES INCIDENTAL TO THE OPERATION OF THE
COMMISSION; AND

(6) PERFORM THE OTHER DUTIES THAT THE BOARD DIRECTS IN
CARRYING OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

~~10–1105.~~

(A) THE BOARD SHALL EMPLOY ANY ADDITIONAL PROFESSIONAL AND
CLERICAL STAFF AS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COMMISSION MAY ENTER INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE
DEPARTMENT FOR THE PROVISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT TO THE
COMMISSION BY INDIVIDUALS EMPLOYED WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT’S DIVISION OF
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT.

(2) THE COMMISSION SHALL REIMBURSE THE DEPARTMENT FOR
~~ANY~~ ~~EXPENSES~~ ~~INCURRED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROVISION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ADMINISTRATIVE~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~BY~~
EMPLOYEES OF THE DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
~~SUBSECTION.~~

5–2504.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF SUPPORT TO THE
COMMISSION.

(C) (B) THE BOARD COMMISSION MAY RETAIN CONSULTANTS AS
NECESSARY.

~~10–1106.~~

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (B), (C), AND (E) OF THIS
SECTION, THE COMMISSION IS EXEMPT FROM TITLE 10 AND DIVISION II OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(B) (1) THE COMMISSION IS SUBJECT TO:

(I) THE PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT; AND

(II) THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT.

(2) FOR PURPOSES OF THE OPEN MEETINGS ACT, A PROJECT SITE
~~VISIT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~EDUCATIONAL~~ ~~FIELD~~ ~~TOUR~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~CONSIDERED~~ ~~A~~ ~~MEETING~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
COMMISSION IF NO ORGANIZATIONAL BUSINESS IS CONDUCTED.

(C) THE BOARD, THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE COMMISSION,
~~AND~~ ~~MEMBERS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~ADVISORY~~ ~~COMMITTEE~~ ~~APPOINTED~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
~~PUBLIC~~ ~~ETHICS~~ ~~LAW.~~

(D) THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE COMMISSION ARE NOT
SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF DIVISION I OF THE STATE PERSONNEL AND
PENSIONS ARTICLE THAT GOVERN THE STATE PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.

(E) (1) THE COMMISSION, THE BOARD, AND COMMISSION EMPLOYEES
ARE SUBJECT TO TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
~~PROCUREMENT~~ ~~ARTICLE.~~

(2) THE BOARD, THE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE
COMMISSION, AND THE MEMBERS OF ANY ADVISORY COMMITTEE APPOINTED SHALL
DISCLOSE TO THE STATE ETHICS COMMISSION WHETHER THEY ARE EMPLOYED BY
~~OR~~ ~~HAVE~~ ~~A~~ ~~FINANCIAL~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~IN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ENTITY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~CURRENTLY~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~WILL~~
~~APPLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~FUNDS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INVESTMENT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~ADMINISTERED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
~~COMMISSION.~~

~~10–1107.~~ 5–2505.

~~(A)~~ THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(1) ESTABLISH THE APPROPRIATE STANDARDS AND EXECUTIVE
~~BODIES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ENSURE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPER~~ ~~USE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FUNDS~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~
FOR RESEARCH;

(2) (1) IDENTIFY RESEARCH AND FUNDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR
ENTITIES IN THIS STATE THAT:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) STRENGTHEN AND ENHANCE THE STATE’S LEADERSHIP
POSITION IN CIVIL, COMMERCIAL, AND MILITARY AEROSPACE RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT;

(II) INTEGRATE THE AEROSPACE INDUSTRY INTO THE
ECONOMY OF THE STATE;

(III) CAPITALIZE, PROMOTE, AND ASSIST IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF WORKFORCE TRAINING TO FURTHER THE DEVELOPMENT OF EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES REQUIRED FOR ALL ASPECTS OF SPACE EXPLORATION; AND

(IV) DEVELOP PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS THAT ADVANCE
BOTH THE STATE’S AEROSPACE INDUSTRY AND THE SURROUNDING COMMUNITY;

(3) (2) ESTABLISH ADVISORY COMMITTEES AS NEEDED;

(4) PROCURE INSURANCE THAT THE COMMISSION CONSIDERS
~~NECESSARY;~~

(5) (3) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT AEROSPACE–RELATED
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES WITHIN THE STATE IN COORDINATION WITH LOCAL
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS; AND

(6) (4) EMPLOY DEVELOP AND ANNUALLY UPDATE THE A
STRATEGIC PLAN DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 10–1108 OF THIS SUBTITLE
§ 5–2506 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO IMPLEMENT THE GOALS OF THE COMMISSION.

~~(B)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) DIRECT THE ACTIVITIES OF, ESTABLISH GOALS FOR, AND PROVIDE
OVERSIGHT TO THE COMMISSION; AND

(2) DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A STRATEGIC PLAN IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 10–1108 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO IMPLEMENT THE GOALS OF THE COMMISSION.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL EMPLOY A CHIEF COMPLIANCE OFFICER
TO MONITOR AND REPORT TO THE BOARD REGARDING COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

(2) THE CHIEF COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL ENSURE THAT GRANT
PROPOSALS SUBMITTED TO THE COMMISSION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE
~~COMPLY~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~REGULATIONS~~ ~~ADOPTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

COMMISSION BEFORE THOSE PROPOSALS ARE SUBMITTED TO THE BOARD FOR
~~CONSIDERATION.~~

~~10–1108.~~ 5–2506.

(A) THE COMMISSION SHALL DEVELOP AND ANNUALLY UPDATE A
STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE PROMOTION OF SPACE, AERONAUTICS, AND AVIATION
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE STATE.

(B) THE STRATEGIC PLAN DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL INCLUDE A LIST OF POTENTIAL PROJECTS THAT FURTHER THE
PURPOSES OF THE COMMISSION AND, FOR EACH PROJECT, DESCRIBE:

(1) THE ESTIMATED TOTAL COST FOR COMPLETION, INCLUDING A
POTENTIAL STATE MATCHING COST; AND

(2) AN ASSESSMENT OF THE AVAILABILITY OF EXTERNAL FUNDING
SOURCES.

(C) THE STRATEGIC PLAN DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION MAY INCLUDE ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT THE COMMISSION
DETERMINES TO BE RELEVANT TO FURTHERING THE PURPOSES OF THE
COMMISSION.

~~10–1109.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELIGIBLE ENTITY” MEANS:

(1) A BUSINESS OR NONPROFIT INVOLVED IN SPACE EXPLORATION;

(2) A GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY; OR

(3) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION THAT CONDUCTS
AEROSPACE RESEARCH WITHIN THE STATE.

(B) THE COMMISSION MAY PROVIDE GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE ENTITIES FOR
THE PURPOSE OF:

(1) DEVELOPMENT OF EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES REQUIRED FOR
ANY ASPECT OF HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT;

(2) RESEARCH INVOLVING SPACE EXPLORATION AND SPACE FLIGHT;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) WORKFORCE TRAINING TO PROMOTE SPACE EXPLORATION AND
SPACE FLIGHT; AND

(4) DEVELOPMENT OF LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
THAT ENHANCE THE STATE’S ABILITY TO COMPETE IN THE AEROSPACE INDUSTRY.

(C) A GRANT AWARDED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CONSISTENT
WITH THE STRATEGIC PLAN DEVELOPED BY THE COMMISSION.

(D) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH:

(1) A COMPETITIVE APPLICATION PROCESS;

(2) CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES FOR MAKING AWARDS, INCLUDING
PRIVATE LEVERAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR AWARDS; AND

(3) PROCESSES AND METRICS FOR MONITORING THE SUCCESS AND
IMPACT OF AWARDS.

~~10–1110.~~ 5–2507.

(A) SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION
SHALL DESIGNATE A MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY ZONE AEROSPACE
AND TECHNOLOGY ZONES WITHIN THE STATE FOR THE PURPOSE OF ENCOURAGING
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT, FACILITATING LAND ACQUISITION, PROVIDING
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES, AND PROMOTING THE AEROSPACE INDUSTRY
WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF THE ZONE ZONES.

(B) THE COMMISSION SHALL DETERMINE THE BOUNDARIES OF THE ZONE
ZONES.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL PARTNER WITH LOCAL COMMUNITIES TO
PROMOTE LOCAL AEROSPACE EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES WITHIN EACH ZONE AND
IMPLEMENT STRATEGIES TO CONNECT LOCAL AEROSPACE FACILITIES WITHIN THE
ZONE TO THE SURROUNDING COMMUNITIES.

~~10–1111.~~

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND AEROSPACE RESEARCH AND SPACE ECONOMY
~~COLLABORATIVE.~~

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE COLLABORATIVE IS TO ADVISE THE COMMISSION
~~AND~~ ~~RECOMMEND~~ ~~AND~~ ~~PROMOTE~~ ~~ACTIONS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OPPORTUNITIES~~ ~~IN~~ ~~PARTNERSHIP~~

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

WITH THE LOCAL COMMUNITY WITHIN THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND
TECHNOLOGY ZONE DESIGNATED UNDER § 10–1110 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE COLLABORATIVE CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COMMISSION, OR THE
~~EXECUTIVE~~ ~~DIRECTOR’S~~ ~~DESIGNEE;~~

(2) A MEMBER OF THE SENATE, APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE SENATE;

(3) A MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

(4) THE DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION’S GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER, OR THE DIRECTOR’S
~~DESIGNEE;~~

(5) THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND
ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION, OR THE ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE;

(6) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION, DESIGNATED BY THE DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
~~INVESTIGATION;~~

(7) THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY, OR THE
~~COUNTY~~ ~~EXECUTIVE’S~~ ~~DESIGNEE;~~

(8) THE MANAGER OF THE CITY OF GREENBELT, OR THE MANAGER’S
~~DESIGNEE;~~

(9) THE MANAGER OF THE CITY OF COLLEGE PARK, OR THE
~~MANAGER’S~~ ~~DESIGNEE;~~

(10) THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE
PARK, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(11) THE PRESIDENT OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY COMMUNITY
COLLEGE, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(12) THE SUPERINTENDENT OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM, OR THE SUPERINTENDENT’S DESIGNEE; AND

(13) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE GODDARD CONTRACTORS’
~~ASSOCIATION;~~

(II) A REPRESENTATIVE OF A REAL ESTATE DEVELOPER GROUP
WITHIN THE ZONE; AND

(III) A MEMBER OF THE AEROSPACE MANUFACTURING
~~INDUSTRY.~~

(D) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE COMMISSION SHALL CHAIR THE
~~COLLABORATIVE.~~

(E) THE COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COLLABORATIVE.

(F) A MEMBER OF THE COLLABORATIVE:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COLLABORATIVE; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(G) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS
REQUIRED BY THE TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS ON OCTOBER 1, 2024.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
~~ONLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERM~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUCCESSOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~APPOINTED~~ ~~AND~~
~~QUALIFIES.~~

(H) THE COLLABORATIVE SHALL DEVELOP PLANS TO:

(1) IMPROVE LOCAL AEROSPACE EDUCATION OPPORTUNITIES
WITHIN THE ZONE;

(2) UPGRADE AND IMPROVE PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
~~SURROUNDING:~~

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

(I) THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
~~ADMINISTRATION~~ ~~HEADQUARTERS;~~

(II) THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE
ADMINISTRATION’S GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER; AND

(III) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK;

(3) ENSURE THAT PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION TO AND FROM LOCAL
~~AEROSPACE~~ ~~LEADERS~~ ~~IS~~ ~~ACCESSIBLE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~AFFORDABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LOCAL~~
~~COMMUNITY;~~

(4) WORK WITH BUSINESSES AND RESIDENTS WITHIN THE ZONE TO
DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT STRATEGIES TO CONNECT THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION’S GODDARD SPACE FLIGHT CENTER TO THE
SURROUNDING COMMUNITY; AND

(5) ASSESS AND IMPROVE PUBLIC SAFETY WITHIN ALL AREAS OF THE
~~ZONE.~~

(I) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, AND EVERY 2 YEARS THEREAFTER,
THE COLLABORATIVE SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT OF THE PLANS DEVELOPED UNDER
SUBSECTION (H) OF THIS SECTION TO THE COMMISSION.

~~10–1112.~~

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY FUND IN THE
~~COMMISSION.~~

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING TO PROMOTE THE
~~GROWTH~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SPACE~~ ~~EXPLORATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~AEROSPACE~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~INDUSTRIES~~
IN THE STATE IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH THE COMMISSION’S STRATEGIC
~~PLAN.~~

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO REVERSION UNDER § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
~~PROCUREMENT~~ ~~ARTICLE.~~

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) THE COMMISSION MAY USE THE FUND TO:

(1) AWARD GRANTS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 10–1109 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

(2) PAY THE COSTS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THIS SUBTITLE AND
TO ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(G) THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND.

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

~~10–1113.~~

THE COMMISSION IS EXEMPT FROM STATE AND LOCAL TAXES.

~~10–1114.~~

THE BOOKS AND RECORDS OF THE COMMISSION ARE SUBJECT TO AUDIT:

(1) AT ANY TIME BY THE STATE; AND

(2) EACH YEAR BY AN INDEPENDENT AUDITOR.

~~10–1115.~~ 5–2508.

(A) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE COMMISSION SHALL
SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE MARYLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 622

COMMISSION, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(B) THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE A COMPLETE OPERATING AND FINANCIAL
STATEMENT AND SUMMARIZE THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMISSION DURING THE
PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR:

(1) A SUMMARY OF THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMISSION DURING THE
PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR; AND

(2) A CURRENT COPY OF THE STRATEGIC PLAN DEVELOPED UNDER §
5–2506 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) IN ADDITION TO THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (B)
OF THIS SECTION, THE REPORT SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A REVIEW OF EACH GRANT APPLICATION SUBMITTED TO THE
COMMISSION DURING THE PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER
THE GRANT APPLICATION WAS FUNDED BY THE COMMISSION OR WITHDRAWN AFTER
SUBMISSION; AND

(2) A REVIEW OF THE GRANT–FUNDED ACTIVITIES UNDERTAKEN BY
EACH GRANT RECIPIENT.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~

~~6–226.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(2)~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~Notwithstanding~~ ~~any~~ ~~other~~ ~~provision~~ ~~of~~ ~~law,~~ ~~and~~ ~~unless~~
~~inconsistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~federal~~ ~~law,~~ ~~grant~~ ~~agreement,~~ ~~or~~ ~~other~~ ~~federal~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~or~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~
~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~gift~~ ~~or~~ ~~settlement~~ ~~agreement,~~ ~~net~~ ~~interest~~ ~~on~~ ~~all~~ ~~State~~ ~~money~~ ~~allocated~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~to~~ ~~special~~ ~~funds~~ ~~or~~ ~~accounts,~~ ~~and~~ ~~otherwise~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~
~~receive~~ ~~interest~~ ~~earnings,~~ ~~as~~ ~~accounted~~ ~~for~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~accrue~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~
~~Fund~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~subparagraph~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~do~~ ~~not~~ ~~apply~~
~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~funds:~~

189. the Teacher Retention and Development Fund; [and]

190. the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund; AND

191. THE MARYLAND AEROSPACE AND TECHNOLOGY
~~FUND.~~

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 622 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the initial
appointed members of ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Directors~~ ~~of~~ the Maryland Aerospace and Technology
Commission shall expire as follows:

(1) one member in 2025; ~~and~~

(2) one member in 2026;

(3) one member in 2027; and

(4) one member in 2028.

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~initial~~
~~appointed~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Aerospace~~ ~~Research~~ ~~and~~ ~~Space~~ ~~Economy~~ ~~Collaborative~~
~~shall~~ ~~expire~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~one~~ ~~member~~ ~~in~~ ~~2025;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~one~~ ~~member~~ ~~in~~ ~~2026;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~one~~ ~~member~~ ~~in~~ ~~2027.~~

SECTION ~~4.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Maryland Aerospace
and Technology Commission ~~shall~~ may hire a consultant to advise the Commission during
the first 2 years of the Commission’s existence to aid in the development ~~and~~
~~implementation~~ of the strategic plan described under ~~§~~ ~~10–1108~~ § 5–2506 of the Economic
Development Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION ~~5.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16