START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 685 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 685 
(Delegates Harris and Chang) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission within the 
Department of Commerce to promote innovation in the fields of space exploration and 
commercial aerospace opportunities. Among other requirements, the commission must 
(1) identify research and funding opportunities for entities in the State, as specified; 
(2) develop and annually update a strategic plan; (3) designate aerospace and technology 
zones; (4) partner with local communities, as specified; and (5) develop educational 
opportunities. By October 1 each year, the commission must report to the Governor, the 
Maryland Economic Development Commission (MEDC), and the General Assembly on 
its activities and strategic plan. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $161,400 in FY 2025. 
Future years reflect annualization and the elimination of one-time costs. Revenues are not 
directly affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
161,400 
103,600 
108,200 
112,900 
117,900 
Net Effect 
($161,400) 
($103,600) 
($108,200) 
($112,900) 
($117,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  While the commission must coordinate and partner with local entities with 
respect to certain duties, the bill does not materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 685/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission is established in 
Commerce, consisting of specified State government and industry members, along with 
nonvoting federal members. The commission and its members are subject to the Maryland 
Public Ethics Law. Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled 
to reimbursement for travel expenses. The bill specifies the appointment procedures and 
terms of commission members. Commerce must provide staff support to the commission. 
The commission may retain consultants as necessary.   
 
Among other requirements, the commission must: 
 
 
identify research and funding opportunities for entities in the State that 
(1) strengthen and enhance the State’s leadership position in civil, commercial, and 
military aerospace research and development; (2) integrate the aerospace industry 
into the economy of the State; (3) capitalize, promote, and assist in the development 
of workforce training to further the development of emerging technologies required 
for all aspects of space exploration; and (4) develop public-private partnerships that 
advance both the State’s aerospace industry and the surrounding community; 
 
establish advisory committees as needed; 
 
develop aerospace-related educational opportunities within the State in coordination 
with local educational institutions; 
 
develop and annually update a strategic plan (as discussed further below) to 
implement the goals of the commission;  
 
designate and determine the boundaries of aerospace and technology zones within 
the State for the purpose of encouraging business development, facilitating land 
acquisition, providing educational opportunities, and promoting the aerospace 
industry within the boundaries of the zones; and 
 
partner with local communities to promote local aerospace education opportunities 
within each zone and implement strategies to connect local aerospace facilities 
within the zone to surrounding communities.  
 
The commission must develop and annually update a strategic plan for promoting space, 
aeronautics, and aviation economic development in the State. The plan must include a list 
of potential projects that further the commission’s purposes. For each project, the plan must 
also describe the estimated total cost for completion, and an assessment of the availability 
of external funding sources. The strategic plan may also encompass any other information 
the commission deems relevant to advancing its objectives. During the first two years of 
the commission’s existence, the commission may hire a consultant to aid in the 
development of the strategic plan. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 685/ Page 3 
Current Law:  Commerce’s mission is to strengthen the Maryland economy. The 
department develops and implements programs that aim to generate new jobs or retain 
existing jobs, attract business investment in new or expanding companies, and promote the 
State’s strategic assets. Business assistance is provided through a combination of 
investments, loans, conditional loans, grants, and tax credits. 
 
The duties of the Maryland Aerospace and Technology Commission established by the bill 
are similar to some of the duties of MEDC, which is likewise staffed by Commerce. For 
example, MEDC must develop and update an economic development strategic plan for the 
State and recommend to the Governor and the Secretary of Commerce the program and 
spending priorities needed to implement the plan. 
 
The State and local governments operate and fund a number of economic development 
entities. At the State level, in particular, the Maryland Technology Development 
Corporation (better known as TEDCO) operates multiple programs related to innovation, 
such as the Maryland Innovation Initiative (MII). MII promotes technology transfer from 
Maryland’s public and private nonprofit research institutions to the private sector. The 
initiative is authorized to provide grant funding or equity investment financing to a 
qualifying university, qualifying university-based entrepreneur, or other start-up entity to 
promote the commercialization of technology developed in whole or in part by a qualifying 
university. 
 
State Expenditures:  Commerce advises that the department anticipates hiring a program 
manager to handle the staffing and other responsibilities of the commission in conjunction 
with existing staff. Commerce also expects to hire a consultant to assist with initial 
development of the strategic plan at a one-time cost of approximately $75,000; this 
estimate assumes consultant costs are incurred in fiscal 2025, although some portion of or 
all such costs may be incurred in fiscal 2026, depending on the speed of implementation. 
Future annual updates to the strategic plan will be handled by Commerce staff.  
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $161,397 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one program manager to staff the commission and handle related duties. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and 
a one-time consultant expense.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$79,141 
Consultant Costs 
75,000 
Operating Expenses 
7,256 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$161,397 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 685/ Page 4 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 516 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; University System of Maryland; 
Prince George’s County; Prince George’s County Public Schools; City of Greenbelt; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4