START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 650 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 650 
(Delegate Boafo) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Labor - Report on Apprenticeship Mentoring Ratios 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) to submit a report to the 
General Assembly by October 1, 2024, that analyzes the apprenticeship mentoring ratios 
for all nontraditional apprenticeable occupations in the State. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MDL can complete the report with existing resources. Revenues are 
not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The report must include: 
 
 
the total number of apprentices and the number of apprentices by employer that 
participated in nontraditional apprenticeships, which are apprenticeship occupations 
outside of the building trades, in the immediately preceding fiscal year; 
 
an analysis of, including identification of, all nontraditional apprenticeship 
occupations that could operate with a higher than one-to-one mentorship ratio 
without posing a risk to the safety of workers in the workplace; 
 
list of all apprenticeship ratio waiver requests received by the Maryland 
Apprenticeship and Training Council (MATC) in the immediately preceding 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 650/ Page 2 
five calendar years, the respective outcomes for the requests, and the reasons for a 
denied waiver request; and 
 
recommended strategies to streamline the expansion of apprenticeship ratios for all 
newly registered nontraditional apprenticeship occupations for the purpose of 
meeting the goals of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
 
Current Law:  The Appendix – Apprenticeship provides an overview of apprenticeship 
programs in Maryland, including an overview of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
 
State regulations establish that each registered apprenticeship program must have a 
minimum ratio of one journeyperson regularly employed for one apprentice consistent with 
proper supervision, training, and continuity of employment and applicable provisions in 
collective bargaining agreements. Deviation from the minimum ratio, including for 
bargaining agreements, is not permitted unless first submitted to MATC in writing for its 
approval. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 511 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 650/ Page 3 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a 
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. More 
specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as changes to current 
programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. The approval 
process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program in a proposed 
industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current staffing level of 
the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate supervision can be 
provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations of the entity. The 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory role for legislation 
and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 650/ Page 4 
As of November 28, 2023, there were 11,530 apprentices registered in 125 different 
occupations, with more than 400 approved registered apprenticeship programs and more 
than 3,800 employers. There were 1,825 Certificates of Completion for apprentices 
processed between January 1, 2023, and November 28, 2023. The State added 38 new 
apprenticeship programs in 2023. The diversity of Maryland’s apprenticeship system has 
also increased since the transfer of the program to DWDAL in 2016. The percentage of 
minority apprentices increased from 36% in November 2016 to 44% in November 2023. 
Likewise, the percentage of female apprentices increased from 3.7% in November 2016 to 
7.7% in November 2023. 
 
Chapter 168 (Senate Bill 104) of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
The purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages;  
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and  
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023 and published the Interim 
Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 

END OF PAGE 4