START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 649 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 649 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Labor and Employment - Equal Pay for Equal Work - Wage Range 
Transparency 
 
   
This bill expands the applicability, requirements, and penalties of the State’s Equal Pay for 
Equal Work Law. Generally, an employer must disclose specified wage, benefit, and any 
other compensation information in public or internal job postings and to applicants to 
which the job posting was not made available. The proactive disclosures have additional 
specified requirements and replace the existing requirement to disclose a wage range to an 
applicant on request. The wage range must be set by the employer in good faith. The 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry must develop and make available to employers a form 
that an employer may use as specified to comply with the bill. Existing retaliation 
provisions are updated to incorporate employee promotions or transfers. Employers must 
keep records of compliance with the updated requirements for at least three years, as 
specified.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) 
increase by $98,800 in FY 2025. Future years reflect annualization and the elimination of 
one-time and contractual costs. Minimal operational effects on State agencies to comply 
with the bill’s disclosure and recordkeeping requirements. Assuming a general level of 
compliance by employers, the bill’s expanded penalty provisions do not materially affect 
State finances or operations. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
98,800 
78,400 
70,600 
73,600 
76,800 
Net Effect 
($98,800) 
($78,400) 
($70,600) 
($73,600) 
($76,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government operations are affected, and expenditures may increase 
minimally. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 649/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: “Posting” means a solicitation intended to recruit applicants for a specific 
available position, including recruitment done directly by an employer or indirectly 
through a third party. 
 
“Wage range” means the minimum and maximum hourly rate or minimum and maximum 
salary for a position, set in good faith by reference to (1) any applicable pay scale; (2) any 
previously determined minimum and maximum hourly rate or minimum and maximum 
salary for the position; (3) the minimum and maximum hourly rate or minimum and 
maximum salary of an individual holding a comparable position; or (4) the budgeted 
amount for the position. 
 
The bill applies only with respect to a position for work that will be physically performed 
at least in part in the State. 
 
Existing civil penalty violations are expanded to include penalties for each employee (in 
addition to each applicant) for whom the employer is not in compliance. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Unlawful Discrimination 
 
State law generally prohibits an employer with at least 15 employees from discharging, 
failing or refusing to hire, or otherwise discriminating against any individual with respect 
to the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because 
of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, genetic information, or disability. The State and local governments are considered 
employers. 
 
Equal Pay for Equal Work 
 
Regardless of employer size, under the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law, an employer 
may not discriminate between employees in any occupation by providing less favorable 
employment opportunities based on sex or gender identity or paying a wage to employees 
of one sex or gender identity at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sex or 
gender identity if both employees work in the same establishment and perform work of 
comparable character or work on the same operation, in the same business, or of the same 
type. The State and local governments are considered employers. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 649/ Page 3 
An employer may not prohibit an employee from inquiring about, discussing, or disclosing 
the wages of the employee or another employee or requesting that the employer provide a 
reason for why the employee’s wages are a condition of employment. An employer may 
not require an employee to sign a waiver or any other document to deny the employee the 
right to disclose or discuss the employee’s wages. An employer may not take any adverse 
employment actions against an employee for specified actions regarding wages or 
exercising specified rights. 
 
The Equal Pay for Equal Work law also requires an employer to provide, on request by an 
applicant for employment, the wage range for the position for which the applicant applied. 
An employer is prohibited from seeking wage history information for an applicant, or from 
screening or considering an applicant for employment or determining an applicant’s wages 
based on the applicant’s wage history. However, an applicant is not prohibited from 
voluntarily sharing wage history information with an employer. An employer may not 
retaliate against or refuse to interview, hire, or employ an applicant because the applicant 
did not provide wage history or requested the wage range. 
 
When the Commissioner of Labor and Industry has determined that the State’s Equal Pay 
for Equal Work law has been violated, the commissioner must (1) try to resolve any issue 
informally by mediation or (2) ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the 
applicant or employee. The Attorney General may bring an action in the county where the 
violation allegedly occurred for injunctive relief, damages, or other relief. An employee 
may bring an action against the employer under specified circumstances. 
 
An employer may not discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee or applicant 
because the employee or applicant makes a complaint, brings or causes an action or 
proceeding, or has testified or will testify in an action or a proceeding relating to Equal Pay 
for Equal Work. The commissioner may bring an action for injunctive relief and damages 
against a person who violates this. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill is expected to increase the number of complaints to MDL 
by approximately 120 complaints per year. This cannot be absorbed within existing 
resources. MDL advises that it requires one wage and hour investigator to conduct 
investigations and one part-time contractual assistant Attorney General to assist in the 
process of interpreting and applying the bill. Accordingly, general fund expenditures 
increase by $98,770 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective 
date. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 649/ Page 4 
Permanent Position 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
0.5 
Regular Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$48,926 
Contractual Salary and Fringe Benefits 
33,508 
Other Operating Expenses 
  16,336 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$98,770 
 
Future year expenditures reflect the elimination of the part-time contractual position and a 
full salary with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
State agencies must comply with the bill’s proactive wage range disclosure requirements, 
for both internal and external positions, along with additional recordkeeping requirements. 
Most agencies advise that their recruitment policies and procedures are generally consistent 
with the bill’s requirements, but some need to make minor adjustments to their disclosure 
and recordkeeping procedures. Thus, the bill has a minimal operational impact, but no 
additional direct effect on State finances.  
 
MDL delegates contested cases to the Office of Administrative Hearings, which can handle 
any increase in new hearings with existing resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local governments must comply with the bill’s proactive wage 
range disclosure requirements, for both internal and external positions, along with 
additional recordkeeping requirements. Thus, the bill has an operational impact, and 
potentially a fiscal impact, on recruiting and hiring local government employees.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses must comply with the bill’s proactive wage 
range disclosure requirements, for both internal and external positions, along with 
additional recordkeeping requirements. At a minimum this creates operational effects on 
small businesses and may result in higher labor costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 832 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 525 (Senators Kelly and Gile) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 649/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Calvert and Prince George’s counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; 
Office of the Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Frederick County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5