START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 740

Chapter 740

(House Bill 647)

AN ACT concerning

Property and Casualty Insurance – Pet Insurance – Regulation

FOR the purpose of establishing requirements and prohibitions for pet insurance policies
that are issued to a resident of the State, or are sold, solicited, negotiated, or offered
in the State, including disclosure requirements and requirements and prohibitions
related to wellness programs; requiring the Maryland Insurance Administration to
develop informational material about pet insurance policies that may be
disseminated to and posted by veterinary practitioners; and generally relating to pet
insurance.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Agriculture
Section 2–301(a) and (i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Insurance
Section 19–1101 through ~~19–1109~~ 19–1107 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 11.
Pet Insurance”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

2–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(i) “Veterinary practitioner” means a licensed and registered veterinarian
engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine.

Article – Insurance

SUBTITLE 11. PET INSURANCE.

19–1101.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 740 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “CHRONIC CONDITION” MEANS A CONDITION THAT CAN BE TREATED OR
MANAGED, BUT NOT CURED.

(C) “CONGENITAL ANOMALY OR DISORDER” MEANS A CONDITION THAT IS
PRESENT FROM BIRTH, WHETHER INHERITED OR CAUSED BY THE ENVIRONMENT,
THAT MAY CAUSE OR CONTRIBUTE TO ILLNESS OR DISEASE.

(D) “HEREDITARY DISORDER” MEANS AN ABNORMALITY THAT IS
GENETICALLY TRANSMITTED FROM PARENT TO OFFSPRING AND MAY CAUSE
ILLNESS OR DISEASE.

(E) (1) “ORTHOPEDIC CONDITION” MEANS A CONDITION AFFECTING THE
BONES, SKELETAL MUSCLE, CARTILAGE, TENDONS, LIGAMENTS, OR JOINTS.

(2) “ORTHOPEDIC CONDITION” INCLUDES ELBOW DYSPLASIA, HIP
DYSPLASIA, INTERVERTEBRAL DISC DEGENERATION, PATELLAR LUXATION, AND
RUPTURED CRANIAL CRUCIATE LIGAMENTS.

(3) “ORTHOPEDIC CONDITION” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) CANCER; OR

(II) A METABOLIC, HEMOPOIETIC, OR AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE.

(F) (1) “PET INSURANCE POLICY” MEANS A PROPERTY INSURANCE
POLICY THAT IS SOLD BY A PET INSURER OR PET INSURANCE PRODUCER THAT
PROVIDES COVERAGE FOR ACCIDENTS AND ILLNESSES OF PETS.

(2) “PET INSURANCE POLICY” INCLUDES A CERTIFICATE OR ADD–ON
COVERAGE.

(G) (1) “PREEXISTING CONDITION” MEANS A CONDITION FOR WHICH ANY
OF THE FOLLOWING ARE TRUE BEFORE THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF A PET INSURANCE
POLICY OR DURING ANY WAITING PERIOD:

(I) A VETERINARY PRACTITIONER PROVIDED MEDICAL ADVICE;

(II) THE PET RECEIVED TREATMENT; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 740

(III) BASED ON INFORMATION FROM VERIFIABLE SOURCES, THE
PET HAD SIGNS OR SYMPTOMS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE CONDITION FOR WHICH
A CLAIM IS BEING MADE.

(2) “PREEXISTING CONDITION” DOES NOT INCLUDE, FOR A RENEWAL
OF A PET INSURANCE POLICY, A CONDITION FOR WHICH COVERAGE WAS AFFORDED
ON THE PREVIOUS POLICY.

(H) “RENEWAL” MEANS THE ISSUANCE AND DELIVERY AT THE END OF A PET
INSURANCE POLICY PERIOD OF A POLICY THAT:

(1) SUPERSEDES THE POLICY PREVIOUSLY ISSUED AND DELIVERED
BY THE SAME PET INSURER OR AFFILIATED PET INSURER; AND

(2) PROVIDES TYPES AND LIMITS OF COVERAGE SUBSTANTIALLY
SIMILAR TO THOSE CONTAINED IN THE PRIOR POLICY.

(I) (1) “VETERINARY EXPENSES” MEANS THE COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH
MEDICAL ADVICE, DIAGNOSIS, CARE, OR TREATMENT PROVIDED BY A VETERINARY
PRACTITIONER.

(2) “VETERINARY EXPENSES” INCLUDES THE COST OF DRUGS
PRESCRIBED BY A VETERINARY PRACTITIONER.

(J) “VETERINARY PRACTITIONER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–301
OF THE AGRICULTURE ARTICLE.

(K) “WAITING PERIOD” MEANS THE PERIOD OF TIME SPECIFIED IN A NEW
PET INSURANCE POLICY THAT MUST ELAPSE BEFORE SOME OR ALL OF THE
COVERAGE IN THE POLICY BEGINS.

(L) “WELLNESS PROGRAM” MEANS A SUBSCRIPTION– OR
REIMBURSEMENT–BASED PROGRAM THAT:

(1) IS SEPARATE FROM A PET INSURANCE POLICY; AND

(2) PROVIDES GOODS AND SERVICES TO PROMOTE THE GENERAL
HEALTH, SAFETY, OR WELL–BEING OF THE PET.

19–1102.

IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY TO PROMOTE THE PUBLIC
WELFARE BY CREATING A COMPREHENSIVE LEGAL FRAMEWORK WITHIN WHICH PET
INSURANCE MAY BE SOLD IN THE STATE.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 740 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

19–1103.

(A) THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES ONLY TO PET INSURANCE POLICIES OR
CERTIFICATES THAT ARE:

(1) ISSUED TO A RESIDENT OF THE STATE; OR

(2) SOLD, SOLICITED, NEGOTIATED, OR OFFERED IN THE STATE.

(B) ALL OTHER APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE APPLY TO PET
INSURANCE, EXCEPT THAT SPECIFIC PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE SUPERSEDE
ANY GENERAL PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE.

19–1104.

(A) A PET INSURER TRANSACTING PET INSURANCE SHALL DISCLOSE THE
FOLLOWING TO CONSUMERS:

(1) ALL POLICY EXCLUSIONS, INCLUDING EXCLUSIONS OF COVERAGE
DUE TO:

(I) A PREEXISTING CONDITION;

(II) A HEREDITARY DISORDER;

(III) A CONGENITAL ANOMALY OR DISORDER; OR

(IV) A CHRONIC CONDITION;

(2) ANY POLICY PROVISION THAT LIMITS COVERAGE THROUGH A
WAITING PERIOD, A DEDUCTIBLE, COINSURANCE, OR AN ANNUAL OR LIFETIME
POLICY LIMIT;

(3) WHETHER THE PET INSURER REDUCES COVERAGE OR INCREASES
PREMIUMS BASED ON THE INSURED’S CLAIM HISTORY, THE AGE OF THE COVERED
PET, OR A CHANGE IN THE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION OF THE INSURED; AND

(4) THE IDENTITY OF THE UNDERWRITING COMPANY IF THE
COMPANY DIFFERS FROM THE BRAND NAME USED TO MARKET AND SELL THE PET
INSURANCE POLICY.

(B) (1) A NOTICE SHALL BE PROMINENTLY PRINTED ON OR ATTACHED TO
THE FACE OF THE PET INSURANCE POLICY THAT STATES THAT:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 740

(I) THE POLICY MAY BE SURRENDERED TO THE INSURER FOR
CANCELLATION WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE POLICY IS DELIVERED TO
THE INSURED; AND

(II) IF A POLICY IS CANCELED DURING THE 10–DAY PERIOD, A
PRO RATA PREMIUM FOR THE UNEXPIRED TERM OF THE POLICY SHALL BE
RETURNED TO THE INSURED.

(2) AN INSURED IS NOT ENTITLED TO A PRO RATA PREMIUM IN
ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE INSURED HAS
MADE A CLAIM UNDER THE PET INSURANCE POLICY.

(C) A PET INSURER SHALL CLEARLY DISCLOSE A SUMMARY DESCRIPTION
OF THE BASIS OR FORMULA ON WHICH THE PET INSURER DETERMINES CLAIM
PAYMENTS UNDER A PET INSURANCE POLICY:

(1) WITHIN THE POLICY;

(2) BEFORE ISSUING THE POLICY; AND

(3) THROUGH A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS LINK ON THE MAIN PAGE
OF THE WEBSITE OF THE PET INSURER OR PET INSURER’S PROGRAM
ADMINISTRATOR.

(D) IF A PET INSURER USES A BENEFIT SCHEDULE TO DETERMINE CLAIM
PAYMENT UNDER A PET INSURANCE POLICY, THE PET INSURER SHALL:

(1) CLEARLY DISCLOSE THE APPLICABLE BENEFIT SCHEDULE IN THE
POLICY; AND

(2) DISCLOSE ALL BENEFIT SCHEDULES USED BY THE PET INSURER
UNDER ITS PET INSURANCE POLICIES THROUGH A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS LINK
ON THE MAIN PAGE OF THE WEBSITE OF THE PET INSURER OR PET INSURER’S
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR.

(E) IF A PET INSURER DETERMINES CLAIM PAYMENTS UNDER A PET
INSURANCE POLICY THAT ARE BASED ON USUAL AND CUSTOMARY FEES, OR ANY
OTHER REIMBURSEMENT LIMITATION BASED ON PREVAILING VETERINARY
PRACTITIONER CHARGES, THE PET INSURER SHALL:

(1) INCLUDE A USUAL AND CUSTOMARY FEE LIMITATION PROVISION
IN THE POLICY THAT CLEARLY DESCRIBES:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 740 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE PET INSURER’S BASIS FOR DETERMINING USUAL AND
CUSTOMARY FEES; AND

(II) HOW THE BASIS IS APPLIED IN CALCULATING CLAIM
PAYMENTS; AND

(2) DISCLOSE THE PET INSURER’S BASIS FOR DETERMINING USUAL
AND CUSTOMARY FEES THROUGH A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS LINK ON THE MAIN
PAGE OF THE WEBSITE OF THE PET INSURER OR PET INSURER’S PROGRAM
ADMINISTRATOR.

(F) IF A MEDICAL EXAMINATION BY A VETERINARY PRACTITIONER IS
REQUIRED TO BEGIN COVERAGE, THE PET INSURER SHALL:

(1) CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSE THE REQUIRED
ASPECTS OF THE EXAMINATION BEFORE PURCHASE OF THE PET INSURANCE POLICY;
AND

(2) DISCLOSE THAT EXAMINATION DOCUMENTATION MAY RESULT IN
A PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSION.

(G) A PET INSURER SHALL CLEARLY AND PROMINENTLY DISCLOSE ANY
WAITING PERIODS AND THE REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO THE WAITING PERIODS
BEFORE PURCHASE OF THE PET INSURANCE POLICY.

(H) (1) A PET INSURER SHALL:

(I) INCLUDE WITH A COPY OF THE PET INSURANCE POLICY A
SUMMARY OF ALL POLICY PROVISIONS REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTIONS (A) THROUGH (G) OF THIS SECTION IN A SEPARATE DOCUMENT IN AT
LEAST 12 POINT TYPE TITLED: “INSURER DISCLOSURE OF IMPORTANT POLICY
PROVISIONS”; AND

(II) INCLUDE THE DOCUMENT REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (I) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH ON THE WEBSITE OF THE PET INSURER OR PET INSURER’S
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR THROUGH A CLEAR AND CONSPICUOUS LINK ON THE
MAIN PAGE OF THE WEBSITE.

(2) THE DOCUMENT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(I) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE ALL RELEVANT DEFINITIONS ESTABLISHED UNDER §
19–1101 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 740

(I) AT THE TIME A PET INSURANCE POLICY IS ISSUED OR DELIVERED TO A
POLICYHOLDER, THE PET INSURER SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING
INFORMATION, PRINTED IN 12 POINT BOLDFACE TYPE:

(1) THE ADMINISTRATION’S MAILING ADDRESS, TOLL–FREE
TELEPHONE NUMBER, AND WEBSITE ADDRESS;

(2) THE ADDRESS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE TELEPHONE NUMBER OF
THE PET INSURER OR THE INSURANCE PRODUCER OF RECORD FOR THE PET
INSURER; AND

(3) IF THE POLICY WAS ISSUED OR DELIVERED BY AN INSURANCE
PRODUCER, A STATEMENT ADVISING THE POLICYHOLDER TO CONTACT THE
INSURANCE PRODUCER FOR ASSISTANCE.

(J) THE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SECTION SHALL BE IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER APPLICABLE DISCLOSURE
REQUIREMENTS UNDER THIS ARTICLE OR REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS
ARTICLE.

19–1105.

(A) (1) A PET INSURER MAY ISSUE POLICIES THAT EXCLUDE COVERAGE
ON THE BASIS OF ONE OR MORE PREEXISTING CONDITIONS WITH APPROPRIATE
DISCLOSURE TO THE CONSUMER.

(2) THE PET INSURER HAS THE BURDEN OF PROVING THAT THE
PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSION APPLIES TO THE CONDITION FOR WHICH A
CLAIM IS MADE.

(B) (1) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPHS (II) AND (III) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A PET INSURER MAY ISSUE A POLICY THAT IMPOSES A WAITING PERIOD
BEFORE COVERAGE UNDER THE POLICY BEGINS.

(II) A WAITING PERIOD MAY NOT EXCEED 30 DAYS FOR AN
ILLNESS OR ORTHOPEDIC CONDITION THAT DOES NOT RESULT FROM AN ACCIDENT.

(III) A PET INSURER MAY NOT IMPOSE A WAITING PERIOD FOR
AN ILLNESS OR ORTHOPEDIC CONDITION THAT RESULTS FROM AN ACCIDENT.

(2) (I) A PET INSURER THAT IMPOSES A WAITING PERIOD UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE A PROVISION IN THE PET
INSURANCE POLICY THAT ALLOWS FOR THE WAIVING OF WAITING PERIODS ON
COMPLETION OF A MEDICAL EXAMINATION.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 740 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) 1. A PET INSURER MAY REQUIRE A MEDICAL
EXAMINATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH TO BE CONDUCTED
BY A VETERINARY PRACTITIONER AFTER THE PURCHASE OF THE POLICY.

2. UNLESS THE PET INSURANCE POLICY SPECIFIES
THAT THE PET INSURER WILL PAY FOR A MEDICAL EXAMINATION UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A POLICYHOLDER SHALL PAY FOR THE
MEDICAL EXAMINATION.

3. A PET INSURER MAY:

A. SPECIFY ELEMENTS TO BE INCLUDED AS PART OF A
MEDICAL EXAMINATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH; AND

B. IF THE SPECIFICATIONS DO NOT UNREASONABLY
RESTRICT A POLICYHOLDER’S ABILITY TO WAIVE THE WAITING PERIOD, REQUIRE
DOCUMENTATION OF THE MEDICAL EXAMINATION.

(3) A PET INSURER SHALL CLEARLY AND PROMINENTLY DISCLOSE
REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO APPLICABLE WAITING PERIODS BEFORE
PURCHASE OF THE POLICY.

(C) A PET INSURER SHALL REQUIRE THAT AN INSURED SUBMIT A CLAIM
UNDER THE PET INSURANCE POLICY AFTER SUBMITTING PAYMENT TO THE
VETERINARY PRACTITIONER FOR VETERINARY EXPENSES.

(D) A PET INSURER MAY NOT REQUIRE A MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF THE
COVERED PET AS A CONDITION FOR THE RENEWAL OF A POLICY.

(E) A PRESCRIPTIVE, WELLNESS, OR NONINSURANCE BENEFIT INCLUDED
IN THE POLICY FORM FOR A PET INSURANCE POLICY IS PART OF THE POLICY AND
SUBJECT TO THIS ARTICLE AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

(F) A PET INSURER MAY NOT CONDITION AN INSURED’S ELIGIBILITY TO
PURCHASE A PET INSURANCE POLICY ON PARTICIPATION, OR LACK OF
PARTICIPATION, IN A SEPARATE WELLNESS PROGRAM.

19–1106.

(A) A PET INSURER OR PET INSURANCE PRODUCER MAY NOT:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 740

(1), EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION AND §
19–1107 OF THIS SUBTITLE, MARKET A WELLNESS PROGRAM AS A PET INSURANCE
POLICY; OR

(2) MARKET A WELLNESS PROGRAM DURING THE SALE,
SOLICITATION, OR NEGOTIATION OF A PET INSURANCE POLICY.

(B) IF A PET INSURER OR PET INSURANCE PRODUCER SELLS A WELLNESS
PROGRAM:

(1) THE PURCHASE OF THE WELLNESS PROGRAM MAY NOT BE A
REQUIREMENT TO PURCHASE THE PET INSURANCE;

(2) THE COSTS AND THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE WELLNESS
PROGRAM SHALL BE SEPARATE AND IDENTIFIABLE FROM ANY PET INSURANCE
POLICY SOLD BY A PET INSURER OR PET INSURANCE PRODUCER;

(3) THE PRODUCTS OR COVERAGES AVAILABLE THROUGH THE
WELLNESS PROGRAM MAY NOT DUPLICATE PRODUCTS OR COVERAGES AVAILABLE
THROUGH THE PET INSURANCE POLICY;

(4) THE ADVERTISING OF THE WELLNESS PROGRAM SHALL
ACCURATELY AND CLEARLY DESCRIBE THE WELLNESS PROGRAM; AND

(5) THE PET INSURER OR PET INSURANCE PRODUCER SHALL
CLEARLY AND IN 12 POINT BOLDFACE TYPE DISCLOSE TO CONSUMERS:

(I) THAT, EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION AND § 19–1107 OF THIS SUBTITLE, WELLNESS PROGRAMS ARE NOT
INSURANCE;

(II) THE ADMINISTRATION’S MAILING ADDRESS,
TOLL–FREE TELEPHONE NUMBER, AND WEBSITE ADDRESS; AND

(III) THE ADDRESS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE TELEPHONE
NUMBER OF THE PET INSURER OR PRODUCER OR INSURANCE PRODUCER OF
RECORD FOR THE PET INSURER.

(C) COVERAGE THAT IS INCLUDED IN THE PET INSURANCE POLICY
CONTRACT DESCRIBED AS A “WELLNESS” BENEFIT IS INSURANCE.

19–1107.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 740 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

IF A WELLNESS PROGRAM CONTRACTS TO INDEMNIFY OR TO PAY OR PROVIDE
A SPECIFIED DETERMINABLE AMOUNT OR BENEFIT ON THE OCCURRENCE OF A
DETERMINABLE CONTINGENCY, THE WELLNESS PROGRAM SHALL BE CONSIDERED
INSURANCE AND BE SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE AND
REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

~~19–1108.~~

(A) (1) IF THE COMMISSIONER FINDS THAT A PERSON HAS VIOLATED
THIS SUBTITLE, THE COMMISSIONER MAY IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING
$250 FOR EACH VIOLATION.

(2) IF THE COMMISSIONER FINDS A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE TO
BE WILLFUL, THE COMMISSIONER MAY IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING
$1,000 FOR THE VIOLATION.

(3) A PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION IS IN ADDITION TO
ANY OTHER PENALTY PROVIDED BY LAW.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COMMISSIONER MAY SUSPEND THE CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY OF A PET INSURER
THAT FAILS TO COMPLY WITH AN ORDER OF THE COMMISSIONER WITHIN THE TIME
~~SET~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORDER~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~EXTENSION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~TIME~~ ~~GRANTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
~~COMMISSIONER.~~

(2) THE COMMISSIONER MAY NOT SUSPEND THE CERTIFICATE OF
AUTHORITY OF A PET INSURER FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH AN ORDER:

(I) UNTIL THE TIME SET FOR AN APPEAL FROM THE ORDER HAS
EXPIRED; OR

(II) IF AN APPEAL HAS BEEN TAKEN, UNTIL THE ORDER HAS
BEEN AFFIRMED.

(3) THE COMMISSIONER MAY DETERMINE WHEN THE SUSPENSION OF
A CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY BECOMES EFFECTIVE.

(4) THE SUSPENSION SHALL REMAIN IN EFFECT FOR THE PERIOD SET
BY THE COMMISSIONER:

(I) UNLESS THE COMMISSIONER MODIFIES OR RESCINDS THE
SUSPENSION; OR

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 740

(II) UNTIL THE ORDER ON WHICH THE SUSPENSION IS BASED IS
MODIFIED, RESCINDED, OR REVERSED.

(C) (1) BEFORE THE COMMISSIONER IMPOSES A PENALTY OR SUSPENDS
OR REVOKES A CERTIFICATE OF AUTHORITY UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE
COMMISSIONER SHALL ISSUE A WRITTEN ORDER THAT STATES THE FINDINGS OF
THE COMMISSIONER.

(2) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL HOLD A HEARING BEFORE ISSUING
AN ORDER UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(3) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL GIVE WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE
HEARING AT LEAST 10 DAYS BEFORE THE HEARING.

(4) THE NOTICE SHALL SPECIFY THE ALLEGED VIOLATION.

~~19–1109.~~

THE COMMISSIONER MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before June 1, 2025,
the Maryland Insurance Administration shall develop informational material about pet
insurance policies that may be disseminated to and posted by veterinary practitioners in
the State.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
policies and contracts of pet insurance issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after
January 1, 2025.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ January 1, ~~2024~~ 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11