START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1008

Chapter 1008

(House Bill 621)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages – Stadium License Annual Fee

FOR the purpose of reducing the annual fee for a stadium beer, wine, and liquor license in
Harford County; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Harford
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–1006
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22–102.

This title applies only in Harford County.

22–1006.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Concession manager” means a person that provides and supervises
under contract the comprehensive management of all food and beverage concession sales
on the licensed premises.

(3) “Licensed premises” includes the stadium facility and stadium parking
lots.

(b) There is a stadium beer, wine, and liquor license.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1008 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The Board may issue the license for a stadium to the owner, lessee, or
concession manager of a professional baseball stadium.

(d) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the license authorizes the
license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on–premises consumption.

(2) The license holder may sell, serve, or allow the consumption of beer,
wine, and liquor on the stadium parking lots only with the prior written approval of the
Board.

(e) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the license holder may sell
beer, wine, and liquor on Monday through Sunday, from 8 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day.

(2) During a baseball game, a holder of a stadium license may not sell beer,
wine, or liquor:

(i) after the beginning of the eighth inning; or

(ii) during a doubleheader game, after the beginning of the sixth
inning of the second game.

(f) (1) An individual who serves beer, wine, and liquor on the licensed
premises shall hold a certificate from an alcohol awareness program that the Board
approves.

(2) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, an individual may
serve beer, wine, and liquor during a baseball game.

(ii) An individual may serve beer, wine, and liquor in a glass
container only on the club level, in an area in the stadium designated by the license holder
to hold a special event, or in a dining area where patrons are seated.

(3) (i) This paragraph does not apply to wine and liquor served on the
club level, in an area in the stadium designated by the license holder to hold a special event,
or in a dining area where patrons are seated.

(ii) An individual may dispense wine and liquor during a baseball
game only from a stationary structure that is in the stadium and equipped with a motor
vehicle driver’s license scanner.

(4) A license holder may not allow a roving vendor to dispense wine and
liquor.

(5) A license holder may not allow a person to carry beer, wine, and liquor
onto or off of the licensed premises.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1008

(g) The annual license fee is [$10,000] $4,000 $7,000.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3