START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 664 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 664 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Court Personnel - Protection of Personal Information (Judge Andrew F. 
Wilkinson Judicial Security Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Office of Information Privacy (OIP) in the Administrative Office 
of the Courts (AOC). A “protected individual,” or OIP (on behalf of a protected individual), 
is authorized to make a request for a person or governmental entity to not publish “personal 
information” of the protected individual (or to remove such information from an existing 
publication), as specified. The bill establishes related requirements and procedures, as well 
as remedies for noncompliance. In addition, OIP must establish and administer a Judicial 
Address Confidentiality Program for the general purpose of safeguarding the actual address 
of a program participant in relation to public records or inspection, including the shielding 
of real property records, as specified. Finally, the bill creates the Task Force to Ensure the 
Safety of Judicial Facilities, staffed by AOC; the task force must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland and the 
General Assembly by January 1, 2025. The bill’s provisions related to the task force 
take effect June 1, 2024, and terminate June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary can use existing budgeted resources to handle the bill’s 
requirements. The bill is otherwise not anticipated to materially affect State operations or 
finances, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 664/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Selected Definitions 
 
“Personal information” means a home address, home telephone number, mobile telephone 
number, personal email address, Social Security number, driver’s license number, federal 
tax identification number, bank account number, credit or debit card number, license plate 
number or unique identifier of a vehicle, birth or marital record, child’s name, school or 
daycare, place of worship, or, for specified protected individuals, a place of employment.  
 
“Personal information” does not include information that (1) has been publicly disclosed 
with the consent of the protected individual or (2) is relevant to and displayed as part of a 
news story, commentary, editorial, or other speech on matters of public concern. 
 
“Protected Individual” means a:   
 
 
current or retired justice or judge of a court established under Article IV of the 
Maryland Constitution; 
 
current or retired justice or judge of a federal court, including a U.S. Bankruptcy 
Court, domiciled in the State; 
 
current or retired magistrate appointed by a circuit court of the State; 
 
current or retired United States magistrate judge domiciled in the State; 
 
current or retired Commissioner of the District Court of Maryland; or 
 
spouse, child, or dependent who resides in the same household as an individual 
described above. 
 
“Publish” means to post or otherwise make available to the general public on the Internet, 
social media, or social networks. 
 
Personal Information of Protected Individuals – Request to Not Publish or Remove from 
Publication   
 
Governmental Entities:  A protected individual or OIP (on behalf of a protected individual) 
may request, as specified, that a governmental entity not publish the protected individual’s 
personal information (or to remove information from any existing publication). A request 
must be in writing; be sent by certified mail or email; include sufficient information to 
confirm the requester’s identity as a protected individual; and adequately identify the 
document, posting, or other publication containing the personal information. A request 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 664/ Page 3 
made by OIP, however, certifies that a requester is a protected individual and no further 
confirming information may be required. 
 
A governmental entity must promptly acknowledge receipt of the request, as specified, and 
(1) take steps reasonably necessary to ensure that the personal information is not published 
or (2) if already published, provide for the removal of the personal information within 
72 hours after receipt of the request. 
 
Other Persons:  Similarly, a protected individual or OIP (on behalf of a protected 
individual) may request, as specified, that a person who has published the protected 
individual’s personal information remove the information from publication. The request is 
subject to the same requirements as those specified above. 
 
The person to whom the request is made must (1) provide for the removal of the personal 
information within 72 hours after receipt of the request and (2) notify the protected 
individual or OIP by certified mail or email of the removal. 
 
Enforcement Provisions 
 
Civil Remedies:  A protected individual or OIP may bring a civil action against a 
governmental entity or a person for violating the aforementioned provisions that seeks 
declaratory relief, injunctive relief, or reasonable attorney’s fees. An action against a 
person may also seek damages incurred as a result of a violation; in addition, punitive 
damages may be awarded if the court finds that a person willfully refused to provide for 
the removal of personal information of a protected individual, as specified. 
 
Criminal Penalty:  An individual may not knowingly publish the personal information of 
a protected individual if (1) the individual knows or reasonably should know that 
publishing the personal information poses an imminent and serious threat to the protected 
individual and (2) the publishing results in an assault in any degree, harassment, trespass, 
or malicious destruction of property. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to 
a maximum penalty of 18 months’ imprisonment and/or a $5,000 fine. 
 
Judicial Address Confidentiality Program 
 
Generally:  OIP must establish and administer a Judicial Address Confidentiality Program 
for protected individuals. The purpose of the program is to:   
 
 
enable State and local agencies to respond to requests for public records without 
disclosing the actual address of a program participant; 
 
encourage interagency cooperation in providing address confidentiality for program 
participants; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 664/ Page 4 
 
allow governmental entities and persons to accept a program participant’s use of an 
address designated by OIP as a substitute address; and 
 
provide a program participant with protections in addition to those otherwise 
provided by the bill (as discussed above). 
 
Protected individuals may apply to OIP to participate in the program in the manner required 
by OIP. On receipt of an application, OIP must determine whether the applicant qualifies 
as a program participant. 
 
Requests from the Office of Information Privacy and Protection of Records:  OIP may 
request that:   
 
 
a person or governmental entity use a substitute address designated by OIP as the 
program participant’s address; 
 
a program participant’s actual address be shielded from public inspection in a record 
maintained by a governmental entity; and 
 
real property records be shielded on behalf of a program participant who has an 
ownership interest in real property, in accordance with Title 3, Subtitle 1, Part II of 
the Real Property Article (which governs recordation procedures for participants of 
the Address Confidentiality Program as administered by the Secretary of State – the 
bill makes some conforming changes to extend applicability to the participants in 
the Judicial Address Confidentiality Program). 
 
A person or governmental entity must promptly acknowledge receipt of the request, as 
specified, and take steps reasonably necessary to comply. A request by OIP certifies that a 
requester is a program participant. 
 
Although OIP may request that a governmental entity shield a program participant’s actual 
address from public inspection in a record, a custodian of record may:   
 
 
maintain a copy of a record containing a program participant’s actual address in a 
separate secure area to which persons who do not have a legitimate reason for access 
are denied access;  
 
permit public inspection of a record with the consent of the program participant; 
 
permit public inspection of a record with the actual address redacted from the 
record; or 
 
after notification to the program participant, permit public inspection of a record if 
the inspection will further a substantial public interest or a legitimate business need. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 664/ Page 5 
A record of a program participant’s actual address and telephone number maintained by 
OIP or a governmental entity is not a public record under the Maryland Public Information 
Act (PIA). 
 
Enforcement Provision:  A protected individual or OIP may bring a civil action for 
declaratory relief, injunctive relief, or reasonable attorney’s fees against a person who 
knowingly discloses a program participant’s actual address. 
 
Task Force to Ensure the Safety of Judicial Facilities 
 
The bill establishes the Task Force to Ensure the Safety of Judicial Facilities, staffed by 
AOC. Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement 
for expenses under the standard State travel regulations. Task force members serve at the 
pleasure of the person who appointed the member. At the task force’s first meeting, the 
task force must vote to adopt a code of conduct for task force members. 
 
The task force must:   
 
 
identify minimum requirements for courthouse safety, including the minimum 
number of security officers to be present in each type of judicial proceeding in a 
circuit court or in the District Court; minimum qualifications for security officers; 
minimum standards for secure entry and exit of judicial officers from court facilities, 
as specified; and minimum standards for safe public areas of courthouses, as 
specified; 
 
develop a legislative proposal to ensure that the minimum standards identified above 
are met; and 
 
identify physical security deficiencies that currently exist in courthouses and 
develop a plan to address these deficiencies. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland’s Public Information Act  
 
PIA establishes that all persons are entitled to have access to information about the affairs 
of government and the official acts of public officials and employees. Each governmental 
unit that maintains public records must identify a representative whom a member of the 
public may contact to request a public record. The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
must post all such contact information on its website and in any Public Information Act 
Manual published by OAG. 
 
Under PIA, “public record” means the original (or any copy) of any documentary material 
that (1) is made by a unit or an instrumentality of the State or of a political subdivision or 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 664/ Page 6 
received by the unit or instrumentality in connection with the transaction of public business 
and (2) is in any form, as further specified. 
 
Duties of Custodians 
 
Generally, a custodian of a public record must permit inspection of any public record at 
any reasonable time. A custodian must designate types of public records that are to be made 
available to any applicant immediately on request and maintain a current list of the types 
of public records that have been so designated. Each custodian must adopt reasonable rules 
or regulations that, consistent with PIA, govern timely production and inspection of a 
public record. Chapter 658 of 2021, effective July 1, 2022, requires each official custodian 
to adopt a policy of proactive disclosure of public records that are available for inspection 
under PIA, as specified. 
 
Required Denials:  A custodian must deny inspection of a public record or any part of a 
public record if (1) the public record is privileged or confidential by law or (2) the 
inspection would be contrary to a State statute, a federal statute or regulation, the Maryland 
Rules, or an order of a court of record. PIA also requires denial of inspection for specified 
personal and confidential records and information, including, for example, personnel and 
student records, hospital records, specified medical and financial information, and shielded 
criminal and police records. In general, PIA requires denial of inspection for the part of a 
public record that contains the home address, personal telephone number, or personal email 
address of an employee of a unit of an instrumentality of the State or of a political 
subdivision unless (1) the employee gives permission for the inspection or (2) the unit or 
instrumentality that employs the individual determines that inspection is needed to protect 
the public interest. 
 
Discretionary Denials:  Unless otherwise specified, if a custodian believes that inspection 
of a part of a public record by an applicant would be contrary to the public interest, the 
custodian may deny inspection to the applicant of that part of the record. PIA specifies the 
types of records and information that are eligible for discretionary denials, including 
documents that would not be available through discovery in a lawsuit. 
 
Procedure for Denial:  A custodian who denies inspection of a public record must, within 
10 working days, provide a written statement to the applicant that gives (1) the reason for 
denial; (2) if denying a part of a record on a discretionary basis, a brief explanation of why 
the denial is necessary and why redacting information would not address the reasons for 
the denial; (3) the legal authority for the denial; (4) a brief description of the undisclosed 
record (without disclosing the protected information); and (5) notice of the available 
statutory remedies. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 664/ Page 7 
Recordation of Instruments for Address Confidentiality Program Participants 
 
As referenced above, the existing Address Confidentiality Program (unchanged by the bill) 
is administered by the Secretary of State. Generally, a program participant (survivors of 
threatened, attempted, or actual domestic violence, sexual assault, stalking, harassment, or 
human trafficking) who acquires an ownership interest in real property while participating 
in the program may request the shielding of real property records concerning the property. 
 
In general, to shield the real property records, a program participant must submit specified 
information to the clerk of the circuit court and the appropriate county finance office, 
including the deed or other instrument to be recorded and specified notice of program 
participation that includes, among other items, a substitute address designated by the 
Secretary of State to be used as the program participant’s address. The clerk of the circuit 
court must provide a copy of the notice to the State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation and the State Archives. The notice is not a public record under PIA and, subject 
to limited exceptions, a clerk and any State or local agency that receives notice may not 
disclose the program participant’s identity information in conjunction with the property 
identified in the notice. 
 
The clerks of the circuit courts and AOC must establish uniform statewide procedures for 
recording deeds and other instruments under the Address Confidentiality Program. The 
procedures must, at a minimum, include provisions for (1) shielding recorded instruments 
that contain a participant’s actual address or identity information and (2) providing notice 
to the public of the existence of a shielded instrument and instructions for requesting access 
to the shielded instrument in accordance with statutory provisions that govern authorized 
disclosures for purposes of a bona fide title examination. All State and local agencies must 
similarly establish uniform procedures for maintaining related records, including tax, 
utility, and zoning records. 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
Under § 1‐114 of the General Provisions Article, a “person” includes an individual, 
receiver, trustee, guardian, personal representative, fiduciary, representative of any kind, 
corporation, partnership, business trust, statutory trust, limited liability company, firm, 
association, or other nongovernmental entity. 
 
Background:  The National Center for State Courts reports that the murder of 
Judge Andrew F. Wilkinson, a Maryland circuit court judge for Washington County, on 
October 19, 2023, was the third targeted shooting of a state court judge in the last 
three years. After presiding over and issuing a ruling in a divorce and custody case that 
involved extensive testimony of abuse inflicted on one of the litigants and her children, 
Judge Wilkinson was shot and killed in the driveway of his personal residence by the 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 664/ Page 8 
abusive litigant over whose case he had just presided. The preamble notes that protecting 
the safety and security of judicial officers throughout the State and the country has become 
an issue of critical importance due to threats, assaults, and murders of judicial officers and 
their family members. Similar federal legislation intended to protect federal judges and 
their families was recently enacted (The Daniel Anderl Judicial Security and Privacy Act) 
following the murder of the son of a U.S. District Court judge from New Jersey. The 
assailant was a disgruntled litigant who found the judge’s home address on the Internet. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The Judiciary can establish and operate OIP and staff the task force 
using existing budgeted resources. Any expense reimbursements for task force members 
are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. The bill’s 
penalty provision is not anticipated to materially impact fine revenues or incarceration 
costs. As it is assumed that the Secretary of State has no administrative duties under the 
bill with respect to the Judicial Address Confidentiality Program, the bill is otherwise not 
anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 575 (Senator Corderman, et al.) (By Request - Maryland 
Judicial Conference) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; National Center for State Courts; Secretary of State; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 14, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8