START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 654 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 654 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
St. Mary’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Nonprofit Performing Arts Theater 
License 
 
 
This bill establishes a nonprofit performing arts theater beer and wine license in  
St. Mary’s County. The St. Mary’s County Board of License Commissioners may issue the 
license for use on the premises of a performing arts theater operated by a nonprofit 
organization. The annual license fee is $300. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County revenues may decrease by $350 annually beginning in 
FY 2025, as discussed below. St. Mary’s County expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Nonprofit performing arts theater” means an area, a building, or a 
structure designed and used for plays, acts, dramas, concerts, or similar events by 
individuals performing on a stage. A nonprofit performing arts theater beer and wine 
license authorizes the holder to sell or serve beer and wine at retail for on-premises 
consumption. 
 
The license holder may sell or serve beer and wine from one hour before to one hour after 
a regular performance or a fundraiser performance that benefits the nonprofit performing 
arts theater. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 654/ Page 2 
The license holder may purchase beer and wine from a licensed wholesaler. 
 
Current Law:  In St. Mary’s County, there are Class C per diem (1) beer; (2) beer and 
wine; and (3) beer, wine, and liquor licenses that may be issued to nonprofit organizations, 
as specified. 
 
Local Revenues:  St. Mary’s County estimates it currently processes approximately 
65 Class C per diem licenses totaling $650 annually, and the bill’s creation of a nonprofit 
performing arts theater license with an annual fee of $300 would serve to reduce county 
revenues by approximately $350 per year beginning in fiscal 2025. However, the county 
estimates any decrease in per diem license fee revenues will be offset from processing only 
1 performing arts theater license per year instead of 65 per diem licenses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2