START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 624 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 624 
(Delegate Barnes) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program - Program Administrator - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill transfers primary responsibility for the administration of the Next Generation 
Scholars of Maryland Program (NGS) from the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE) to the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC). Even so, MSDE must 
assist MHEC with the review of applications, and MHEC must work in collaboration with 
MSDE to publicize the program, as specified. The bill also establishes that MSDE remains 
responsible for identifying eligible school systems and clarifies what constitutes financial 
aid literacy assistance. The bill is applicable beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures associated with NGS transfer from 
MSDE to MHEC beginning in FY 2026 (for no net effect). Assuming NGS special funds 
are not spent on administrative costs, MHEC general fund expenditures increase by 
$223,700 in FY 2026 ($60,000 for one-time contractual costs and $163,700 for ongoing 
staffing costs) to administer the program, as discussed below. MSDE can assist MHEC 
with the review of applications and collaborate on NGS publicity using existing resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$223,700 
$157,600 
$164,500 
$171,800 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($223,700) 
($157,600) 
($164,500) 
($171,800) 
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 624/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MHEC must still collaborate with MSDE, local boards of education, local 
superintendents, and institutions of higher education in administering the program. The 
transfer includes all aspects of NGS, including general program responsibilities already 
outlined in statute, administration of the Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program 
Fund, and the authority to adopt regulations to implement the program.  
 
The bill also specifies certain continued roles for MSDE to assist in program administration 
after the transfer. MSDE must assist MHEC with the review of applications and the 
selection of nonprofit organizations to administer the program in local school systems. 
Regarding publicization of the program, MHEC must publicize the program in 
collaboration with MSDE through community outreach and marketing materials. Such 
publicization must, under the bill, include posting of lists of the nonprofit organizations 
selected to provide services and the local school systems and cities in which the program 
is located. 
 
The bill also establishes that MSDE remains responsible for identifying local school 
systems at which at least 50% of the students as a percentage of full-time equivalent 
students are eligible to receive a free lunch under the National School Lunch Program in 
the 2015-2016 school year. Under the bill, “financial aid literary assistance” includes 
informing students of available sources of financial aid and how to leverage federal, State, 
and institutional aid at specified institutions to make education affordable. 
 
Current Law:  MSDE, in collaboration with MHEC, the local boards of education, local 
superintendents, and institutions of higher education, must administer NGS. 
 
The program must provide guidance and services to students who qualify for a Guaranteed 
Access Grant and students who qualify to receive free or reduced-price lunch under the 
National School Lunch Program to assist the students in successfully (1) completing a 
college preparatory curriculum; (2) graduating from high school; (3) matriculating at an 
institution of higher education; and (4) making timely progress to complete a degree 
program. Under Chapter 23 of 2022, NGS may continue to provide services to students 
when they attend an institution of higher education. 
 
To administer NGS, MSDE must:   
 
 
publicize the program through community outreach and marketing materials; 
 
award grants to nonprofit organizations to administer the program; 
 
solicit applications from nonprofit organizations to administer the program in local 
school systems; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 624/ Page 3 
 
give priority to applications from Maryland-based nonprofit organizations and that 
include businesses and institutions of higher education partners. 
 
The following guidance and services must be provided to students participating in the 
program:   
 
 
a high school graduation plan; 
 
summer work or internship opportunities; 
 
financial aid literacy assistance; 
 
career interest assessments; 
 
mentorship and one-on-one counseling; 
 
visits to college campuses and workplaces; 
 
an intensive summer bridge program for students entering an institution of higher 
education directly from high school or a matriculation assistance program; and  
 
a plan to matriculate and graduate from an institution of higher education. 
 
The Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million for 
the program. MSDE must use the mandated funding to distribute grants to nonprofit 
organizations that are selected in accordance with specified priorities to administer the 
program in local school systems in which at least 50% of the students are eligible to receive 
a free lunch under the National School Lunch Program in the 2015-2016 school year. 
 
The Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program Fund, administered by MSDE, is a 
special, nonlapsing fund that consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget; 
(2) interest earnings; and (3) any other money from any other source given to the fund. The 
fund may only be used to administer the program, and expenditures from the fund may be 
only in accordance with the State budget. Any investment earnings of the fund must be 
credited to the fund. 
 
On or before December 1 each year, MHEC and MSDE must report to the Governor and 
the General Assembly on the implementation of the program with information on 
implementation metrics and recommendations as specified. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes a $5.0 million 
appropriation for NGS. Given the bill is applicable beginning in fiscal 2026, this analysis 
reflects that funding for the Next Generation Scholars of Maryland Program Fund 
remaining budgeted through MSDE in fiscal 2025 and transferring to MHEC in fiscal 2026. 
 
MSDE advises that the program is currently administered by one employee who splits their 
time across NGS and other MSDE grant programs. Therefore, this analysis assumes no 
employees transfer from MSDE to MHEC because of the program transfer. MSDE further 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 624/ Page 4 
advises that currently none of the $5.0 million annual appropriation is used to cover 
administrative costs of the program. MHEC advises that its current staff has no additional 
capacity to take on program administration. To administer the NGS program, MHEC, 
therefore, advises that it would require three additional regular, full-time positions to 
oversee the NGS program. However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that 
MHEC can likely administer the program with fewer additional employees as MSDE 
currently administers NGS using time from only one program administrator. Therefore, 
this analysis assumes that one full-time program administrator plus one part-time 
administrative assistant to account for MHEC’s smaller bench of support staff are needed 
to properly administer NGS. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $223,747 in fiscal 2026, which 
accounts for new staff beginning July 1, 2025, in accordance with the bill’s uncodified 
language specifying that the bill’s changes apply beginning in fiscal 2026. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring (1) one regular, full-time program manager to run the program, 
coordinate with eligible nonprofits, and adhere to yearly reporting requirements and 
(2) one regular half-time research analyst to maintain data for State reporting purposes and 
provide administrative support as needed to run the program. It includes salaries, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and system enhancements 
needed to the Maryland College Aid Processing System (MDCAPS) to incorporate 
tracking and reporting of NGS funds. 
 
Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$149,218 
MDCAPS Upgrade Costs 
60,000 
Operating Expenses 
    14,529 
Total FY 2026 MHEC Administrative Expenditures 
$223,747 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent MHEC uses NGS 
special fund dollars for program administration, the general fund impact is offset, but the 
number or amount of funding provided to NGS grantees may be reduced. However, this 
analysis assumes that 100% of special funds continue to be used for NGS grants with 
general funds continuing to cover administrative costs. 
 
MSDE advises that its existing NGS staff person can, after the program transfer, continue 
to provide support to MHEC for the review of applications and publicization of the 
program without the need for additional expenditures. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 624/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 517 (Senator A. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5