START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1011

Chapter 1011

(House Bill 635)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages – Performing Arts Nonprofit
Organization License

FOR the purpose of establishing in Harford County a performing arts nonprofit
organization license that authorizes the holder to sell or serve beer, wine, and liquor
at certain locations for on–premises consumption; requiring the holder of the license
to comply with certain record–keeping and reporting requirements; and generally
relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Harford County.

BY renumbering
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–1005.2 and 22–1005.3
to be Section 22–1005.3 and 22–1005.4, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–1005.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–1501(b)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 22–1005.2 and 22–1005.3 of Artic1e – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis of
the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 22–1005.3 and 22–1005.4,
respectively.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1011 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22–102.

This title applies only in Harford County.

22–1005.2.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PERFORMING ARTS NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION”
MEANS A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT ORGANIZES THE PRODUCTION OF PLAYS,
ACTS, DRAMAS, CONCERTS, OR SIMILAR EVENTS BY INDIVIDUALS PERFORMING ON
A STAGE OR THE SHOWING OF FILMS.

(B) THERE IS A PERFORMING ARTS NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION BEER,
WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

(C) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE TO A PERFORMING ARTS
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

(D) (1) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL OR SERVE BEER,
WINE, AND LIQUOR AT RETAIL FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION AT UP TO THREE
LOCATIONS DESIGNATED AT THE TIME OF APPLICATION.

(2) THE LOCATIONS DESIGNATED AT THE TIME OF APPLICATION
MUST:

(I) BE SUITABLE FOR THE PRODUCTION OF PLAYS, ACTS,
DRAMAS, CONCERTS, OR SIMILAR EVENTS BY INDIVIDUALS PERFORMING ON A
STAGE OR THE SHOWING OF FILMS; AND

(II) MEET ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY THE
BOARD.

(3) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY ALTER THE AUTHORIZED LOCATIONS
EACH TIME THE LICENSE IS RENEWED.

(E) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL OR SERVE BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR:

(1) 1 HOUR BEFORE AND AFTER A PERFORMANCE;

(2) DURING A PERFORMANCE;

(3) DURING AN INTERMISSION; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1011

(4) DURING A RECEPTION WITHIN 1 HOUR BEFORE OR AFTER A
PERFORMANCE.

(F) THE LICENSE MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED TO ANOTHER LOCATION NOT
IDENTIFIED ON THE APPLICATION.

(G) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL PURCHASE BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
FROM A RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER OR AN AUTHORIZED AND LICENSED WHOLESALER.

(H) A LICENSE HOLDER MAY NOT SELL OR ISSUE MORE THAN 750 TICKETS
TO ANY EVENT OR PERFORMANCE AT WHICH THE HOLDER WILL SELL OR SERVE
BEER, WINE, OR LIQUOR.

(I) ISSUANCE OF A LICENSE UNDER THIS SECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT THE
BOARD FROM ISSUING A CLASS C PER DIEM LICENSE TO THE PERFORMING ARTS
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION FOR AN EVENT OUTSIDE THE SCOPE OF THE LICENSE.

(J) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL SERVE OR OFFER FOR SALE SNACKS AT
ALL TIMES WHEN BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR ARE SOLD.

(K) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL:

(I) KEEP COMPLETE AND ACCURATE RECORDS OF ALL
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD, SERVED, AND PURCHASED UNDER THIS SECTION;

(II) ON WRITTEN REQUEST OF THE COMPTROLLER OR, THE
BOARD, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, REPORT ON THE FORM THAT THE
COMPTROLLER OR, THE BOARD, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR REQUIRES
INFORMATION RELATING TO THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES THAT ARE THE SUBJECT
OF THE RECORDS REQUIRED TO BE KEPT; AND

(III) ON REQUEST OF THE COMPTROLLER OR, THE BOARD, OR
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, MAKE THE REPORT UNDER OATH.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, EACH LICENSE HOLDER SHALL KEEP RECORDS AT THE LOCATION
DESIGNATED IN THE LICENSE.

(II) IF THE LICENSE HOLDER IS ALLOWED TO HAVE MORE THAN
ONE LOCATION, THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY KEEP THE RECORDS AT THE PRINCIPAL
LOCATION.

(III) THE RECORDS SHALL:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 1011 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. MEET FORM AND CONTENT REQUIREMENTS OF THE
COMPTROLLER AND, THE BOARD, AND THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR;

2. BE PRESERVED FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS IN A MANNER
THAT ENSURES PERMANENCY; AND

3. BE MADE AVAILABLE FOR AUDIT OR INSPECTION
DURING REGULAR BUSINESS HOURS BY THE COMPTROLLER OR, THE BOARD, OR
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OR A DESIGNEE OF THE COMPTROLLER OR, THE BOARD,
OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(3) (I) THE COMPTROLLER MAY WITHOUT A HEARING
IMMEDIATELY SUSPEND FOR A MAXIMUM OF 30 DAYS THE LICENSE OF A LICENSE
HOLDER WHO FAILS TO COMPLY WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) IF A REPORT REQUIRED BY THIS SECTION OR AN
INVESTIGATION BY THE BOARD, A BOARD OFFICER, THE COMPTROLLER, THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OR ANY OTHER PERSON INDICATES THAT THE LICENSE
HOLDER IS VIOLATING THIS SECTION, THE BOARD SHALL SUMMON THE LICENSE
HOLDER AND CONDUCT A HEARING.

(III) IF THE CHARGES AT THE HEARING ARE SUSTAINED, THE
BOARD:

1. SHALL IMPOSE A FINE OF NOT LESS THAN $250 AND
NOT MORE THAN $2,000; AND

2. MAY SUSPEND OR REVOKE THE LICENSE HOLDER’S
LICENSE IMMEDIATELY.

(K) (L) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $750.

22–1501.

(b) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 2 (“Issuance or Denial of Local
Licenses”) of Division I of this article apply in the county:

(2) § 4–203 (“Prohibition against issuing multiple licenses to individual or
for use of entity”), subject to §§ 22–1503 and 22–1504 of this subtitle and Subtitle 13, Part
III [and], Subtitle 16, Part II, AND § 22–1005.2 of this title;

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1011

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5