START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1009

Chapter 1009

(House Bill 632)

AN ACT concerning

Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Golf Simulator Facility

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Harford County to
issue a Class GSF (golf simulator facility) license to a golf simulator facility under
certain circumstances; authorizing the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor
for on–premises consumption under certain circumstances; requiring the license
holder to submit a certain report to the Board before a license may be renewed; and
generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Harford County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 22–1003.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

22–102.

This title applies only in Harford County.

22–1003.2.

(A) THERE IS A CLASS GSF (GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY) LICENSE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE BY A GOLF SIMULATOR
FACILITY THAT:

(1) IS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC;

(2) HAS AT LEAST FIVE GOLF SIMULATOR BAYS; AND
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1009 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) HAS ACCOMMODATIONS THAT ARE PREDOMINANTLY DEDICATED
TO GOLF SIMULATOR BAYS AND SEATING DEDICATED TO THE GOLF SIMULATOR
BAYS.

(C) AN APPLICANT FOR THE LICENSE SHALL SUBMIT TO THE BOARD A
FLOOR PLAN OR LAYOUT OF THE PROPOSED LICENSED PREMISES THAT
ILLUSTRATES THAT THE PROPOSED LICENSED PREMISES IS PREDOMINANTLY
DEDICATED TO GOLF SIMULATOR BAYS AND HAS SEATING DEDICATED TO THE GOLF
SIMULATOR BAYS.

(D) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION:

(1) IF THE LICENSE HOLDER OFFERS FOOD ON THE PREMISES AT ALL
TIMES WHEN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE BEING SOLD; AND

(2) DURING NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
22–2004 OF THIS TITLE.

(E) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER’S ANNUAL GROSS SALES FROM:

(I) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MAY NOT EXCEED 35% OF THE
ANNUAL GROSS SALES OF THE GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY;

(II) GOLF SIMULATOR BAY RENTAL FEES SHALL BE AT LEAST
50% OF THE ANNUAL GROSS SALES OF THE GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY; AND

(III) FOOD SHALL BE AT LEAST 15% OF THE ANNUAL GROSS
SALES OF THE GOLF SIMULATOR FACILITY.

(2) BEFORE THE BOARD MAY RENEW THE LICENSE, THE LICENSE
HOLDER SHALL PROVIDE THE BOARD WITH AN ANNUAL GROSS SALES REPORT FOR
ALCOHOL, GOLF SIMULATOR BAY RENTAL FEES, AND FOOD THAT SHOWS THE
LICENSE HOLDER HAS MET THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(F) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $1,500.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2