START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 611 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 611 
(Delegate Harrison) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Electronic Transactions Protection Act - Repeal 
 
   
This bill repeals the Electronic Transactions Protection Act.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Electronic Transactions Protection Act, established by Chapter 440 of 
2001, defines “electronic transactions” as the use of, access to, or communication involving 
the Internet, World Wide Web, or wireless or similar technologies. 
 
Under the Act, the Electronic Transaction Education, Advocacy, and Mediation Unit 
within the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) is charged with:  (1) receiving complaints 
regarding the use or retention of personal information or unlawful conduct or practices in 
electronic transactions; (2) providing consumer information and advice about electronic 
transactions and privacy related laws; (3) referring complaints to the appropriate local, 
State, or federal agency; (4) developing information and education programs and materials; 
(5) identifying consumer problems and facilitating electronic commerce best practices for 
privacy protection; (6) promoting voluntary nonbinding arbitration and mediation of 
privacy-related electronic commerce disputes; (7) investigating and assisting in the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 611/ Page 2 
prosecution of identity theft, other privacy related crimes, and unfair and deceptive trade 
practices in electronic commerce transactions; and (8) assisting and coordinating the 
training of local, State, and federal law enforcement agencies, as appropriate, in identity 
theft, other privacy related crimes, and unfair and deceptive trade practices in electronic 
commerce transactions.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  OAG advises that the Electronic Transaction Education, Advocacy, 
and Mediation Unit was never funded and that the Consumer Protection Division handles 
the same functions. Thus, the bill does not substantively change OAG activities or finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 534 (Senator Jackson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2