START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 646 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 646 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - Police Auxiliary and Reserve 
Volunteers 
 
 
This bill (1) consolidates the existing subtraction modification programs for volunteer 
police personnel and volunteer fire, rescue, and emergency services personnel under a 
“public safety volunteer” subtraction modification and makes various related changes; and 
(2) increases the value of the subtraction modification for police auxiliaries and reserve 
volunteers from $5,000 to $7,000 beginning in tax year 2024 (consistent with the value of 
the existing subtraction modification for volunteer fire, rescue, and emergency services 
personnel). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and applies to tax year 2024 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $21,000 annually beginning in FY 2025. 
The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s changes with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000) 
($21,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by $14,000 annually beginning in FY 2025. Local 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 646/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Honorable Louis L. Goldstein Volunteer Police Personnel Subtraction 
Modification Program authorizes a subtraction modification of $5,000 against the State 
income tax for qualifying police auxiliaries and reserve volunteers. 
 
A similar program – the Honorable Louis L. Goldstein Volunteer Fire, Rescue, and 
Emergency Medical Services Personnel Subtraction Modification Program – authorizes a 
subtraction modification against the State income tax for qualifying volunteer fire, rescue, 
or emergency medical services (EMS) members. The value of the subtraction modification 
is $7,000 for tax year 2022 and beyond. 
 
Similar eligibility requirements apply to the volunteer police personnel and volunteer fire, 
rescue, and EMS personnel subtraction modifications. In general, an individual must (1) be 
an active member of a qualifying organization; (2) serve the organization in a volunteer 
capacity; and (3) have been an active member of a qualifying organization for at least 
36 months during the last 10 calendar years by December 31 of the taxable year. In 
addition, an individual must:   
 
 
qualify for active status during the taxable year under a specified program, or have 
maintained active status under a specified program for at least 25 years; 
 
be a member of the National Guard or other reserve component of the 
U.S. Armed Forces who has been ordered into active military service and serves on 
active duty during the taxable year; or  
 
be a civilian or member of the Merchant Marines on assignment in support of the 
U.S. Armed Forces in a designated combat zone during the taxable year. 
 
State Revenues:  As discussed above, the bill increases the value of the volunteer police 
personnel subtraction modification from $5,000 to $7,000 beginning in tax year 2024. 
Thus, general fund revenues decrease by an estimated $21,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025 due to increases in the value of subtraction modifications claimed against the 
personal income tax. This estimate is based on claims for the existing subtraction 
modification in recent tax years and assumes a similar number of taxpayers will claim the 
subtraction modification at the higher value in tax year 2024 and future years. 
 
Local Revenues:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $14,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025 due to increases in the value of subtraction modifications claimed 
against the personal income tax. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 646/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 108 (Senator Bailey, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 5, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3