START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 693 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 693 
(The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Departmental - 
Housing and Community Development) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Renters' Rights and Stabilization Act of 2024 
 
 
This departmental bill increases a certain surcharge assessed in civil cases in the 
District Court and the circuit courts and alters the distribution of surcharge revenues in 
certain landlord-tenant cases. The bill also establishes the Office of Tenant and Landlord 
Affairs (OTLA) in the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). In 
addition, among other provisions, the bill (1) extends the period between granting judgment 
for possession in favor of a landlord and the execution of the warrant of restitution; 
(2) establishes a tenant’s right of first refusal (and an exclusive negotiation period) prior to 
the sale of certain residential rental property; and (3) expands the categories of eviction 
data that must be collected by the Judiciary and provided to DHCD. Provisions that 
allocate a portion of surcharge revenues to a certain special fund are contingent on 
the enactment of Senate Bill 370 or House Bill 428. Provisions related to eviction data 
take effect October 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by up to $13.3 million in FY 2025 due to the 
increase in the surcharges; future year revenues reflect annualization and maximum 
potential revenues under the assumptions discussed below. General fund expenditures for 
the Judiciary and DHCD increase by a total of $379,300 in FY 2025; the FY 2025 budget 
as passed by the General Assembly includes $344,500 in general funds for DHCD, 
contingent on a bill that establishes OTLA. Future year expenditures reflect annualization, 
inflation, and ongoing costs. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$13.3 
$17.7 
$17.7 
$17.7 
$17.7 
GF Expenditure 
$0.4 
$0.4 
$0.4 
$0.4 
$0.5 
Net Effect 
$12.9 
$17.3 
$17.3 
$17.3 
$17.3  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 693/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues from landlord-tenant surcharge and service fees, particularly 
in Baltimore City, potentially decrease minimally, as discussed below. The bill does not 
have a direct, material effect on local expenditures, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
disagrees with this assessment, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Surcharges for Civil Cases 
 
The bill increases, from $8 to $43, a maximum surcharge imposed by the District Court for 
summary ejectment cases. The bill requires the surcharge to be assessed against a landlord 
and prohibits it from being awarded or assigned as a fee or cost against a residential tenant 
by the court.  
 
However, the court may allow a landlord to deduct the surcharge from the tenant’s security 
deposit if (1) a judgment for possession is granted in the landlord’s favor and (2) the lease 
agreement provides that a surcharge may be assessed against the tenant. Any deduction 
may not exceed the amount of a tenant’s security deposit. The bill makes conforming 
changes to provisions governing the authorized use and forfeiture of surety bonds and 
security deposits.  
 
Contingent on the enactment of Senate Bill 370 or House Bill 428, surcharge revenues 
from summary ejectment cases must be deposited as follows:  45% into the Statewide 
Rental Assistance Voucher Program in DHCD; 45% into the Maryland Legal Services 
Corporation (MLSC) Fund; and 10% into the Rental Assistance for Community Schools 
Families (RACSF) Fund (as established in Senate Bill 370 or House Bill 428).  
 
The bill also increases the maximum surcharge in other civil cases as follows:  (1) from 
$18 to $28 for cases in the District Court (other than the aforementioned summary 
ejectment cases); and (2) in the circuit courts, from $55 to $85. Surcharge revenues from 
these cases continue to be deposited into the MLSC Fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 693/ Page 3 
Office of Tenant and Landlord Affairs 
 
OTLA is established within DHCD to (1) ensure that tenants have access to educational 
resources to aid in understanding and exercising the tenants’ rights under State law; 
(2) provide tenants with information on how to report a violation of their legal rights as 
tenants and facilitate referrals of reported violations to appropriate enforcement agencies; 
(3) provide tenants with information on how to obtain financial counseling; and (4) notify 
appropriate authorities regarding housing discrimination and other unfair or illegal housing 
practices. The Secretary of Housing and Community Development must appoint the 
director of the office, who reports to and serves at the pleasure of the Secretary. 
 
The bill assigns the following duties to OTLA:  
 
 
developing resources to aid tenants in understanding and exercising their legal rights 
as tenants, including (1) a Maryland Tenants’ Bill of Rights that summarizes the 
existing rights and remedies available under State and federal law (and includes 
contact information for OTLA) and (2) a publicly accessible website to provide 
access to the Maryland Tenants’ Bill of Rights and other relevant informational 
resources;  
 
establishing points of contact within the office by which a tenant may report a 
violation by a landlord (or a person acting on behalf of a landlord) for referral to 
appropriate enforcement agencies;  
 
providing resources to facilitate access by tenants to credit counseling;  
 
referring covered individuals to the Access to Counsel in Evictions Program 
(administered by MLSC);  
 
collaborating with county and local governments that provide tenant advocacy and 
assistance; 
 
receiving notices and other documents related to a tenant’s exclusive negotiation 
period and right of first refusal (as established under the bill); and 
 
adopting regulations governing the content and delivery of notices for a tenant’s 
exclusive negotiation period and right of first refusal. 
 
OTLA may (1) implement fair housing testing to ensure compliance by landlords with fair 
housing laws and (2) identify landlords that are out of compliance with federal, State, or 
local law and facilitate referrals of cases to an appropriate law enforcement agency or 
another appropriate agency. 
 
By June 1 each year, OTLA must publish the Maryland Tenants’ Bill of Rights on its 
website. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 693/ Page 4 
Tenant’s Right of Exclusive Negotiation Period and First Refusal 
 
Right of Exclusive Negotiation Period 
 
Generally:  Subject to limitations on applicability (discussed below), the bill establishes 
specified procedures in regard to a “tenant’s exclusive negotiation period” before a 
residential rental property may be offered for sale to the public or a third party. This period 
refers to the period of time after a tenant is notified about the tenant’s right to purchase the 
property during which the tenant may negotiate exclusively with the owner to enter into a 
contract of sale. Tenant(s) may affirmatively decline an offer of sale by an owner, as 
specified, after which the owner may offer the property for sale. If multiple tenants submit 
offers, the owner can choose the most favorable one without liability to any other tenant.  
 
Notice Requirements:  The owner must send each tenant a written notice of the tenant’s 
right to deliver an offer to purchase the property. The notice must (1) be in the form 
specified by DHCD via adopted regulations; (2) be delivered by first class mail with a 
certificate of mailing or a delivery service providing delivery tracking and confirmation;  
(3) contain “material terms” that the owner would agree to incorporate in a resulting 
contract of sale with the tenant; (4) state, in a conspicuous manner, that the notice is a 
solicitation of an offer to purchase and is not intended as and may not be construed as a 
binding contract of sale; and (5) state any information regarding deadlines for the tenant to 
submit an offer to purchase (including the duration of the tenant’s exclusive negotiation 
period). The owner must also send a copy of the notice to OTLA, as specified.  
 
Negotiations:  Tenants have 30 days to submit a written purchase offer to the owner after 
the landlord delivers the notice. Within 5 days after the owner receives an offer to purchase 
the property from the tenant, the owner must (1) if the offer contains the same or more 
favorable material terms as those contained in the notice, accept the offer and notify OTLA 
or (2) if the offer contains material terms that deviate from the terms of the notice, deliver 
a counteroffer to the tenant with an explanation of how the offer deviates from the notice. 
 
Within five days after receiving a counteroffer, the tenant may accept or reject the owner’s 
counteroffer. If no response is received within this timeframe, the counteroffer is 
considered rejected, and the owner must notify OTLA. A tenant’s right of first refusal is 
terminated if the tenant fails to, in accordance with the bill’s provisions, (1) deliver a 
written offer to purchase the property or (2) accept the counteroffer.  
 
For purposes of the bill’s provisions, “material terms” are those that are essential for the 
sale of a residential rental property, including the sales price, settlement date, and other 
contingencies. Material terms for the purchase of a residential rental property under these 
provisions (1) must be commercially reasonable and made in good faith; (2) must adhere 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 693/ Page 5 
to generally accepted residential real estate practices; and (3) may not include restrictions 
on financing methods or the right of inspection.  
 
 
Right of First Refusal 
 
Generally: Subject to limitations on applicability (discussed below), before a voluntary 
transfer of title to a residential rental property may occur, any tenant or group of tenants of 
the property must have the right of first refusal to purchase the property. The right of a 
third party to purchase any residential rental property to which the bill’s provisions apply 
is subject to the exercise of the right of first refusal by a tenant or group of tenants. 
 
Tenants have the right of first refusal to purchase residential rental property if (1) the 
property owner intends to accept a purchase offer from a third party for an amount that is 
at least 10% lower than any price offered to the tenant in any previous notice, offer, or 
counteroffer during the exclusive negotiation period, as discussed above, or (2) the owner, 
without having offered the property for sale to the public or any third party, receives an 
offer from a third party to purchase the property. If a third party delivers an offer to 
purchase to the owner, the owner must notify the third party of a tenant’s right of 
first refusal. 
 
Notice Requirements:  If the owner receives an offer to purchase the property from a 
third party under either of the aforementioned circumstances, the owner is prohibited from 
accepting the offer until (1) the owner provides written notice, as specified under the bill, 
to the tenant of the tenant’s right of first refusal and (2) the tenant has an opportunity to 
exercise the right of first refusal within 30 days after receipt of the notice. In addition to 
other requirements, the notice must contain the same sales price as the third-party offer to 
purchase. The owner must send a copy of the written notice to OTLA.  
 
Exercise of Right of First Refusal:  Within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the tenant 
may deliver to the owner a written offer to purchase the property. If a tenant delivers an 
offer to purchase at the same sales price as the offer from the third party, the owner must 
accept the offer from the tenant and notify OTLA. If more than one tenant or group of 
tenants delivers a timely offer to purchase the property, the owner may select the more 
favorable offer without liability to any other tenant.  
 
If the owner accepts the tenant’s offer to purchase but the contract is terminated before 
settlement, the tenant’s right of first refusal is waived and the owner must notify OTLA. If 
a tenant does not deliver an offer to purchase, (1) the owner may accept the third-party 
offer; (2) the tenant’s right of first refusal is considered waived; and (3) the owner must 
notify OTLA.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 693/ Page 6 
 
Penalty and Liability for Failure to Comply 
 
An owner who violates these provisions is subject to a maximum fine of $1,000 per 
violation. 
 
After closing on a contract of sale between an owner and a tenant, liability for failure to 
comply with the bill’s provisions is restricted to the owner and may not attach to the 
residential rental property that is the subject of the contract. A tenant who brings an action 
against the owner after closing for failing to provide the notice required by the bill may not 
file a notice of lis pendens under Maryland Rule 12-102; a court may dismiss a wrongfully 
filed action.  
 
 
Waiver, Interpretation, and Preemption 
 
The rights of a tenant under these provisions may not be waived or assigned, and any 
attempted waiver or assignment is void. The provisions preempt any local law or ordinance 
governing the right of first refusal or opportunity to purchase of a jurisdiction or tenant for 
the purchase of a residential rental property.  
 
The bill’s provisions may not be construed to prohibit (1) an individual from submitting an 
offer to purchase a property leased by the individual that is offered for sale to the public or 
(2) multiple tenants of a residential property from jointly delivering an offer to purchase or 
from jointly contracting to purchase the property. 
 
 
Tenant’s Rights to Exclusive Negotiation Period and First Refusal – Applicability  
 
The bill’s provisions establishing a tenant’s rights of an exclusive negotiation period and 
first refusal do not apply to the following circumstances:  
 
 
transfer of title to a family member of the owner; 
 
transfer of title to a business entity wholly owned by the owner; 
 
transfer of title through a court order (including foreclosure, tax sale, sale by 
court-appointed trustee, etc.); 
 
transfer by a fiduciary in the course of the administration of a decedent’s estate, 
guardianship, conservatorship, or trust;  
 
transfer of title through a will, trust instrument, or inheritance; 
 
transfer of bare legal title into a revocable trust, as specified;  
 
transfer of title to the State or a local government; 
 
transfer of title in lieu of foreclosure of a mortgage or deed of trust; 
 
transfer of title through a court order, receivership, or court-approved settlement; 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 693/ Page 7 
 
transfer of title through a bankruptcy court order or sale by a bankruptcy trustee or 
debtor in possession; 
 
gift transfer of title to a tax-exempt nonprofit organization, as specified; or 
 
transfer of title by a public housing authority. 
 
Further, for purposes of the aforementioned provisions, “residential rental property” means 
a tenant-occupied rental property for residential use with three or fewer individual dwelling 
units; therefore, the provisions are not applicable to residential rental property with four or 
more individual dwelling units. A “tenant” is an individual who has occupied a residential 
rental property for at least six months and who is a named lessee in the written lease. 
 
Additional Responsibilities for the Department of Housing and Community 
Development 
 
The Secretary of Housing and Community Development must adopt implementing 
regulations. 
 
DHCD must regularly gather and monitor data related to the aforementioned provisions. 
The data must be published on its website, organized in a specified manner, and provided 
on request to State or local government entities and institutions of higher education located 
in the State. DHCD may not publish data that is privileged or otherwise protected from 
disclosure. 
 
Residential Lease Requirements and Prohibitions 
 
The bill decreases, from two months’ rent to one month’s rent, the maximum security 
deposit that may be imposed by a landlord. However, a landlord may impose a security 
deposit in an amount equivalent to up to two months’ rent if (1) the tenant is eligible and 
has qualified for utility assistance through the Department of Human Services; (2) the lease 
agreement requires that the tenant make payments for utility services directly to the 
landlord; and (3) the tenant and landlord agree in writing to the amount of the security 
deposit. 
 
The bill expands the provisions that may not be included in a lease to include prohibitions 
against (1) requiring a tenant to pay more than the sum of the security deposit and the 
first month’s rent in order to start the lease and occupy the premises; (2) waiving or placing 
conditions on a tenant’s right of first refusal; (3) except as explicitly authorized, providing 
that a tenant is responsible for – or requiring a tenant to agree to be responsible for – 
payment of the surcharge assessed against the landlord by the District Court under the bill’s 
provisions; or (4) requiring the tenant to accept specified notice by electronic delivery. A 
lease must include a copy of the most recent version of the Maryland Tenants’ Bill of 
Rights. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 693/ Page 8 
Failure to Pay Rent – Procedures 
 
The bill extends, from four days to seven days, the minimum time period between the 
granting of a judgement of possession in favor of the landlord and the issuance of an 
execution of a warrant of restitution against the tenant.  
 
The bill requires the administrative judge of any district to stay the execution of a warrant 
of restitution in the event of extreme weather conditions affecting the residential property, 
as specified under the bill. A warrant of restitution granted a stay for these circumstances 
must be completed within five days after the extreme weather conditions stop.  
 
The bill also establishes that if written notice (as required under current law) of a landlord’s 
intent to file a claim to recover possession of the premises based on the failure to pay rent 
is sent electronically, the electronic message must provide the landlord with proof of the 
transmission of the notice.  
 
Eviction Data Collection and Publication – Provisions Effective October 1, 2025 
 
The bill specifies that “eviction data” – as generally required under current law to be 
collected by the Judiciary and shared with DHCD for publication – must include the 
following information, regardless of whether an eviction occurs:  
 
 
the name of the landlord; 
 
the street address, city, county, and zip code of the premises; 
 
the date of filing of the complaint and the type of action; 
 
for a hearing or trial related to the complaint, whether the tenant appeared at the 
hearing or trial and whether the tenant had legal representation; 
 
the date of entry of a judgement for possession; 
 
whether the right of redemption was foreclosed at the time of the entry of judgment 
for possession, if applicable; 
 
the date of issuance of the warrant; and 
 
the outcome of the issuance of the warrant, as specified. 
 
The Judiciary must notify DHCD and provide updated eviction data if the Judiciary 
discovers that any shared eviction data (for any collection period) is inaccurate or 
incomplete. The bill also specifies that DHCD must publish and make available only 
publicly disclosable data (defined in the bill as data not required to be withheld from 
disclosure under the Public Information Act or other law). 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 693/ Page 9 
Current Law: 
 
Surcharges for Landlord-tenant and Civil Cases 
 
Generally, the Chief Judge of the District Court must assess a surcharge of up to $8 for 
summary ejectment (failure to pay rent) cases and $18 for all other civil cases (including 
breach of lease and tenant holding over actions). Money from this surcharge is deposited 
into the MLSC Fund, which is used to finance civil legal services to indigent clients. An 
additional surcharge of up to $3 for summary ejectment cases and $8 for all other civil 
cases is also assessed for the benefit of the Circuit Court Real Property Records 
Improvement Fund. In Baltimore City, further surcharges are applied to certain 
landlord-tenant cases; these funds are remitted to the city to enhance the service of domestic 
violence orders. 
 
In the circuit courts, a surcharge of up to $55 may be assessed per case for each civil case. 
These funds are also deposited into the MLSC Fund.  
 
A judge may waive the prepayment of filing fees and other costs due to indigence. 
 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program 
 
Chapter 446 of 2023 established the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program in 
DHCD. The purpose of the program is to provide vouchers and housing assistance 
payments for low-income families that are currently on a waiting list under the federal 
Housing Choice Voucher Program for housing in units approved by DHCD or a public 
housing agency within the State. DHCD and each public housing agency must equally 
prioritize vouchers and housing assistance payments for families that meet specified 
demographic criteria. Pursuant to Chapter 446, the Governor is required to include 
$10.0 million in the annual budget bill for the program in fiscal 2025 through 2027 and 
sufficient amounts in future years to fund the same number of vouchers. The fiscal 2025 
budget as introduced includes $10.0 million in general funds for the program, consistent 
with the mandated appropriation. 
 
Eviction Proceedings – Generally 
 
In general, a landlord seeking to evict a tenant initiates the process by filing the appropriate 
action (e.g., failure to pay rent, breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. If awarded a 
judgment by the court, the landlord files a warrant of restitution, which, once reviewed and 
signed by the court, authorizes an eviction. The warrants of restitution are forwarded to the 
local sheriff’s office who is then authorized to carry out the evictions. Statute sets forth 
numerous specific requirements for such actions, including those related to written notice 
prior to filing certain actions. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 693/ Page 10 
In failure to pay rent actions, if judgment is in favor of the landlord and the tenant does not 
return the premises to the landlord or otherwise satisfy the judgment by paying the 
applicable rent and late fees within 4 days, as specified, the court must, at any time after 
4 days have elapsed, issue a warrant of restitution. The court may, upon presentation of a 
certificate signed by a physician certifying that surrendering the property within the 
4-day period would endanger the health or life of the tenant or other occupant, extend the 
time for surrender of the premises as justice may require up to 15 days. Statutory provisions 
also authorize stays of execution in other specified circumstances, such as in the event of 
extreme weather conditions. 
 
If the landlord does not order a warrant of restitution within 60 days from either the date 
of judgment or the expiration date of any stay of execution (whichever is later), then  
(1) the judgment for possession must be stricken and (2) the judgment must generally count 
toward the threshold for the number of judgments at which a tenant no longer has the right 
to redemption of the leased premises, as specified. 
 
Residential Lease Requirements and Prohibitions 
 
Any landlord who offers five or more dwelling units in the State for rent may not rent a 
unit without using a written lease. The lease must include (1) a statement that the premises 
will be delivered in a livable condition, with reasonable safety, if that is the agreement, or 
if both parties agree otherwise, a statement of the agreement concerning the condition of 
the premises; (2) the landlord’s and the tenant’s specific obligations for heat, gas, 
electricity, water, and repair of the premises; and (3) a receipt for the security deposit, as 
specified. 
 
Among other requirements regarding leases, a landlord may not use a lease or form of lease 
containing any provision that, among others: 
 
 
has the tenant agree to waive/forego any right or remedy provided by applicable 
law; 
 
imposes a penalty for the late payment of rent in excess of specified thresholds; 
 
authorizes the landlord to take possession of the leased premises or the tenant’s 
personal property unless the lease has been terminated by action of the parties or by 
operation of law, and the personal property has been abandoned by the tenant 
without the benefit of a formal legal process; 
 
is against public policy and void, as specified;  
 
requires the tenant to accept notice of rent increases by electronic delivery; or 
 
limits the ability of a tenant to summon the assistance of law enforcement or 
emergency services or penalizes a tenant solely for summoning the assistance of law 
enforcement or emergency services. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 693/ Page 11 
Eviction Data – Collection and Publication 
 
The Judiciary is required to collect, compile, and share residential eviction data on a 
monthly basis in a manner required by DHCD. “Eviction data” means, in regard to 
specified landlord/tenant actions, the (1) county and zip code of the subject premises; 
(2) date of execution of the warrant of restitution or writ of possession; and (3) the type of 
action from which the warrant or writ was issued. DHCD must organize and format the 
data and publish the data on its website. Generally, the data must be made available, on 
request, by (1) a State agency; (2) an agency of a county or municipality; or (3) an academic 
institution located in the State. 
 
Rental Assistance for Community School Families Program 
 
Chapters 210 and 211 of 2024 (Senate Bill 370/House Bill 428) establish the Rental 
Assistance for Community School Families Program and related special fund within 
DHCD to provide rental assistance to eligible student households at community schools. 
The Acts take effect July 1, 2024. 
 
Background:  The Governor’s Office reports that this bill, which is part of the 
Administration’s legislative package, is intended to address the immediate needs of tenants 
who are experiencing housing instability. Specifically, the bill was introduced in an effort 
to, among other things, (1) establish a designated office to provide tenants with information 
about their rights under law and to create the Maryland Tenant’s Bill of Rights; (2) address 
the high eviction filing rate by increasing a specified surcharge in landlord-tenant actions; 
and (3) create a new pathway to homeownership by creating a statewide right of 
first refusal, allowing some tenants the right to purchase their home if being sold.  
 
In a 2021 op-ed, former Attorney General Brian E. Frosh addressed numerous concerns 
with the State’s system for landlord-tenant disputes and highlighted the overall low cost of 
filing such actions as contributing to the State’s high rate of eviction filings. The landlord’s 
cost of filing is one of the lowest nationwide, causing some landlords to file against the 
same household repeatedly, essentially using the District Court as a collection agency. 
Legislation to increase the surcharges on filings in specific landlord-tenant actions has been 
introduced in prior years, but those measures have not been successful. 
 
The General Assembly has, however, enacted several measures in an attempt to provide 
resources, information, and assistance to tenants, including, among others, measures to  
(1) require landlords, prior to filing a failure to pay rent action against a tenant, to provide 
written notice to tenants of an intent to file a claim; (2) establish the Access to Counsel in 
Evictions Program; (3) require landlords to demonstrate compliance with any local 
licensing laws; and (4) authorize court-ordered stays in failure to pay rent proceedings if a 
tenant is awaiting the results of an application for rental assistance. 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 693/ Page 12 
Despite the actions taken to date, data provided by the Judiciary, as included in a DHCD 
dashboard, indicate that more than 21,500 tenants were evicted during 2023, with 
approximately 19,000 of those evictions resulting from failure to pay rent actions. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by as much as $13.3 million in 
fiscal 2025 and up to $17.7 million annually thereafter, which reflects an increase in special 
fund revenues for the MLSC Fund, the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program, and 
the Rental Assistance for Community Schools Families Fund. The fiscal 2025 estimates 
reflect the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. General fund expenditures increase by a 
total of $379,314 in fiscal 2025 for computer programming costs in the Judiciary and 
DHCD costs to establish OTLA; the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $344,515 in general funds for DHCD contingent on the enactment of legislation 
that establishes OTLA, which this bill effectuates. Future year expenditures are annualized 
and reflect inflation and ongoing costs. 
 
As previously noted, the bill contains provisions that are contingent on the passage of 
separate legislation (Senate Bill 370/House Bill 428). DLS notes that Senate Bill 370/ 
House Bill 428 have been enacted as Chapters 210 and 211, respectively; thus, this analysis 
reflects the contingency.   
 
The bill’s annualized revenue impact on the multiple funds/programs affected by the bill 
under the assumptions discussed below is shown in Exhibit 1. A more detailed discussion 
of these effects is provided below. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Annualized Revenue Impacts 
 
Surcharge Recipient 
Revenues under 
Current Law* 
Revenues under 
the Bill 
Difference 
Maryland Legal Services 
Corporation Fund 
$9,882,105 
$18,106,808 
$8,224,703  
Statewide Rental Assistance 
Voucher Program 
n/a 
7,774,772 
7,774,772 
Rental Assistance for Community 
Schools Families Fund 
n/a 
1,727,727 
1,727,727 
 
* Reflects revenues collected in fiscal 2023, as estimated and provided by the Judiciary. 
 
Source:  Judiciary; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 693/ Page 13 
Surcharge Revenues for the Maryland Legal Services Corporation Fund, the Statewide 
Rental Assistance Voucher Program, and the Rental Assistance for Community Schools 
Families Fund 
 
Summary Ejectment Cases:  The Judiciary advises that approximately 401,800 summary 
ejectment cases were filed in the District Court during fiscal 2023. Accordingly, summary 
ejectment cases alone generated $3.2 million in surcharge revenues for the MLSC Fund in 
fiscal 2023. While the number of case filings varies each year, this estimate assumes that 
the number of cases to which the surcharges are imposed remains constant each year. In 
addition, although the bill establishes that the surcharge may not exceed $43 per case, for 
purposes of this analysis, the surcharge is assumed to be $43 per case. Based on these 
assumptions, surcharge revenues attributable to these cases increase by up to $10.5 million 
in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date, and by as much 
as $14.1 million annually thereafter.  
 
DLS notes, however, that the increase in the summary ejectment surcharge may deter 
landlords from filing as many failure to pay rent cases, or waiting longer periods before 
filing. Even though the bill includes provisions by which a landlord may deduct the 
surcharge from a tenant’s security deposit under specified conditions, filing behavior may 
still be altered and result in fewer overall filings (and corresponding surcharge revenues). 
Any such impact has not been specifically accounted for in this analysis, however, DLS 
advises that the special fund revenues illustrated in this fiscal and policy note likely indicate 
the maximum revenues anticipated. DLS further advises that if case filings for summary 
ejectment cases decrease, general fund revenues also decrease (representing a decrease in 
revenues from the $4 filing fee per case that is attributed to the general fund); special fund 
revenues for the Circuit Court Real Property Records Improvement Fund likewise decrease 
(representing a decrease in revenues from an additional $3 surcharge imposed on summary 
ejectment cases for the benefit of that fund).  
 
Other Civil Cases:  Surcharge revenues in other civil cases in the District Court (excluding 
summary ejectment cases), generated approximately $2.7 million for the MLSC Fund in 
fiscal 2023. The bill increases the applicable maximum surcharge for these cases from  
$18 to $28; surcharge revenues from these cases are therefore estimated to increase by 
$1.5 million annually ($1.1 million in fiscal 2025). Despite the increase, this analysis 
assumes that the increased surcharge does not affect the volume of these cases filed in the 
District Court and that the maximum surcharge is assessed.  
 
Furthermore, the Judiciary advises that the circuit courts generated approximately 
$4.0 million in civil case filing surcharge revenues for the MLSC Fund in fiscal 2023. The 
bill increases the applicable surcharge for all civil cases filed in the circuit courts from a 
maximum of $55 to $85; surcharge revenues from these cases are therefore estimated to 
increase by $2.2 million annually ($1.6 million in fiscal 2025). This analysis assumes that 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 693/ Page 14 
this increase does not decrease total filings of such cases in the circuit courts. Although the 
bill establishes that the surcharge may not exceed $85 per case, for purposes of this 
analysis, the surcharge is assumed to be $85 per case.   
 
Total Special Fund Revenues:  Accordingly, total special fund revenues for the 
aforementioned funds from the surcharge increased by the bill increase by up to 
$13.3 million in fiscal 2025, reflecting the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date, and by as 
much as $17.7 million annually thereafter, based on the aforementioned assumptions. 
Although the MLSC Fund, the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program, and the 
Rental Assistance Community Schools Families Fund share a portion of these proceeds, 
the estimate reflects a revenue increase of (1) approximately $6.2 million for the 
MLSC Fund in fiscal 2025 and $8.2 million annually thereafter, after accounting for 
surcharge revenues that it already receives under current law; (2) approximately 
$5.8 million for the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program in fiscal 2025 and 
$7.8 million annually thereafter (that program does not receive any surcharge revenues 
under current law); and (3) approximately $1.3 million for the Rental Assistance 
Community Schools Families Fund in fiscal 2025 and $1.7 million annually thereafter (that 
fund – set to take effect July 1, 2024, pursuant to Chapters 210 and 211 – does not receive 
any surcharge revenues under current law). If filings decrease below current levels or the 
higher surcharge amounts result in additional fee waivers being granted, the revenue 
increase is moderated but still significant. Likewise, to the extent the maximum surcharge 
is not imposed, the revenue increase is moderated.  
 
Furthermore, although the Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program is currently 
funded with general funds and the bill does not explicitly create a special fund to receive 
the surcharge revenues, this estimate assumes that the surcharge revenues distributed to 
DHCD under the bill are treated as special funds. 
 
While the bill does not explicitly require additional spending from the MLSC Fund, the 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher Program, and the Rental Assistance Community 
Schools Families Fund, significant additional funding is available for the funds and the 
program as a result of the bill. 
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
Although other components of the bill can be handled by DHCD using existing resources, 
it requires additional staff for the newly established OTLA. Specifically, three positions 
are required to, among other responsibilities, develop informational materials for tenants, 
create points of contact for tenants to report violations of their rights, and provide resources 
to facilitate tenant access to credit counseling. Accordingly, general fund expenditures 
increase by $344,515 for staff and associated start-up and operating costs in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date; the fiscal 2025 budget as 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 693/ Page 15 
passed by the General Assembly includes $344,515 in general funds for DHCD, contingent 
on legislation establishing the office, which this bill effectuates. Future year expenditures, 
which total approximately $412,900 in fiscal 2026, increasing to approximately $466,500 
by fiscal 2029, reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Judiciary 
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $34,799 in fiscal 2025 only for 
computer programming costs. To the extent that fewer cases are filed, thereby reducing the 
workload of the District Court, operational efficiencies may be realized. 
 
Penalties 
 
The bill’s penalty provision is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, pursuant to current law, other surcharges are 
imposed on landlord-tenant actions filed in Baltimore City. While this analysis does not 
specifically account for a potential decrease in filings, DLS advises that if overall filings 
decrease in Baltimore City as a result of the bill’s increased surcharge in summary 
ejectment cases, Baltimore City revenues decrease minimally. Fee revenues associated 
with service of process in landlord-tenant actions may also further decrease minimally in  
Baltimore City and other jurisdictions. While expenditures strictly associated with 
evictions may decrease, resources are assumed to be directed elsewhere so that there is no 
material effect on local government expenditures from these changes. 
 
As noted above, the bill does not require additional spending by DHCD under the 
Statewide Rental Assistance Voucher program; however, because the bill significantly 
increases available funding for the program, amounts distributed to public housing 
agencies likely increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Numerous provisions of the bill likely have a meaningful impact 
on small business landlords. For example, the bill increases surcharges associated with 
landlord-tenant actions and limits the circumstances under which a landlord may pass 
specified surcharge costs on to a tenant. Additionally, under certain circumstances, 
landlords must engage in exclusive negotiation periods with tenants and offer tenants the 
right of first refusal when desiring to sell a residential rental property, which may extend 
the overall timeframe for selling the property. Among other provisions, the bill also reduces 
the maximum security deposit a landlord may require (subject to a limited exception) and 
extends the process of repossessing property after a court enters judgment in a landlord’s 
favor. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 693/ Page 16 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 481 (The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Judicial Proceedings and Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Wicomico counties; Office of the 
Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of 
Labor; Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2024 
Enrolled - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 693/ Page 17 
ANALYSIS OF IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Renters' Rights and Stabilization Act of 2024 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0693 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Brad Fallon 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This omnibus legislation seeks to 1) increase the eviction filing surcharge to $100, in line 
with the national average of $109; 2) prevent the pass through of the eviction filing fee 
from landlords to tenants; 3) limit allowable security deposits to the equivalent of one 
month’s rent; and 4) provides a right of first refusal for renters to purchase their rental 
homes in cases where the owner has decided to sell the property.  
 
This legislation is expected to have the impact of lowering Maryland’s highest-in-the-
nation eviction filing rate, remove financial barriers to becoming housed, and create new 
pathways to homeownership. Each of these anticipated impacts are expected to improve 
economic stability for Maryland residents.  
 

END OF PAGE 17