START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 647 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 647 
(Delegate Guyton) 
Economic Matters and Environment and 
Transportation 
Finance 
 
Property and Casualty Insurance – Pet Insurance – Regulation 
 
 
This bill establishes a regulatory framework for pet insurance by generally adopting the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioner pet insurance model act. By June 1, 2025, 
the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) must develop informational material about 
pet insurance policies that may be disseminated to and posted by veterinary practitioners 
in the State. The Insurance Commissioner may adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
The bill takes effect January 1, 2025, and applies to all policies and contracts of pet 
insurance issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for MIA in FY 2025 only due 
from rate and form filing fees. Enforcement can be handled using existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In establishing the regulatory framework, the bill:   
 
 
establishes relevant definitions, including for various medical conditions and for 
veterinary expenses that may be covered by pet insurance; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 647/ Page 2 
 
specifies that the bill applies to pet insurance policies or certificates that are issued 
to a resident of the State or sold, solicited, negotiated, or offered in the State; 
 
specifies that applicable provisions of the Insurance Article apply to pet insurance, 
unless superseded by the bill’s specifications; 
 
requires pet insurance policies to include specified disclosures and other 
information for an applicant or insured; 
 
explicitly authorizes or prohibits certain aspects of pet insurance coverage; and 
specifies the circumstances under which a pet insurer may sell a pet wellness 
program and specifies when a pet wellness program must be considered insurance. 
 
A more detailed discussion of the bill’s requirements for pet insurance can be found below. 
 
Required Disclosures and Information on the Policy 
 
At the time a pet insurance policy is issued or delivered to a policyholder, the pet insurer 
must include specified contact information. 
 
A pet insurer must disclose to consumers (1) all policy exclusions, including exclusions of 
coverage due to specified conditions or disorders; (2) any policy provision that limits 
coverage through a waiting period, a deductible, coinsurance, or an annual or lifetime 
policy limit; (3) whether the pet insurer reduces coverage or increases premium based on 
the insured’s claim history, the age of the covered pet, or a change in the geographic 
location of the insured; and (4) the identity of the underwriting company if the company 
differs from the brand name used to market and sell the pet insurance policy. 
 
A notice must be prominently printed on or attached to the face of a pet insurance policy 
that states that the policy may be canceled within 10 days after it is first delivered and, if 
canceled in that timeframe, a pro rata premium for the unexpired term of the policy must 
be returned to the insured. However, this does not apply if the insured has made a claim 
under the pet insurance policy. 
 
A pet insurer must clearly disclose a summary description of the basis or formula it uses to 
determine claim payments within the policy, before issuing the policy, and on its website. 
 
If a pet insurer uses a benefit schedule to determine claim payment under a policy, the pet 
insurer must clearly disclose the applicable benefit schedule in the policy and disclose all 
benefit schedules it uses on its website. 
 
If a pet insurer determines claim payments based on usual and customary fees, or any other 
reimbursement limitation based on prevailing veterinary practitioner charges, the pet 
insurer must (1) include a usual and customary fee limitation provision in the policy that 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 647/ Page 3 
clearly describes the basis for determining the fees and how the basis is applied in 
calculating claim payments and (2) disclose the basis on its website. 
 
If a medical examination by a veterinary practitioner is required to begin coverage, the pet 
insurer must disclose the required aspects of the examination before purchase of the pet 
insurance policy, as specified, and disclose that examination documentation may result in 
a preexisting condition exclusion. 
 
A pet insurer must clearly and prominently disclose any waiting periods and the 
requirements applicable to the waiting periods before purchase of the pet insurance policy. 
 
Authorizations and Prohibitions 
 
A pet insurer may issue policies that exclude coverage on the basis of one or more 
preexisting conditions with appropriate disclosure to the consumer. The pet insurer has the 
burden of proving that the preexisting condition exclusion applies to the condition for 
which a claim is made. 
 
A pet insurer may issue a policy that imposes a waiting period before coverage under the 
policy begins, but only under specified circumstances and conditions, and with specified 
disclosure. A pet insurer that imposes a waiting period must include a provision in the 
policy that allows for the waiving of waiting periods on completion of a medical 
examination. A pet insurer may require a medical examination to be conducted after a 
purchase of the policy, as specified. 
 
A pet insurer must require that an insured submit a claim under the policy after submitting 
payment to the veterinary practitioner for veterinary expenses. A pet insurer may not 
require a medical examination of the covered pet as a condition for the renewal of a policy. 
 
A prescriptive, wellness, or noninsurance benefit included in the policy form for a pet 
insurance policy is part of the policy and subject to Insurance Law and regulations. A pet 
insurer may not condition an insured’s eligibility to purchase a policy on participation, or 
lack of participation, in a separate wellness program. 
 
Wellness Programs 
 
A pet insurer or pet insurance producer may not market a wellness program as a pet 
insurance policy unless the marketing is done in the manner specified by the bill. Coverage 
included in a pet insurance policy contract defined as a “wellness” benefit is insurance. 
 
If a wellness program contracts to indemnify or pay or provide a specified determinable 
amount or benefit on the occurrence of a determinable contingency, the program must be 
considered insurance. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 647/ Page 4 
Current Law:  MIA and the Commissioner’s statutory and regulatory duties include, 
among other things, certifying insurers to operate in the State, reviewing and approving the 
rates and forms used by insurers, and licensing and certifying insurance professionals. MIA 
and the Commissioner have broad authority to enforce the requirements and prohibitions 
that apply to insurers and insurance professionals. For example, depending on the type of 
violation and following the administrative processes required by Insurance Law and 
regulations, the Commissioner is authorized to issue orders directing insurers or insurance 
professionals to take certain actions, impose administrative penalties, and suspend or 
revoke certifications and/or licenses. 
 
Although State law does not include specific provisions that apply exclusively to pet 
insurance, MIA currently regulates pet insurance as a type of property and casualty 
insurance subject to existing requirements, prohibitions, authorizations, and enforcement 
actions by the Commissioner. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; National Association of Insurance Commissioners; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4