START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 622 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 622 
(Delegate Healey) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Reporting Agencies - Records of Criminal Proceedings - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits a consumer reporting agency from including in a consumer report any 
record of a criminal proceeding concerning the consumer (1) in which the consumer was 
falsely accused, acquitted, or exonerated; (2) in which a nolle prosequi was entered as to a 
charge concerning the consumer; or (3) that did not result in a guilty verdict for (or guilty 
plea by) the consumer. A consumer reporting agency is also prohibited from including any 
criminal records concerning the consumer that have been expunged. A consumer reporting 
agency may not rely on the information contained in the aforementioned records when 
making a determination regarding the creditworthiness of a consumer.    
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Office of Financial Regulation (OFR) can enforce the bill with existing 
resources. Revenues are likely not materially affected.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:    
 
Consumer Reports and Consumer Reporting Agencies 
 
A “consumer report” is any written, oral, or other communication of any information by a 
consumer reporting agency bearing on a consumer’s credit worthiness, credit standing, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 622/ Page 2 
credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living 
which is used or expected to be used or collected (in whole or in part) for the purpose of 
serving as a factor in establishing a consumer’s eligibility for (1) credit or insurance to be 
used primarily for personal, family, or household purposes; (2) employment purposes; or 
(3) other specified purposes, as authorized by State law.   
 
A “consumer reporting agency” is any person which, for monetary fees, dues, or on a 
cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages (in whole or in part) in the practice of 
assembling or evaluating consumer credit information or other information on consumers 
for the purpose of furnishing consumer reports to third parties, and which uses any means 
or facility of commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing the reports.  
 
Prohibited Information in Consumer Reports 
 
Consumer reporting agencies may not report in a consumer credit report (1) bankruptcies 
of more than 10 years before the credit report; (2) suits and judgments of more than 
seven years before the report, or the expiration of the governing statute of limitations, 
whichever is longer; (3) paid tax liens whose payment date is more than seven years before 
the report; (4) accounts placed for collection or charged to profit and loss more than 
seven years before the report; (5) records of arrest, indictment, or conviction of crime 
whose date of disposition, release, or parole is more than seven years before the report date; 
or (6) any other adverse information that predates the report by more than seven years.     
 
The prohibition against including the above information does not apply in the case of a 
consumer credit report to be used in connection with (1) a credit transaction whose 
principal amount may involve at least $50,000; (2) the underwriting of life insurance with 
a face value of at least $50,000; or (3) the employment of an individual in a position with 
a salary of at least $20,000.   
 
Commissioner of Financial Regulation – Investigative and Enforcement Powers 
 
OFR has the power to vigorously investigate financial transactions to determine whether a 
person has violated a law, regulation, rule, or order over which the commissioner has 
jurisdiction. For the purposes of an investigation or proceeding, the commissioner may 
administer oaths and affirmations, subpoena witnesses, compel the attendance of 
witnesses, and require the production of documents and other evidence. If a person refuses 
to obey a subpoena from the commissioner, the commissioner may apply to the appropriate 
circuit court to issue an order requiring the person to appear before the commissioner and 
produce any requested evidence. If the court issues such an order, failure to obey it subjects 
the person to contempt of court. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 622/ Page 3 
When the commissioner determines, after notice and a hearing, as specified, that a person 
has engaged in a violation of a law, regulation, rule, or order, the commissioner may issue 
a cease and desist order, suspend or revoke the license of the violator, issue an order 
requiring the person to take corrective affirmative action, as specified, and/or issue a 
penalty order against the person for up to $10,000 for a first violation and up to $25,000 for 
each subsequent violation.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 994 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3