START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 602 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 602 
(The Speaker and Delegate Clippinger) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Employment Discrimination – Sexual Orientation 
 
 
This bill expands the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law by prohibiting employment 
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. The bill incorporates the prohibition of 
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation into existing prohibitions against 
workplace discrimination under the Equal Pay for Equal Work law. Thus, an employer may 
not discriminate between employees in any occupation by providing less favorable 
employment opportunities based on sexual orientation or by paying a wage to employees 
of one sexual orientation at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sexual 
orientation, as specified under current law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Enforcement can be handled with existing resources. The bill has no effect 
on the State as an employer because State agencies already are prohibited from 
discriminating against individuals based on sexual orientation. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local governmental operations or finances 
because relatively few cases should be heard in the circuit courts, and local governments 
currently cannot discriminate against an individual based on sexual orientation. No effect 
on revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 602/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Unlawful Discrimination 
 
State law generally prohibits an employer with at least 15 employees from discharging, 
failing or refusing to hire, or otherwise discriminating against any individual with respect 
to the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because 
of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, genetic information, or disability. The State and local governments are considered 
employers. 
 
Equal Pay for Equal Work 
 
Regardless of employer size, under the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law, an employer 
may not discriminate between employees in any occupation by providing less favorable 
employment opportunities based on sex or gender identity or paying a wage to employees 
of one sex or gender identity at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sex or 
gender identity if both employees work in the same establishment and perform work of 
comparable character or work on the same operation, in the same business, or of the same 
type. The State and local governments are considered employers. 
 
When the Commissioner of Labor and Industry has determined that the State’s Equal Pay 
for Equal Work law has been violated, the commissioner must (1) try to resolve any issue 
informally by mediation or (2) ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the 
applicant or employee. The Attorney General may bring an action in the county where the 
violation allegedly occurred for injunctive relief, damages, or other relief. An employee 
may bring an action against the employer under specified circumstances. 
 
An employer may not discharge or otherwise discriminate against an employee or applicant 
because the employee or applicant makes a complaint, brings or causes an action or 
proceeding, or has testified or will testify in an action or a proceeding relating to Equal Pay 
for Equal Work. The commissioner may bring an action for injunctive relief and damages 
against a person who violates this. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Employers with fewer than 15 employees are prohibited from 
employment discrimination based on sexual orientation. Employers with at least 
15 employees are already prohibited from employment discrimination based on sexual 
orientation under current law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 602/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); University System of Maryland; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3