START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 494

Chapter 494

(House Bill 688)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Historical Trust – Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance
Program – Funding

FOR the purpose of altering prohibitions on grants from the Maryland Historical Trust;
authorizing the Governor to include a certain appropriation in the annual budget bill
to the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Historical~~ Trust to be used to provide grants to museums under the
Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program; and generally relating to
funding for the Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5A–352, 5A–353(a) and (b), 5A–354 ~~through~~ ~~5A–356,~~ 5A–355, and 5A–358
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5A–356
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5A–360
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

5A–352.

There is a Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program of the Trust.

5A–353.

(a) The purpose of the Program is to provide political subdivisions and nonprofit
organizations with financial assistance for museums.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 494 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) The Program shall make grants from the MHT Grant Fund under § 5A–328
of this subtitle to political subdivisions and nonprofit organizations for use by museums for:

(1) research related to collections, exhibits, or other educational activities;

(2) the care, conservation, interpretation, and documentation of collections;

(3) the planning, design, and construction of exhibits;

(4) educational programs and projects;

(5) the development of master plans for museums, including activities
required to achieve accreditation by the American Association of Museums or another
appropriate entity;

(6) minor structural modifications to existing museum facilities;

(7) the development of plans and specifications and the provision of
architectural, engineering, or other special services directly related to the construction or
rehabilitation of museum facilities; or

(8) operating support for any museum–related activity, including activities
described in items (1) through (7) of this subsection.

5A–354.

(a) There is a Museum Assistance Review Panel in the Program.

(b) (1) The Panel shall include as members:

(i) the President of the Senate or the President’s designee; and

(ii) the Speaker of the House of Delegates or the Speaker’s designee.

(2) The Secretary shall appoint the other members of the Panel.

(3) Of the members that the Secretary appoints:

(i) one shall be a representative of the Executive Branch with
functions related to the purposes of the Program; and

(ii) the others shall fairly represent museums eligible for assistance
under this part.

(c) (1) The Panel shall:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 494

(i) advise the Secretary and the staff of the Trust regarding
Program policies and activities;

(ii) review applications for grants under the Program and
recommend approval or disapproval to the Secretary; and

(iii) seek the advice and recommendations of the State Archivist in
reviewing grant applications that relate in any part to the care and preservation of, or
access to, archival material.

(2) The Panel shall recommend approval of a grant only after a competitive
selection process.

5A–355.

(a) The Trust shall administer the Program and coordinate the Program with
federal, State, and private programs that complement or facilitate carrying out the
Program.

(b) The Trust shall:

(1) survey the locations, resources, and needs of museums in the State;

(2) provide technical and general advisory assistance to museums that
qualify or seek to qualify for grants under the Program; and

(3) encourage museums to develop long–range plans and to achieve
accreditation by the American Association of Museums or another appropriate entity that
accredits museums and helps them to meet professional standards.

5A–356.

The Trust may not make a grant to a museum that:

~~(1)~~ ~~currently~~ ~~is~~ ~~receiving~~ ~~operating~~ ~~support~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~State~~ ~~Arts~~
~~Council;~~

(2) (1) is operated wholly or partly by the State; or

(3) (2) has not existed as a nonprofit organization for at least 3 years
before applying for the grant.

5A–358.

(a) The Department shall adopt regulations to carry out the Program, including:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 494 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) application and review procedures;

(2) procedures for adequate public notice of assistance available under the
Program; and

(3) selection standards that the Panel shall consider in reviewing
applications for grants.

(b) Selection standards under subsection (a)(3) of this section include:

(1) the relative merits of the project or activities within identified statewide
needs;

(2) the extent to which the appropriate political subdivision contributes to
support the project;

(3) the potential for the project to stimulate increased tourism, museum
attendance, or museum self–sufficiency; and

(4) other relevant factors, such as the extent to which the project helps
achieve equal geographic distribution of grant assistance throughout the State.

5A–360.

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$5,000,000 TO THE TRUST TO FUND GRANTS UNDER THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4