START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

Chapter 132

(House Bill 609)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Public Libraries – Collective Bargaining
(Library Workers Empowerment Act)

FOR the purpose of authorizing employees of certain public libraries to form, join, and
participate in an employee organization and engage in certain other activities related
to collective bargaining; requiring certain employers and certified exclusive
representatives to engage in good faith bargaining; establishing a collective
bargaining process for employees of certain public libraries; establishing a process
for resolving impasses during collective bargaining; prohibiting employers and
employee organizations from engaging in certain actions regarding the exercise of an
employee’s rights under this Act; prohibiting employers, employees, and employee
organizations from engaging in certain actions related to strikes, work stoppages,
boycotts, and lockouts; repealing certain provisions of law rendered obsolete by
certain provisions of this Act; and generally relating to collective bargaining for
employees of public libraries.

BY repealing
Article – Education
Section 23–601 through 23–614 and the subtitle “Subtitle 6. Howard County Library
System – Collective Bargaining”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 23–901 through 23–913 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Public
Libraries – Collective Bargaining”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 23–601 through 23–614 and the subtitle “Subtitle 6. Howard County
Library System – Collective Bargaining” of Article – Education of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Education

SUBTITLE 9. PUBLIC LIBRARIES – COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

23–901.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) (1) “CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE” MEANS THE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION THAT HAS BEEN CERTIFIED AS THE COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING AGENT FOR A BARGAINING UNIT.

(2) “CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE” INCLUDES AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION CERTIFIED TO EXCLUSIVELY REPRESENT PUBLIC
LIBRARY EMPLOYEES BEFORE JULY 1, 2024.

(C) “CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE WHO:

(1) IS REQUIRED TO DEVELOP OR PRESENT MANAGEMENT POSITIONS
WITH RESPECT TO EMPLOYER–EMPLOYEE RELATIONS; AND

(2) WHOSE DUTIES NORMALLY REQUIRE ACCESS TO CONFIDENTIAL
INFORMATION THAT CONTRIBUTES SIGNIFICANTLY TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
MANAGEMENT POSITIONS WITH RESPECT TO EMPLOYER–EMPLOYEE RELATIONS.

(D) “DIRECTOR” MEANS THE DIRECTOR, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, OR
CHIEF OFFICER OF THE APPLICABLE PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM, OR THE DESIGNEE
OF THE DIRECTOR, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, OR CHIEF OFFICER.

(E) (1) “EMPLOYEE” MEANS A FULL–TIME OR PART–TIME EMPLOYEE OF
A PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM.

(2) “EMPLOYEE” DOES NOT INCLUDE A CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE,
MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE, OR SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE.

(F) “EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ORGANIZATION THAT ADMITS
EMPLOYEES OF THE EMPLOYER AS MEMBERS AND HAS AS A PRIMARY PURPOSE THE
REPRESENTATION OF THE EMPLOYEES IN THEIR RELATIONS WITH THE EMPLOYER.

(G) “EMPLOYER” MEANS A PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM AND, WHERE
APPLICABLE, THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR THE PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM.

(H) ~~“GOVERNING~~ FUNDING BODY” MEANS:

(1) (I) FOR A CHARTER COUNTY THAT DOES NOT HAVE AN
ELECTED CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE COUNTY COUNCIL; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

(II) FOR A CHARTER COUNTY THAT HAS AN ELECTED CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE COUNTY COUNCIL OR THE COUNTY COUNCIL AND THE
COUNTY EXECUTIVE THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY, AS PROVIDED BY THE
COUNTY CHARTER; OR

(2) (III) FOR A CODE OR COMMISSION COUNTY, THE COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS; OR

(3) (2) FOR BALTIMORE CITY, THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF
BALTIMORE CITY.

(I) “MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE WHO GENERALLY
HAS AUTHORITY AND WHO:

(1) FORMULATES POLICY THAT IS APPLICABLE THROUGHOUT A
BARGAINING UNIT;

(2) HAS A SIGNIFICANT ROLE IN PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION,
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS, OR THE PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF BUDGETS
FOR THE EMPLOYER; OR

(3) MAY REASONABLY BE REQUIRED TO:

(I) ASSIST DIRECTLY IN THE PREPARATION FOR AND CONDUCT
OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING NEGOTIATIONS ON BEHALF OF THE EMPLOYER; OR

(II) HAVE A MAJOR ROLE IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF
RESULTING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.

(J) (1) “PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM” MEANS A COUNTY PUBLIC LIBRARY
SYSTEM.

(2) “PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM” INCLUDES THE ENOCH PRATT FREE
LIBRARY.

(3) “PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE PUBLIC
LIBRARY SYSTEM OF BALTIMORE COUNTY, MONTGOMERY COUNTY, OR PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(K) “SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS AUTHORIZED
TO:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) HIRE, TRANSFER, SUSPEND, LAY OFF, RECALL, PROMOTE,
DISCHARGE, ASSIGN, REWARD, OR DISCIPLINE EMPLOYEES;

(2) RESPONSIBLY DIRECT EMPLOYEES FOR MORE THAN 50% OF THE
EMPLOYEE’S WORKING HOURS; OR

(3) ADDRESS AND RESOLVE THE GRIEVANCES OF EMPLOYEES.

23–902.

(A) THERE MAY BE NOT MORE THAN TWO BARGAINING UNITS AT EACH
PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM INCLUDING:

(1) ONE BARGAINING UNIT FOR EMPLOYEES; AND

(2) ONE BARGAINING UNIT FOR SUPERVISORY EMPLOYEES.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
BARGAINING UNIT MAY CONTAIN FULL–TIME OR PART–TIME EMPLOYEES.

(2) A BARGAINING UNIT MAY NOT INCLUDE VOLUNTEERS OR
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES WITH LESS THAN 90 DAYS OF SERVICE IN A 12–MONTH
PERIOD.

(C) (1) THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO MODIFY OR
TERMINATE A BARGAINING UNIT THAT WAS RECOGNIZED OR IN EXISTENCE ON OR
BEFORE JUNE 30, 2024.

(2) (I) IF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION HAS BEEN CERTIFIED
UNDER STATE OR LOCAL LAW ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30, 2024, TO BE AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE OF EMPLOYEES OF A PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM, THE EMPLOYER
SHALL ACCRETE ALL ELIGIBLE POSITIONS INTO THE EXISTING BARGAINING UNIT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION ON REQUEST OF THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(II) AN ACCRETION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
SUBJECT TO A SHOWING OF INTEREST AND ELECTION BY EMPLOYEES IN THE
ACCRETED POSITIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROCEDURES UNDER § 23–907 OF
THIS TITLE.

23–903.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

(A) AN EMPLOYEE WHO MAY EFFECTIVELY RECOMMEND AN ACTION LISTED
IN § 23–901(I) OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY BE DEEMED A MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE IF
THE EMPLOYEE’S EXERCISE OF THE AUTHORITY REQUIRES THE EXERCISE OF
INDEPENDENT JUDGMENT AND IS NOT MERELY OF A ROUTINE OR CLERICAL
NATURE.

(B) THE EXERCISE OF ANY SINGLE FUNCTION LISTED IN § 23–901(I) OF THIS
SUBTITLE MAY NOT NECESSARILY REQUIRE THE CONCLUSION THAT THE
INDIVIDUAL EXERCISING THAT FUNCTION IS IN FACT A MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE
WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE DEFINITION.

(C) IN DIFFERENTIATING A MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE FROM A
NONMANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE:

(1) A CLASS TITLE ALONE MAY NOT BE THE BASIS FOR
DETERMINATION; AND

(2) THE NATURE OF THE MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE’S WORK,
INCLUDING WHETHER A SIGNIFICANT PORTION OF THE MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE’S
WORKING TIME IS SPENT AS PART OF A TEAM THAT INCLUDES NONMANAGEMENT
EMPLOYEES, SHALL BE CONSIDERED.

23–904.

EMPLOYEES OF THE EMPLOYER MAY:

(1) FORM, JOIN, AND PARTICIPATE IN AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION;

(2) BARGAIN COLLECTIVELY THROUGH A CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE OF THEIR CHOICE;

(3) ENGAGE IN LAWFUL CONCERTED ACTIVITIES FOR THEIR MUTUAL
AID AND PROTECTION; AND

(4) REFRAIN FROM ANY ACTIVITY COVERED UNDER ITEMS (1)
THROUGH (3) OF THIS SECTION.

23–905.

(A) THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE
HAVE A RESPONSIBILITY TO ENGAGE IN GOOD FAITH BARGAINING OVER MATTERS
REQUIRED BY LAW.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE
JOINTLY SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR FOSTERING A POSITIVE LABOR RELATIONS
ENVIRONMENT BASED ON MUTUAL TRUST, RESPECT, COMMUNICATION, AND
COOPERATION.

(C) THE GOAL OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING IS THE DELIVERY OF QUALITY
PUBLIC SERVICES TO THE RESIDENTS OF THE STATE IN A MANNER THAT IS
CONSISTENT AND COMPLIANT WITH LAW.

23–906.

(A) THE EMPLOYER SHALL RECOGNIZE THE RIGHT OF THE CERTIFIED
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE TO REPRESENT THE EMPLOYEES IN THE UNIT IN
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND IN THE GRIEVANCE PROCESS.

(B) THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF A UNIT SHALL:

(1) SERVE AS THE SOLE AGENT FOR THE UNIT IN COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING; AND

(2) REPRESENT ALL EMPLOYEES IN THE UNIT FAIRLY AND IN GOOD
FAITH, IN A MANNER THAT IS NOT ARBITRARY OR DISCRIMINATORY.

23–907.

(A) (1) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SEEKING CERTIFICATION AS THE
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE FOR THE BARGAINING UNIT OF EMPLOYEES MAY FILE
A PETITION WITH THE EMPLOYER INDICATING THIS INTENT.

(2) THE PETITION SHALL CONTAIN:

(I) A REQUEST THAT THE EMPLOYER RECOGNIZE THE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT;

(II) A STATEMENT THAT THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION IS ONE
IN WHICH EMPLOYEES PARTICIPATE AND THAT HAS AS ONE OF ITS PURPOSES THE
REPRESENTATION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES IN MATTERS OF WAGES, HOURS, AND
OTHER TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT;

(III) A STATEMENT THAT THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION HAS NO
TERMS OR CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP THAT DISCRIMINATE WITH REGARD TO

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

RACE, COLOR, CREED, GENDER, AGE, POLITICAL AFFILIATION, NATIONAL ORIGIN,
RELIGION, MARITAL STATUS, OR DISABILITY; AND

(IV) A STATEMENT THAT THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION HAS IN
ITS POSSESSION WRITTEN PROOF DATED NOT MORE THAN 18 MONTHS BEFORE THE
DAY ON WHICH THE PETITION IS FILED ESTABLISHING THAT AT LEAST 30% OF THE
EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT:

1. HAVE DESIGNATED THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
TO REPRESENT THEM IN THEIR EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS WITH THE EMPLOYER; OR

2. ARE MEMBERS OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.

(3) BEFORE A PETITION MAY BE PROCESSED, THE PROOF OF
INTEREST SUBMITTED SHALL BE VERIFIED AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION.

(4) THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AND THE EMPLOYER SHALL
EQUALLY BEAR ANY COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE VERIFICATION.

(B) (1) (I) WHEN AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR EMPLOYEES IN A
BARGAINING UNIT FILE A PETITION WITH THE EMPLOYER, THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION OR EMPLOYEES SHALL SELECT A NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER FROM
A REFERRAL OR LIST OF ARBITRATORS PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL MEDIATION
AND CONCILIATION SERVICE.

(II) THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR EMPLOYEES IN THE
BARGAINING UNIT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SELECTED
UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH THE AUTHORIZATION CARDS
SIGNED AND DATED BY AT LEAST 30% OF THE EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT
NOT MORE THAN 18 MONTHS BEFORE THE DAY THE PETITION WAS FILED
INDICATING, AS APPROPRIATE, THAT THE EMPLOYEES HAVE DESIGNATED THE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO REPRESENT THEM IN THEIR EMPLOYMENT
RELATIONS WITH THE PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION.

(2) THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SHALL COPY THE EMPLOYER ON
THE REQUEST FOR A NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER IN ORDER FOR THE PUBLIC
LIBRARY SYSTEM TO RECEIVE NOTICE OF THE SELECTION OF THE NEUTRAL
DECISION MAKER FOR THE CERTIFICATION PROCESS.

(C) (1) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
WITHIN 2 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE DAY ON WHICH THE EMPLOYER RECEIVES
THE PETITION, THE EMPLOYER SHALL SUBMIT TO THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
AND NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. A LIST OF EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT
THAT IDENTIFIES EACH EMPLOYEE THAT THE EMPLOYER CONTENDS SHOULD BE
EXCLUDED AS AN ELIGIBLE VOTER OR FROM THE BARGAINING UNIT; AND

2. A STATEMENT EXPLAINING THE REASON FOR EACH
EXCLUSION.

(II) IF A NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER HAS NOT BEEN SELECTED
WHEN THE EMPLOYER IS REQUIRED TO SUBMIT THE LIST REQUIRED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE EMPLOYER SHALL INSTEAD SUBMIT
THE LIST WITHIN 1 CALENDAR DAY AFTER THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER HAS
BEEN SELECTED.

(III) IF THE EMPLOYER FAILS TO PROVIDE AN EXPLANATION AS
REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (I)2 OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE EMPLOYER MAY NOT
CHALLENGE THE ELIGIBILITY OF AN EMPLOYEE’S VOTE IN AN ELECTION OR THE
ELIGIBILITY TO SUBMIT A SHOWING OF INTEREST FORM FOR PURPOSES OF
SUBSECTION (D)(3) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) IF THE EMPLOYER FAILS TO SUBMIT THE LIST OF EMPLOYEES TO
THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER WITHIN THE
REQUIRED TIME, IT SHALL BE CONCLUSIVELY DEEMED THAT AT LEAST 30% OF THE
EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT HAVE INDICATED A DESIRE TO BE
REPRESENTED BY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION.

(D) (1) THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL CHECK THE WRITTEN
AUTHORIZATION CARDS SUBMITTED BY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR THE
EMPLOYEES AGAINST THE LIST OF EMPLOYEES SUBMITTED BY THE EMPLOYER.

(2) IF THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER DETERMINES THAT AT LEAST
30% OF THE EMPLOYEES ON THE LIST HAVE INDICATED A DESIRE TO BE
REPRESENTED BY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION OR TO DECERTIFY AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE, THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL NOTIFY THE EMPLOYER
OF THE DETERMINATION.

(3) IF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SUBMITS A SHOWING OF
INTEREST OF AT LEAST 50% OF THE EMPLOYEES IN AN UNREPRESENTED
BARGAINING UNIT:

(I) THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL ISSUE TO EACH
PARTICIPANT IN AN ELECTION A CERTIFICATION OF REPRESENTATION; AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

(II) THE EMPLOYER SHALL RECOGNIZE THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION AS THE CERTIFIED BARGAINING REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
EMPLOYEES AT ISSUE.

(E) AN ELECTION MAY NOT BE CONDUCTED IN A BARGAINING UNIT UNLESS
AT LEAST 1 YEAR HAS PASSED SINCE THE LAST ELECTION HELD IN THE BARGAINING
UNIT.

(F) (1) THE EMPLOYER SHALL NOTIFY ALL EMPLOYEES WITHIN THE
PROPOSED BARGAINING UNIT THAT AN ELECTION WILL BE HELD AND REQUEST A
NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER FROM THE FEDERAL MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION
SERVICE TO OVERSEE AND CONDUCT AN ELECTION BY SECRET BALLOT.

(2) THE BALLOT FOR AN ELECTION SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING
CHOICES:

(I) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ISSUES PRESENTED BY THE
PETITION OR PETITIONS, EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION BY ANY EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION SEEKING TO OBTAIN OR CONTINUE REPRESENTATION RIGHTS; AND

(II) NO EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION.

(G) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION MAY INTERVENE IN THE ELECTION AND
HAVE ITS NAME PLACED ON THE BALLOT IF:

(1) THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION FILES A PETITION NOT MORE
THAN 15 CALENDAR DAYS AFTER THE DATE ON WHICH THE ORIGINAL PETITION IS
FILED;

(2) THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION CERTIFIES THAT AT LEAST 30%
OF THE EMPLOYEES OF THE UNIT:

(I) HAVE DESIGNATED THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO
REPRESENT THEM IN THEIR EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS WITH THE PUBLIC LIBRARY
SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION; OR

(II) ARE MEMBERS OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION; AND

(3) THE SHOWING OF INTEREST IS VERIFIED AS PROVIDED IN THIS
SECTION.

(H) (1) WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER A NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER IS
SELECTED, THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL HOLD A CONFERENCE WITH THE

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

PARTIES DURING WHICH ALL OBJECTIONS TO THE PETITION AND THE CONDUCT OF
THE ELECTION MUST BE RAISED.

(2) (I) THE ELECTION SHALL BE CONDUCTED:

1. ACCORDING TO THE PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED BY
THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER FROM THE FEDERAL MEDIATION AND
CONCILIATION SERVICE CONDUCTING THE ELECTION;

2. SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE PARTIES THAT ATTENDED THE
CONFERENCE REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

3. WITHIN 90 DAYS AFTER THE DAY OF FILING THE
PETITION WITH THE EMPLOYER.

(II) 1. AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION ON A BALLOT MAY
REQUEST A PREFERRED METHOD OF VOTING.

2. THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL DESIGNATE
THE METHOD OF VOTING BASED ON THE REQUEST OF THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATIONS ON THE BALLOT.

3. IF THERE IS A DISPUTE BETWEEN TWO OR MORE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS ON THE BALLOT OVER THE METHOD OF VOTING, THE
NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER MAY DESIGNATE THE METHOD OF VOTING.

(3) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SHALL BE CERTIFIED AS
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE FOLLOWING AN ELECTION IF THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION HAS RECEIVED THE VOTE OF A MAJORITY OF THE VALID VOTES CAST
IN THE BARGAINING UNIT IN WHICH THE ELECTION IS HELD.

(4) (I) IF AN ELECTION INCLUDES THREE OR MORE CHOICES AND
NO CHOICE RECEIVES A MAJORITY OF THE VALID VOTES CAST, THE NEUTRAL
DECISION MAKER SHALL CONDUCT A RUNOFF ELECTION BETWEEN THE TWO
CHOICES THAT RECEIVED THE LARGEST NUMBER OF VALID VOTES CAST.

(II) THE CHOICE RECEIVING THE MAJORITY OF THE VALID
VOTES CAST IN THE RUNOFF ELECTION SHALL BE CERTIFIED.

(5) THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER CONDUCTING THE ELECTION
SHALL ISSUE TO ALL THE PARTICIPANTS IN AN ELECTION A CERTIFICATION OF

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

REPRESENTATION, IF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION IS CERTIFIED, OR THE RESULTS
OF THE ELECTION, IF NO REPRESENTATIVE IS CHOSEN.

(I) (1) IF THE EMPLOYER DISAGREES WITH THE PETITIONING EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION OR THE PETITIONING EMPLOYEES AS TO THE INCLUSION OR
EXCLUSION OF SPECIFIC EMPLOYEES AND CLASSIFICATIONS OF EMPLOYEES IN THE
BARGAINING UNIT, ALL THE EMPLOYEES IN THE PETITIONED–FOR GROUP SHALL
HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY TO VOTE IN THE ELECTION.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE BALLOTS
OF CHALLENGED EMPLOYEES SHALL REMAIN SEALED AND BE SET ASIDE UNTIL THE
BALLOTS OF EMPLOYEES WHO ARE NOT IN DISPUTE HAVE BEEN TALLIED.

(3) (I) IF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF BALLOTS OF CHALLENGED
EMPLOYEES DOES NOT HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE ELECTION RESULT:

1. THE PARTIES MAY NOT COUNT THE BALLOTS OF
CHALLENGED EMPLOYEES; AND

2. THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL RESOLVE THE
DISPUTE OVER THE CHALLENGED EMPLOYEES AFTER THE ELECTION IS CERTIFIED
THROUGH A HEARING.

(II) IF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF BALLOTS OF CHALLENGED
EMPLOYEES DOES HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE ELECTION RESULT, THE PARTIES SHALL
IMMEDIATELY REFER THE DISPUTE TO THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER FROM THE
FEDERAL MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION SERVICE TO RESOLVE THE DISPUTE
THROUGH A HEARING.

(4) (I) THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL HOLD A HEARING
ON THE DISPUTE REFERRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

1. WITH THE PARTIES PRESENTING EVIDENCE ON THEIR
POSITIONS; AND

2. WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE ELECTION HAS
CONCLUDED.

(II) IF THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER FINDS THAT
CHALLENGED EMPLOYEES ARE PROPERLY INCLUDED WITHIN THE BARGAINING
UNIT, THE BALLOTS OF THE CHALLENGED EMPLOYEES SHALL BE COUNTED IN THE
TOTAL TALLY FOR THE ELECTION.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) 1. THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER SHALL ISSUE A
DECISION WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE HEARING CONCLUDES.

2. THE NEUTRAL DECISION MAKER’S FINDINGS SHALL
BE FINAL AND BINDING ON THE PARTIES.

(J) (1) IF EMPLOYEES ARE REPRESENTED BY AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION, EMPLOYEES MAY FILE A PETITION WITH THE EMPLOYER THAT
CONTAINS THE FOLLOWING:

(I) AN ASSERTION THAT THE MAJORITY OF THE EMPLOYEES NO
LONGER WISH TO BE REPRESENTED BY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION;

(II) A STATEMENT THAT THE EMPLOYEES HAVE IN THEIR
POSSESSION SUBSTANTIVE DOCUMENTARY PROOF, DATED NOT MORE THAN 6
MONTHS BEFORE THE DAY ON WHICH THE PETITION IS FILED, THAT AT LEAST 30%
OF THE EMPLOYEES WITHIN THE BARGAINING UNIT APPROVE OF THE
DECERTIFICATION OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION; AND

(III) A STATEMENT EXPLAINING THAT THE EMPLOYEES ARE
SEEKING DECERTIFICATION OF THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE FOR THE BARGAINING UNIT.

(2) (I) THE PETITION SHALL BE PROCESSED AS DESCRIBED IN
THIS SECTION, INCLUDING VERIFICATION OF PROOF OF INTEREST AND AN
ELECTION.

(II) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SHALL BE DECERTIFIED AS
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE FOLLOWING AN ELECTION IF THE MAJORITY OF THE
VALID VOTES CAST IN THE UNIT IN WHICH THE ELECTION IS HELD ARE FOR NO
REPRESENTATION.

23–908.

(A) IF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION IS CERTIFIED AS DESCRIBED IN THIS
SUBTITLE, THE EMPLOYER AND THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION SHALL ENTER INTO
A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT THAT CONTAINS PROVISIONS REGARDING:

(1) WAGES, HOURS, AND TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT;

(2) THE ORDERLY PROCESSING AND SETTLEMENT OF GRIEVANCES
REGARDING THE INTERPRETATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING AGREEMENT THAT CULMINATE IN FINAL AND BINDING ARBITRATION,

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

~~INCLUDING~~ ~~APPEALS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~DISCIPLINARY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~ADVERSE~~ ~~PERSONNEL~~ ~~ACTIONS~~
SUBJECT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW UNDER THE MARYLAND UNIFORM ARBITRATION
ACT; AND

(3) OTHER TOPICS THAT THE PARTIES MAY MUTUALLY AGREE TO
THAT WERE SUITABLE FOR BARGAINING.

(B) (1) THE EMPLOYER AUTOMATICALLY SHALL DEDUCT FROM THE
PAYCHECK OF AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS A MEMBER OF THE BARGAINING UNIT
REPRESENTED BY THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE DUES AUTHORIZED
AND OWED BY THE EMPLOYEE TO THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE IF
THE EMPLOYEE SUBMITS TO THE EMPLOYER A DUES DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION
THAT HAS BEEN DULY EXECUTED BY THE EMPLOYEE.

(2) ANY DUES DEDUCTED FROM PAYCHECKS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE REMITTED TO THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(3) THE EMPLOYER AUTOMATICALLY SHALL STOP MAKING PAYROLL
DEDUCTIONS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION ON BEHALF OF A
CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE IF:

(I) THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE IS
DECERTIFIED;

(II) THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE’S RIGHT TO
DUES IS REVOKED UNDER § 23–913(D)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(III) THE EMPLOYEE CEASES TO BE A MEMBER OF THE
BARGAINING UNIT REPRESENTED BY THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE;
OR

(IV) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
EMPLOYEE REVOKES THE AUTHORIZATION FOR PAYMENTS TO THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROCEDURES PROVIDED IN A DUES
DEDUCTION AUTHORIZATION.

(4) THE PROCEDURES PROVIDED IN A DUES DEDUCTION
AUTHORIZATION UTILIZED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL ALLOW FOR A
REVOCATION OF THE AUTHORIZATION FOR PAYMENTS TO THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE AT LEAST ANNUALLY.

(C) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO:

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) AUTHORIZE OR OTHERWISE ALLOW AN EMPLOYEE TO ENGAGE IN
A STRIKE OR WORK STOPPAGE, AS THOSE TERMS ARE DEFINED IN § 23–913 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; OR

(2) RESTRICT THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY
OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY TO DETERMINE THE BUDGET OF THE EMPLOYER.

(D) (1) A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE EFFECTIVE ON RATIFICATION BY THE
MAJORITY OF VOTES CAST BY THE EMPLOYEES IN THE BARGAINING UNIT AND
APPROVAL BY THE DIRECTOR AND THE EMPLOYER.

(2) A SINGLE–YEAR OR MULTIYEAR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT SHALL EXPIRE AT THE CLOSE OF THE COUNTY’S FISCAL YEAR.

23–909.

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL REACH
AN AGREEMENT BY FEBRUARY 1 OF THE YEAR IN WHICH A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT WILL EXPIRE.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MUTUALLY MAY
AGREE TO EXTEND NEGOTIATIONS FOR A PERIOD NOT TO EXTEND PAST JUNE 30 OF
THE YEAR IN WHICH A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT WILL EXPIRE.

(3) ANY EXTENSION MUST ACKNOWLEDGE ANY RELEVANT COUNTY
BUDGETARY DEADLINES IN WRITING TO ENSURE THAT PARTIES MEET CRUCIAL
FUNDING DEADLINES.

(B) AN IMPASSE IS REACHED DURING THE NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN THE
EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE IF THE EMPLOYER
AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE DO NOT REACH AN AGREEMENT
BY:

(1) STATING THEY HAVE MUTUALLY AGREED THAT THEY ARE AT AN
IMPASSE;

(2) FEBRUARY 1 OF THE YEAR IN WHICH A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT WILL EXPIRE; OR

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

(3) IF NEGOTIATIONS WERE EXTENDED, THE DATE TO WHICH
NEGOTIATIONS WERE EXTENDED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) (1) IF AN IMPASSE IS REACHED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION, THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL
EACH SUBMIT A FINAL OFFER TO THE OTHER PARTY WITHIN 48 HOURS AFTER THE
IMPASSE IS REACHED.

(2) UNLESS THE IMPASSE REACHED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION HAS BEEN RESOLVED, THE DISPUTE AND THE FINAL OFFERS SHALL BE
SUBMITTED TO THE MEDIATOR SELECTED BY THE PARTIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) (1) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER A MEDIATOR IS SELECTED BY THE
PARTIES, THE MEDIATOR SHALL:

(I) MEET WITH THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE; AND

(II) MAKE WRITTEN FINDINGS OF FACT AND
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE RESOLUTION OF THE DISPUTE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) (I) IF THE PARTIES ARE UNABLE TO AGREE ON A MEDIATOR,
THEY SHALL REQUEST A LIST OF SEVEN MEDIATORS FROM THE FEDERAL
MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION SERVICE.

(II) 1. SUBJECT TO SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF THIS
SUBPARAGRAPH, WITHIN 3 WORKING DAYS AFTER RECEIVING THE LIST UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE PARTIES SHALL ALTERNATELY
REMOVE ONE MEDIATOR FROM THE LIST UNTIL ONLY ONE MEDIATOR REMAINS, WHO
THE PARTIES SHALL AGREE WILL SERVE AS THE MEDIATOR UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION.

2. THE PARTIES SHALL SELECT WHICH PARTY REMOVES
THE FIRST MEDIATOR FROM THE LIST BY USING A SELECTION METHOD THAT IS
RANDOM AND OF EQUAL CHANCE FOR BOTH PARTIES.

(3) THE MEDIATOR SHALL ACT AS AN INTERMEDIARY IN BRINGING
THE PARTIES TOGETHER AND SHALL ACTIVELY ASSIST THE PARTIES IN RESOLVING
THE DISPUTE BY:

(I) CONDUCTING PROCEEDINGS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SUBSECTION;
– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IDENTIFYING THE MAJOR ISSUES IN THE DISPUTE BETWEEN
THE PARTIES;

(III) REVIEWING THE POSITIONS OF THE PARTIES; AND

(IV) RECOMMENDING A RESOLUTION FOR THE AGREEMENT OF
THE PARTIES.

(4) A RESOLUTION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) SHALL ADDRESS MATTERS SUCH AS WAGES, HOURS, OR
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT;

(II) EXCEPT FOR COSTS ASSESSED TO EMPLOYEES FOR HEALTH
CARE BENEFITS, MAY NOT INCLUDE HEALTH CARE BENEFITS UNLESS THE BENEFITS
ARE CONTRACTED DIRECTLY THROUGH THE PUBLIC LIBRARY SYSTEM; AND

(III) MAY NOT EXCEED 1 FISCAL YEAR, UNLESS AGREED TO BY
THE PARTIES.

(5) (I) ANY RESOLUTION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION REGARDING
PENSION BENEFITS SHALL BE CONSTRUED AS A RECOMMENDATION FOR
CONSIDERATION BY THE PENSION SPONSOR OF THE STATE OR RESPECTIVE
COUNTY.

(II) A CHANGE MAY NOT BE MADE TO PENSION BENEFITS
UNLESS AN APPROPRIATE PLAN AMENDMENT IS ADOPTED BY THE PLAN SPONSOR
OF THE STATE OR RESPECTIVE COUNTY.

(6) (I) BEFORE ISSUING A FINAL DECISION, THE MEDIATOR SHALL
TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION, AMONG ANY OTHER RELEVANT FACTORS:

1. THE WAGES AND PENSION BENEFITS, NOT INCLUDING
HEALTH CARE BENEFITS, OF THE EMPLOYEES OF THE BARGAINING UNIT;

2. THE WAGES AND PENSION BENEFITS OF OTHER
SIMILARLY SITUATED EMPLOYEES PERFORMING SIMILAR SERVICES IN LIBRARIES
OF COMPARABLE COUNTIES IN THE STATE, TAKING INTO CONSIDERATION THE
COST–OF–LIVING INDEX FOR THE AREA IN WHICH THE COMPARABLE COUNTY IS
LOCATED;

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

3. WAGES AND PENSION BENEFITS OF SIMILARLY
SITUATED COUNTY EMPLOYEES;

4. THE LAST PUBLISHED ANNUAL U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
LABOR CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR ALL URBAN CONSUMERS FOR ALL ITEMS IN
THE WASHINGTON–BALTIMORE AREA;

5. THE SPECIAL NATURE OF THE WORK PERFORMED BY
THE EMPLOYEES OF THE BARGAINING UNIT, INCLUDING:

A. PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS OF EMPLOYMENT;

B. EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS;

C. JOB TRAINING AND JOB SKILLS; AND

D. SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS AND THE DEMANDS PLACED ON
THE EMPLOYEES COMPARED TO THE DEMANDS PLACED ON OTHER SIMILARLY
SITUATED LIBRARY EMPLOYEES IN COMPARABLE COUNTY JURISDICTIONS;

6. STATE AND COUNTY MANDATED EXPENDITURES;

7. SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS, INCLUDING FINANCIAL SOURCES OF
REVENUE; AND

8. THE INTEREST AND WELFARE OF THE PUBLIC.

(II) IN CONSIDERING THE AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR WAGE
INCREASES, THE MEDIATOR SHALL CONSIDER THE GENERAL FUND REVENUES OF
THE RESPECTIVE COUNTY AND ANY RELATED COUNTY REPORTS ON REVENUES.

(7) A MEDIATOR MAY NOT CONSIDER TESTIMONY REGARDING FUNDS
FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS, SURPLUS CONTINGENCY, OR RESERVE FUNDS.

(8) (I) THE PARTIES ARE STRONGLY ENCOURAGED TO REACH AN
AGREEMENT ON ALL ISSUES WHENEVER POSSIBLE.

(II) IF NO AGREEMENT CAN BE REACHED BY THE PARTIES, THE
MEDIATOR SHALL ISSUE A REPORT WITH THE MEDIATOR’S DECISION, INCLUDING
WRITTEN FINDINGS OF FACT.

(9) THE MEDIATOR MAY ADOPT A PACKAGE OF FINAL POSITIONS OR
RULE ON EACH MATTER SEPARATELY.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(10) THE MEDIATOR SHALL SUBMIT COPIES OF THE MEDIATOR’S
WRITTEN FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE EMPLOYER AND THE
CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE ON OR BEFORE THE IMMEDIATELY
FOLLOWING APRIL 2.

(11) ANY COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
SHARED EQUALLY BY THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(12) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO INTERFERE WITH
ANY EFFORTS THE PARTIES MAY UNDERTAKE TO REACH AN AGREEMENT AT ANY
TIME.

(13) THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY IS
NOT BOUND BY ANY DECISION MADE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(14) THE PROCEDURE IN THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE THE EXCLUSIVE
PROCEDURE FOR RESOLVING DISPUTES BETWEEN THE PARTIES, UNLESS THE
PARTIES, BY MUTUAL AGREEMENT, DETERMINE TO USE ANOTHER METHOD OF
DISPUTE RESOLUTION.

(E) (1) THE MEDIATOR SHALL SUBMIT THE FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MEDIATOR TO THE EMPLOYER IN A TIMELY MANNER
CONSISTENT WITH THE TIMING OF PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) THE EMPLOYER SHALL APPROVE ALL RECOMMENDATIONS AND
FINDINGS OF THE MEDIATOR THAT DO NOT REQUIRE AN APPROPRIATION OF
ADDITIONAL FUNDS WITHIN 5 14 DAYS AFTER THE MEDIATOR’S DECISION.

23–910.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
EMPLOYER SHALL SUBMIT A TERM OF A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT OR
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING ENTERED INTO UNDER THIS SUBTITLE TO THE
GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY WITH THE EMPLOYER’S
RECOMMENDATION REGARDING WHETHER THE AGREEMENT OR THE MEDIATOR’S
DECISION REQUIRES AN APPROPRIATION OF ADDITIONAL FUNDS.

(2) THE SUBMISSION REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
MADE BEFORE THE FIRST MEETING OF THE ~~GOVERNING~~ FUNDING BODY OF THE
APPLICABLE COUNTY THAT IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWS AN AGREEMENT BEING

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

REACHED TO ENSURE ANY RELEVANT COUNTY BUDGETARY DEADLINES ARE NOT
MISSED.

(B) (1) THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY
MAY APPROVE OR REJECT A REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDING UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, IN WHOLE OR IN PART.

(2) IF THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY
APPROVES A REQUEST UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
~~GOVERNING~~ FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY SHALL TAKE ALL ACTIONS
NECESSARY TO PROCESS THE REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDING.

(C) (1) IF ANY PART OF A REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDING
SUBMITTED TO THE ~~GOVERNING~~ FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION IS REJECTED, THE REQUEST FOR ADDITIONAL FUNDS
SHALL BE RETURNED TO THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE FOR RENEGOTIATION WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE FUNDING
ALLOCATED BY THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY.

(2) THE RENEGOTIATION SHALL BE COMPLETED WITHIN A
TIMETABLE ESTABLISHED BY THE ~~GOVERNING~~ FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE
COUNTY.

(3) (I) IF AN IMPASSE IS REACHED, THE EMPLOYER AND THE
CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE SHALL EACH SUBMIT A FINAL OFFER,
WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE FUNDING ALLOCATED BY THE ~~GOVERNING~~ FUNDING
BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY, FOR THE REVIEW OF THE GOVERNING FUNDING
BODY OF THE APPLICABLE COUNTY.

(II) THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF THE APPLICABLE
COUNTY SHALL SELECT ONE OF THE OFFERS SUBMITTED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(III) THE SELECTION OF THE GOVERNING FUNDING BODY OF
THE APPLICABLE COUNTY IS BINDING ON ALL PARTIES.

(D) (1) THE EMPLOYER AND THE CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE ARE MUTUALLY OBLIGATED TO:

(I) MEET AT REASONABLE TIMES IN CONSIDERATION OF THE
COUNTY’S BUDGET SUBMISSION DATE; AND

(II) NEGOTIATE IN GOOD FAITH ON:

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. WAGES, HOURS, AND TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF
EMPLOYMENT; AND

2. DRAFTING A WRITTEN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT THAT CONTAINS ALL MATTERS AGREED ON AND IS SIGNED BY
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVES OF BOTH PARTIES.

(2) THE OBLIGATION TO NEGOTIATE IN GOOD FAITH UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) REQUIRES THAT AN EFFORT BE MADE BY BOTH PARTIES TO
ARRIVE AT AN AGREEMENT AND REDUCE THE AGREEMENT TO WRITING WITHIN A
REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME; AND

(II) DOES NOT REQUIRE THAT ANY CONCESSION BE MADE BY
EITHER PARTY.

23–911.

(A) AN EMPLOYER MAY PROVIDE TO A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE:

(1) RELEASE TIME; AND

(2) ACCESS TO ROUTINE SERVICES AND FACILITIES OF THE
EMPLOYER.

(B) THE EMPLOYER OR ITS OFFICERS OR AGENTS MAY NOT:

(1) INTERFERE WITH, COERCE, UNDULY INFLUENCE, OR RESTRAIN
AN EMPLOYEE’S EXERCISE OF RIGHTS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION,
DOMINATE, SURVEIL, INTERFERE WITH, ASSIST IN THE FORMATION,
ADMINISTRATION, OR EXISTENCE OF, OR CONTRIBUTE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE OR
OTHER SUPPORT TO AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION;

(3) ENCOURAGE OR DISCOURAGE MEMBERSHIP IN AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION BY DISCRIMINATING AGAINST AN EMPLOYEE THROUGH HIRING,
TENURE, PROMOTION, OR OTHER CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT;

(4) REFUSE TO BARGAIN IN GOOD FAITH WITH AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION THAT IS THE EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE EMPLOYEES; OR

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

(5) SPEND PUBLIC MONEY, USE PUBLIC RESOURCES, OR PROVIDE
ASSISTANCE TO AN INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP FOR A NEGATIVE CAMPAIGN AGAINST
EFFORTS BY EMPLOYEES OR AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO:

(I) GAIN OR RETAIN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING RIGHTS OR TO
CERTIFY AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS AN EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE; OR

(II) CERTIFY AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AS AN EXCLUSIVE
REPRESENTATIVE.

(C) AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION MAY NOT:

(1) INTERFERE WITH, COERCE, UNDULY INFLUENCE, OR RESTRAIN
AN EMPLOYEE’S EXERCISE OF RIGHTS UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) CAUSE OR ATTEMPT TO CAUSE THE EMPLOYER TO DISCRIMINATE
AGAINST AN EMPLOYEE BECAUSE THE EMPLOYEE EXERCISES A RIGHT UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE;

(3) DISCIPLINE OR FINE A MEMBER OF THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION AS PUNISHMENT OR REPRISAL;

(4) DISCIPLINE OR FINE A MEMBER OF THE EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION FOR THE PURPOSE OF IMPEDING THE MEMBER’S WORK
PERFORMANCE;

(5) REFUSE TO BARGAIN IN GOOD FAITH WITH THE EMPLOYER OR TO
PARTICIPATE IN GOOD FAITH IN A PROCEDURE UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(6) UNFAIRLY REPRESENT EMPLOYEES IN COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
OR IN ANY OTHER MATTER IN WHICH THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION HAS THE DUTY
OF FAIR REPRESENTATION.

(D) (1) AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS A MEMBER OF A BARGAINING UNIT WITH A
CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE MAY, WITHOUT THE INTERVENTION OF AN
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION, DISCUSS ANY MATTER WITH THE EMPLOYER.

(2) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT WAIVE THE RIGHT OF THE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION TO BE THE EXCLUSIVE BARGAINING REPRESENTATIVE
FOR ISSUES RELATED TO WAGES, HOURS, AND WORKING CONDITIONS AND IS NOT
INTENDED TO CREATE AN ALTERNATE PATH TO ALTER TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF
THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES.

23–912.
– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISIONS OF LAW, IT IS THE
EXCLUSIVE RIGHT OF THE EMPLOYER TO:

(1) DETERMINE THE PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES OF EACH OF ITS
CONSTITUENT OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS;

(2) SET STANDARDS OF SERVICES TO BE OFFERED TO THE PUBLIC;

(3) EXERCISE CONTROL AND DISCRETION OVER ITS ORGANIZATION
AND OPERATIONS; AND

(4) DETERMINE THE METHODS, MEANS, PERSONNEL, AND OTHER
RESOURCES BY WHICH THE EMPLOYER’S OPERATIONS ARE TO BE CONDUCTED,
INCLUDING:

(I) THE USE OF VOLUNTEERS; AND

(II) THE CONTRACTING OUT OF WORK IF CONSIDERED
NECESSARY.

(B) SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
AGREEMENT AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE RESPECTIVE COUNTY CHARTER AND
OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS, THE EMPLOYER MAY:

(1) DIRECT ITS EMPLOYEES;

(2) HIRE, PROMOTE, TRANSFER, ASSIGN, OR RETAIN EMPLOYEES;

(3) ESTABLISH REASONABLE WORK RULES; AND

(4) DEMOTE, SUSPEND, DISCHARGE, OR TAKE ANY OTHER
DISCIPLINARY ACTION AGAINST ITS EMPLOYEES FOR JUST CAUSE.

(C) THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE DEEMED TO BE PART OF
EVERY AGREEMENT EXECUTED BETWEEN THE EMPLOYER AND A CERTIFIED
EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE.

(D) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO DENY THE RIGHT OF AN
EMPLOYEE TO SUBMIT A GRIEVANCE WITH REGARD TO THE EMPLOYER’S EXERCISE
OF ITS RIGHTS UNDER THIS SECTION.

(E) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, IF EMPLOYEES HAVE
ENTERED INTO A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT WITH THE EMPLOYER

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO
SUPERSEDES ANY CONFLICTING REGULATION OR ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY OF THE
EMPLOYER.

(F) A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT MAY INCLUDE A PROVISION
FOR ARBITRATION OF DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.

23–913.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “LOCKOUT” MEANS THE TEMPORARY WITHHOLDING OF WORK, BY
MEANS OF SHUTTING DOWN AN OPERATION OR FUNCTION IN ORDER TO BRING
PRESSURE ON EMPLOYEES OR ON THEIR REPRESENTATIVES TO ACCEPT A CHANGE
IN COMPENSATION OR RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES, OBLIGATIONS, OR OTHER TERMS AND
CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT.

(3) “SECONDARY BOYCOTT” MEANS AN ACTIVITY BY AN EMPLOYEE
ORGANIZATION OR ITS MEMBERS THAT IS INTENDED TO INDUCE, ENCOURAGE, OR
COERCE PERSONS DOING BUSINESS WITH THE EMPLOYER TO WITHHOLD,
WITHDRAW, OR IN ANY RESPECT CURTAIL THEIR BUSINESS RELATIONS WITH THE
COUNTY.

(4) “STRIKE” MEANS THE REFUSAL OR FAILURE BY AN EMPLOYEE OR
GROUP OF EMPLOYEES TO PERFORM THEIR DUTIES OF EMPLOYMENT AS ASSIGNED
IF A PURPOSE OF THE REFUSAL OR FAILURE IS TO INDUCE, FORCE, OR REQUIRE THE
EMPLOYER TO ACT OR REFRAIN FROM ACTING WITH REGARD TO ANY MATTER.

(5) “WORK STOPPAGE” MEANS:

(I) THE WILLFUL ABSENCE OF A GROUP OF EMPLOYEES FROM
THEIR POSITIONS;

(II) THE ENGAGING IN A SLOWDOWN BY EMPLOYEES; OR

(III) THE REFUSAL OF EMPLOYEES TO PERFORM JOB DUTIES.

(B) IN GENERAL, STRIKES, WORK STOPPAGES, LOCKOUTS, AND SECONDARY
BOYCOTTS ARE PROHIBITED.

(C) (1) EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS MAY NOT ENGAGE
IN, SPONSOR, INITIATE, SUPPORT, DIRECT, OR CONDONE A STRIKE, WORK
STOPPAGE, OR SECONDARY BOYCOTT.
– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 132 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS MAY NOT ENGAGE IN, INITIATE,
SPONSOR, OR SUPPORT, DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY, PICKETING OF THE EMPLOYER,
ITS PROPERTY, OR FIELD OR OFFICE FACILITIES IN FURTHERANCE OF A STRIKE,
WORK STOPPAGE, OR SECONDARY BOYCOTT.

(D) IF AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION VIOLATES THIS SECTION, THE
EMPLOYER MAY:

(1) REVOKE THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION’S DESIGNATION AS
CERTIFIED EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE;

(2) DISQUALIFY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION FROM
PARTICIPATING IN REPRESENTATION ELECTIONS FOR A PERIOD OF UP TO 2 YEARS;
AND

(3) TERMINATE IMMEDIATELY THE PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS FOR THE
EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION’S DUES.

(E) AN EMPLOYEE WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO IMMEDIATE
DISCIPLINARY ACTION, WHICH MAY INCLUDE PERMANENT DISMISSAL FROM THE
EMPLOYMENT BY THE EMPLOYER FOR JUST CAUSE.

(F) (1) THE EMPLOYER MAY NOT DIRECT A LOCKOUT AGAINST
EMPLOYEES.

(2) THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT THE
EMPLOYER FROM EXERCISING ITS MANAGERIAL RIGHTS.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
application to:

(1) the composition of a collective bargaining unit that is in existence on
the effective date of this Act unless the collective bargaining unit dissolves after the
effective date of this Act;

(2) a collective bargaining agreement entered into before the effective date
of this Act; or

(3) collective bargaining negotiations that began before the effective date
of this Act.

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 132

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25