START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 629 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 629 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Consumer Price Index - Definition 
 
 
This bill corrects an obsolete reference to the 1967 Consumer Price Index (CPI) in State 
pension law. It clarifies that the CPI for all urban consumers using 1982-1984 as base years 
must be used to calculate cost-of-living adjustments for almost all State Retirement and 
Pension System (SRPS) retirees.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is technical in nature and has no material effect on governmental 
operations or finance.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill is technical in nature and has no material effect on governmental 
operations or finance.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Consumer Price Index” is defined as the annual average CPI (all urban 
consumers, United States city average, all items, not seasonally adjusted, 1967=100) for 
the calendar year ending December 31 as published by the U.S. Department of Labor, 
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
 
Each year, the SRPS board must adjust the allowance for all retirees except those in the 
Judges’ Retirement System or the Legislative Pension Plan, or for former Governors. In 
general, the adjustment is calculated by subtracting the CPI for the calendar year ending 
December 31 in the second preceding year from the CPI for the calendar year ending 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 629/ Page 2 
December 31 in the preceding year. That amount is then divided by the CPI for the 
second preceding year.            
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 490 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2