START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 271

Chapter 271

(House Bill 649)

AN ACT concerning

Labor and Employment – Equal Pay for Equal Work – Wage Range
Transparency

FOR the purpose of altering the requirement that an employer disclose certain wage
information to an applicant for employment; requiring an employer to disclose
certain wage information in certain postings and to certain employees at certain
times; requiring an employer to set the wage range disclosed in good faith; requiring
the Commissioner of Labor and Industry to develop and make available to employers
a form that an employer may use to comply with certain wage disclosure
requirements; prohibiting an employer from taking a certain retaliatory action;
requiring each employer to keep a record of compliance with certain provisions of
this Act for at least a certain time period; and generally relating to equal pay for
equal work.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–301, 3–304.2, 3–305, ~~3–307,~~ and 3–308(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) (1) “Employer” means:

(i) a person engaged in a business, industry, profession, trade, or
other enterprise in the State;

(ii) the State and its units;

(iii) a county and its units; and

(iv) a municipal government in the State.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 271 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “Employer” includes a person who acts directly or indirectly in the
interest of another employer with an employee.

(c) “Gender identity” has the meaning stated in § 20–101 of the State Government
Article.

(d) “POSTING” MEANS A SOLICITATION INTENDED TO RECRUIT
APPLICANTS FOR A SPECIFIC AVAILABLE POSITION, INCLUDING RECRUITMENT
DONE DIRECTLY BY AN EMPLOYER OR INDIRECTLY THROUGH A THIRD PARTY.

(E) (1) “Wage” means all compensation for employment.

(2) “Wage” includes board, lodging, or other advantage provided to an
employee for the convenience of the employer.

(F) “WAGE RANGE” MEANS THE MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM HOURLY OR RATE
OR MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SALARY WAGE FOR A POSITION, SET IN GOOD FAITH BY
REFERENCE, AS APPLICABLE, TO:

(1) ANY APPLICABLE PAY SCALE;

(2) ANY PREVIOUSLY DETERMINED MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM HOURLY
OR RATE OR MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SALARY WAGE FOR THE POSITION;

(3) THE MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM HOURLY OR RATE OR MINIMUM AND
MAXIMUM SALARY ~~WAGE~~ OF AN INDIVIDUAL HOLDING ~~AN~~ ~~EQUIVALENT~~ A
COMPARABLE POSITION AT THE TIME OF THE POSTING; OR

(4) THE BUDGETED AMOUNT FOR THE POSITION.

3–304.2.

[(a) On request, an employer shall provide to an applicant for employment the
wage range for the position for which the applicant applied.]

(A) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY WITH RESPECT TO A JOB OR
POSITION FOR WORK PROMOTION, TRANSFER, OR OTHER EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITY THAT WILL BE PHYSICALLY PERFORMED,:

(I) AT LEAST IN PART, IN THE STATE; OR STATE.

(II) OUTSIDE THE STATE, IF THE EMPLOYEE REPORTS TO:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 271

1. A SUPERVISOR WHO IS PHYSICALLY LOCATED IN THE
STATE; OR

2. AN OFFICE OR ANOTHER WORK SITE THAT IS
PHYSICALLY LOCATED IN THE STATE.

(2) AN EMPLOYER SHALL:

(I) DISCLOSE IN EACH PUBLIC OR INTERNAL POSTING FOR
EACH JOB, PROMOTION, TRANSFER, OR OTHER EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY THE
~~HOURLY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SALARY~~ ~~WAGE~~ ~~OR~~ POSITION THE WAGE RANGE AND A GENERAL
DESCRIPTION OF BENEFITS AND ANY OTHER COMPENSATION OFFERED FOR THE
POSITION; AND

(II) IF A PUBLIC OR INTERNAL POSTING FOR A JOB, PROMOTION,
TRANSFER, OR OTHER EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POSITION WAS NOT MADE
AVAILABLE TO AN APPLICANT FOR EMPLOYMENT THE POSITION, DISCLOSE TO THE
APPLICANT THE INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE DISCLOSED IN A PUBLIC OR
INTERNAL POSTING UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH:

1. BEFORE A DISCUSSION OF COMPENSATION IS HELD
WITH THE APPLICANT; AND

2. AT ANY OTHER TIME ON REQUEST OF THE APPLICANT.

(B) AN EMPLOYER SHALL SET THE WAGE RANGE DISCLOSED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION IN GOOD FAITH.

(C) (1) THE COMMISSIONER SHALL DEVELOP AND MAKE AVAILABLE TO
EMPLOYERS A FORM THAT AN EMPLOYER MAY USE TO COMPLY WITH SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) AN EMPLOYER MAY COMPLY WITH SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION BY:

(I) COMPLETING THE FORM DEVELOPED UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

(II) INCLUDING THE COMPLETED FORM IN EACH PUBLIC OR
INTERNAL POSTING FOR A POSITION; AND

(III) OTHERWISE MAKING THE COMPLETED FORM AVAILABLE TO
APPLICANTS AS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 271 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(b)] (C) (D) (1) An employer may not:

(i) retaliate against or refuse to interview, hire, or employ an
applicant for employment OR PROMOTE OR TRANSFER AN EMPLOYEE because the
applicant OR EMPLOYEE:

1. did not provide wage history; [or]

2. requested the wage range in accordance with this section
[for the position for which the applicant applied]; [and] OR

3. EXERCISED ANY RIGHTS UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(ii) except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection:

1. rely on the wage history of an applicant for employment in
screening or considering the applicant for employment or in determining the wages for the
applicant; or

2. seek the wage history for an applicant for employment
orally, in writing, or through an employee or an agent or from a current or former employer.

(2) After an employer makes an initial offer of employment with an offer of
compensation to an applicant for employment, an employer may:

(i) subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, rely on the wage
history voluntarily provided by the applicant for employment to support a wage offer higher
than the initial wage offered by the employer; or

(ii) seek to confirm the wage history voluntarily provided by the
applicant for employment to support a wage offer higher than the initial wage offered by
the employer.

(3) An employer may rely on wage history under paragraph (2) of this
subsection only if the higher wage does not create an unlawful pay differential based on
protected characteristics under § 3–304 of this subtitle.

[(c)] (D) (E) This section may not be construed to prohibit an applicant for
employment from sharing wage history with an employer voluntarily.

3–305.

(a) (1) Each employer shall keep each record that the Commissioner requires
on:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 271

(i) wages of employees;

(ii) job classifications of employees; and

(iii) other conditions of employment.

(2) EACH EMPLOYER SHALL KEEP A RECORD OF COMPLIANCE WITH §
3–304.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE FOR EACH POSTING FOR A JOB, PROMOTION, TRANSFER,
OR OTHER EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POSITION FOR AT LEAST 3 YEARS AFTER:

(I) THE POSITION IS FILLED; OR

(II) IF THE POSITION IS NOT FILLED, THE POSITION WAS
INITIALLY POSTED.

[(2)] (3) An employer shall keep the records required under this
subsection for the period of time that the Commissioner requires.

(b) On the basis of the records required under this section, an employer shall
make each report that the Commissioner requires.

~~3–307.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~If~~ ~~an~~ ~~employer~~ ~~knew~~ ~~or~~ ~~reasonably~~ ~~should~~ ~~have~~ ~~known~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~
~~employer’s~~ ~~action~~ ~~violates~~ ~~§~~ ~~3–304~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle,~~ ~~an~~ ~~affected~~ ~~employee~~ ~~may~~ ~~bring~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~
~~against~~ ~~the~~ ~~employer~~ ~~for~~ ~~injunctive~~ ~~relief~~ ~~and~~ ~~to~~ ~~recover~~ ~~the~~ ~~difference~~ ~~between~~ ~~the~~ ~~wages~~
~~paid~~ ~~to~~ ~~employees~~ ~~of~~ ~~one~~ ~~sex~~ ~~or~~ ~~gender~~ ~~identity~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~wages~~ ~~paid~~ ~~to~~ ~~employees~~ ~~of~~ ~~another~~
~~sex~~ ~~or~~ ~~gender~~ ~~identity~~ ~~who~~ ~~do~~ ~~the~~ ~~same~~ ~~type~~ ~~work~~ ~~and~~ ~~an~~ ~~additional~~ ~~equal~~ ~~amount~~ ~~as~~
~~liquidated~~ ~~damages.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~If~~ ~~an~~ ~~employer~~ ~~knew~~ ~~or~~ ~~reasonably~~ ~~should~~ ~~have~~ ~~known~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~
~~employer’s~~ ~~action~~ ~~violates~~ ~~§~~ ~~3–304.1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle,~~ ~~an~~ ~~affected~~ ~~employee~~ ~~may~~ ~~bring~~ ~~an~~
~~action~~ ~~against~~ ~~the~~ ~~employer~~ ~~for~~ ~~injunctive~~ ~~relief~~ ~~and~~ ~~to~~ ~~recover~~ ~~actual~~ ~~damages~~ ~~and~~ ~~an~~
~~additional~~ ~~equal~~ ~~amount~~ ~~as~~ ~~liquidated~~ ~~damages.~~

(3) AN AFFECTED EMPLOYEE OR APPLICANT FOR EMPLOYMENT MAY
BRING AN ACTION AGAINST THE EMPLOYER WHO VIOLATES § 3–304.2 OF THIS
SUBTITLE FOR INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND TO RECOVER DAMAGES UP TO $10,000 OR
ACTUAL DAMAGES, WHICHEVER IS GREATER, PLUS REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES.

(4) An employee OR APPLICANT FOR EMPLOYMENT may bring an action
on behalf of the employee OR APPLICANT and other employees OR APPLICANTS similarly
~~affected.~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 271 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) On the written request of an employee OR APPLICANT FOR EMPLOYMENT
~~who~~ ~~is~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~ ~~bring~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commissioner~~ ~~may:~~

(1) take an assignment of the claim in trust for the employee OR
~~APPLICANT;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~ask~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~to~~ ~~bring~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~this~~
section on behalf of the employee OR APPLICANT; and

~~(3)~~ ~~consolidate~~ ~~2~~ ~~or~~ ~~more~~ ~~claims~~ ~~against~~ ~~an~~ ~~employer.~~

(c) An action under this section shall be filed within 3 years after:

(1) the employee receives from the employer the wages paid on the
termination of employment under § 3–505(a) of this title; OR

(2) THE DATE THE APPLICANT FOR EMPLOYMENT LEARNED OF THE
VIOLATION UNDER § 3–304.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~(d)~~ ~~The~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~employee~~ ~~to~~ ~~work~~ ~~for~~ ~~less~~ ~~than~~ ~~the~~ ~~wage~~ ~~to~~ ~~which~~ ~~the~~
~~employee~~ ~~is~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~a~~ ~~defense~~ ~~to~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~

(e) If a court determines that an employee OR APPLICANT FOR EMPLOYMENT
~~is~~ ~~entitled~~ ~~to~~ ~~judgment~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~the~~ ~~court~~ ~~shall~~ ~~allow~~ ~~against~~ ~~the~~
~~employer~~ ~~reasonable~~ ~~counsel~~ ~~fees~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~costs~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~action,~~ ~~as~~ ~~well~~ ~~as~~ ~~prejudgment~~
~~interest~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Rules.~~

3–308.

(e) (1) If the Commissioner determines that an employer has violated §
3–304.2 of this subtitle, the Commissioner:

(i) shall issue an order compelling compliance; and

(ii) may, in the Commissioner’s discretion:

1. for a first violation, issue a letter to the employer
compelling compliance;

2. for a second violation, assess a civil penalty of up to $300
for each EMPLOYEE OR applicant for employment for whom the employer is not in
compliance; or

3. for each subsequent violation, assess a civil penalty of up
to $600 for each EMPLOYEE OR applicant for employment for whom the employer is not in

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 271

compliance if the violation occurred within 3 years after a previous determination that a
violation had occurred.

(2) In determining the amount of the penalty, if assessed, the
Commissioner shall consider:

(i) the gravity of the violation;

(ii) the size of the employer’s business;

(iii) the employer’s good faith; and

(iv) the employer’s history of violations under this subtitle.

(3) If the Commissioner assesses a penalty under paragraph (1)(ii) of this
subsection, the penalty shall be subject to the notice and hearing requirements of Title 10,
Subtitle 2 of the State Government Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7