START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 38

Chapter 38

(House Bill 678)

AN ACT concerning

Public Higher Education – Communities of Interest – Targeted Recruitment and
Outreach Efforts

FOR the purpose of altering certain principles of public higher education in the State to
include a principle that public higher education in Maryland should be committed to
promoting diversity and inclusion at ~~each~~ ~~institution;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~each~~ certain
institutions; requiring certain public senior higher education ~~institution~~ institutions
to adopt a certain written policy related to targeted recruitment and outreach efforts
in certain communities of interest; requiring ~~each~~ certain public senior higher
education ~~institution~~ institutions to submit a certain report to the Governor, the
President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House each year; and generally
relating to targeted recruitment and outreach efforts by certain public senior higher
education institutions to communities of interest.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 10–202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 15–138
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

10–202.

Public higher education in Maryland should be based on the following principles:

(1) The people of Maryland expect quality in all aspects of public higher
education: teaching, research, and public service;

(2) Public higher education should be accessible to all those who seek and
qualify for admission;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 38 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Public higher education should provide a diversity of quality
educational opportunities;

(4) Adequate funding by the State is critical if public higher education is to
achieve its goal;

(5) The people of Maryland are entitled to efficient and effective
management of public higher education; [and]

(6) The people of Maryland are entitled to capable and creative leadership
in public higher education; AND

(7) PUBLIC HIGHER EDUCATION SHOULD BE COMMITTED TO
PROMOTING DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION AT EACH INSTITUTION BY ATTRACTING AND
GRADUATING A DIVERSE STUDENT BODY COMMITTED TO SERVICE.

15–138.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COMMUNITY OF INTEREST” MEANS A COMMUNITY IN THE STATE
IDENTIFIED BY A PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION THAT HAS
INDIVIDUALS FROM HISTORICALLY UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS,
DEMOGRAPHICS, OR GEOGRAPHIC AREAS THAT THE INSTITUTION HAS DETERMINED
ARE UNDERREPRESENTED IN THE ENROLLMENT OF THE INSTITUTION OR OTHER
INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN THE STATE.

(3) (I) “TARGETED RECRUITMENT AND OUTREACH EFFORTS”
MEANS EFFORTS SPECIFICALLY IDENTIFIED BY A PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTION AND A COMMUNITY OF INTEREST TO INCREASE
APPLICATIONS OF STUDENTS FROM THE IDENTIFIED COMMUNITY OF INTEREST.

(II) “TARGETED RECRUITMENT AND OUTREACH EFFORTS”
INCLUDES:

1. ESTABLISHING PARTNERSHIPS WITH
COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATIONS, LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS, OR SPECIFIC HIGH
SCHOOLS AND THE PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION;

2. ATTENDING COLLEGE FAIRS;

3. HOLDING SPECIFIC RECRUITMENT EVENTS IN THE
COMMUNITY OF INTEREST;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 38

4. ESTABLISHING A STUDENT AMBASSADOR PROGRAM;

5. HOLDING COLLEGE ACCESS WORKSHOPS IN THE
COMMUNITY OF INTEREST, WITH A FOCUS ON THE ADMISSIONS APPLICATION
PROCESS AT THE PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION; AND

6. PROVIDING DEDICATED SUPPORT SERVICES AND
STAFF FOR THE COMMUNITY OF INTEREST DURING THE APPLICATION PROCESS.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND
GLOBAL CAMPUS.

(B) (C) (1) EACH PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION
SHALL ADOPT AND ANNUALLY UPDATE A WRITTEN POLICY THAT IDENTIFIES
COMMUNITIES OF INTEREST IN THE STATE AND THE INSTITUTION’S TARGETED
RECRUITMENT AND OUTREACH EFFORTS FOR THE COMMUNITY OF INTEREST WITH
THE GOAL OF MEETING THE PRINCIPLE OF PUBLIC HIGHER EDUCATION STATED IN
§ 10–202(7) OF THIS ARTICLE.

(2) EACH PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION SHALL
COMPLETE THE TARGETED RECRUITMENT AND OUTREACH EFFORTS IDENTIFIED IN
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION EACH YEAR.

(C) (D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 1, 2024, AND EACH AUGUST 1 THEREAFTER,
EACH PUBLIC SENIOR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTION SHALL REPORT TO THE
GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE AND THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE ON:

(I) THE COMMUNITIES OF INTEREST IDENTIFIED BY THE
INSTITUTION;

(II) THE TARGETED RECRUITMENT AND OUTREACH EFFORTS
COMPLETED IN THE PREVIOUS SCHOOL YEAR IN EACH IDENTIFIED COMMUNITY OF
INTEREST;

(III) THE TARGETED RECRUITMENT AND OUTREACH EFFORTS
PLANNED FOR THE NEXT SCHOOL YEAR IN EACH IDENTIFIED COMMUNITY OF
INTEREST; AND

(IV) APPLICATION AND ADMISSION DATA FOR INDIVIDUALS IN
EACH IDENTIFIED COMMUNITY OF INTEREST.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 38 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE REPORT SUBMITTED BY AN INSTITUTION ON OR BEFORE
AUGUST 1, 2024, IS NOT REQUIRED TO INCLUDE THE INFORMATION REQUIRED IN
PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4