START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 605 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 605 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Motor Vehicles - Recreational Vehicle Dealer Agreements 
 
   
This bill establishes a new regulatory framework that applies to recreational vehicle 
manufacturers, distributors, factory branches, and dealers. Among other things, the 
framework includes licensing requirements for recreational vehicle manufacturers, 
distributors, and factory branches. Existing laws that apply to vehicle manufacturers, 
distributors, and factory branches no longer apply to manufacturers and distributors of, or 
factory branches for, recreational vehicles. The bill establishes procedures, timelines, and 
requirements that govern written dealer agreements, warranties on recreational vehicles, 
and when damages or unreasonable miles are apparent on delivery of a recreational vehicle. 
The bill also establishes enforcement provisions.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances, as discussed 
below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Applicability 
 
Existing laws that govern vehicle manufacturers, distributors, and factory branches do not 
apply to manufacturers and distributors of, or factory branches for, recreational vehicles 
under the bill. The bill’s new regulatory framework applies instead.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 605/ Page 2 
Licensing Requirements  
 
A manufacturer may not transfer any new recreational vehicle to any dealer or distributor 
in the State unless the manufacturer is licensed by the Motor Vehicle Administration 
(MVA) pursuant to the bill. A distributor may not transfer any new recreational vehicle to 
any dealer in the State unless the distributor is licensed by MVA pursuant to the bill. 
Further, a person may not conduct the business of a factory branch of a recreational vehicle 
manufacturer unless the person is licensed by MVA pursuant to the bill. (“Factory branch” 
means a branch office of a manufacturer from which the manufacturer (1) sells or promotes 
sales of a particular brand or make of new recreational vehicles to dealers in the State; 
(2) directs and supervises the manufacturer’s representatives in the State; or (3) supervises 
or contacts dealers or prospective dealers in the State.)  
 
The bill specifies the information that must be included in a license application and requires 
each licensee to pay an annual fee to MVA for each license year or part of a license year 
for which the license is issued. For a manufacturer or a distributor, the annual license fee 
must be established by MVA based on the combined number of new recreational vehicles 
transferred by the manufacturer or distributor to dealers in the State during the preceding 
license year. MVA must also establish an annual license fee for a factory branch.  
 
Surety Bonds and Good Faith Requirements 
 
After MVA notifies a manufacturer or distributor of the approval of an application for a 
license and before MVA issues a license, the manufacturer or distributor must file with 
MVA a surety bond in the form and with the surety that MVA requires. The amount of the 
surety bond must be based on the number of new recreational vehicles transferred by the 
manufacturer or distributor to dealers in the State during the preceding license year, as 
specified in the bill. Each surety bond must continuously maintain the amount specified. A 
manufacturer or distributor is only required to file one bond, regardless of the number of 
makes of recreational vehicles manufactured or distributed.  
 
A manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch, whether directly or through an agent, an 
employee, or a representative, may not fail to act in good faith in (1) acting or purporting 
to act under the term, provisions, or conditions of any franchise agreement or (2) in any 
transaction or conduct governed by the bill.  
 
Written Dealer Agreements  
 
A manufacturer or distributor may not sell a new recreational vehicle in the State to or 
through a dealer without having first entered into a written dealer agreement that has been 
signed by both parties. A manufacturer must designate the duration of the dealer agreement 
and the area of sales exclusively assigned to a dealer in the agreement and may not make 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 605/ Page 3 
changes to the terms without the mutual written consent of both parties. A dealer may not 
sell a new recreational vehicle in the State unless (1) the dealer is licensed by MVA in 
accordance with existing provisions of Title 15, Subtitle 3 of the Transportation Article; 
(2) the dealer has entered into a dealer agreement; and (3) the dealer is selling within the 
area of sales designated in the agreement. A manufacturer or distributor must (1) distribute 
recreational vehicles to its dealers in a fair and equitable manner; (2) on request, provide 
information on its manner of distribution to dealers; and (3) provide adequate repair 
instructions to its licensed dealers, as specified.  
 
The bill includes various procedures, requirements, and timelines that must be followed by 
a manufacturer, distributor, and dealer relating to the termination, cancellation, and renewal 
of any written dealer agreement. Generally, a manufacturer or distributor may only 
terminate, cancel, or fail to renew a model, line-make, or dealer agreement with a dealer 
for good cause. However, a dealer may terminate, cancel, or fail to renew a model, 
line-make, or dealer agreement with a manufacturer or distributor with or without good 
cause by giving 30 days written notice.  
 
The bill also establishes procedures and requirements applicable to the transfer of 
ownership of a dealer when that dealer has entered into a dealer agreement with a 
manufacturer or distributor. Generally, a manufacturer or distributor may only object to the 
transfer of ownership in limited specified circumstances.   
 
A manufacturer or distributor, whether directly or through an agent, an employee, an 
affiliate, or a representative, may not coerce or attempt to coerce a dealer to (1) purchase a 
product the dealer did not order; (2) enter into an agreement with the manufacturer or 
distributor; (3) take action that is unfair or unreasonable to the dealer; or (4) forgo 
exercising a right authorized by a dealer agreement or any law governing the business 
relationship.  
 
Warranties and Warrantors   
 
The bill establishes provisions related to warranties on recreational vehicles (and associated 
warranted products) and requirements for warrantors. Among other things, the bill 
(1) requires each warrantor to specify in writing each dealer’s obligations for preparation, 
delivery, and warranty service for the warrantor’s products; (2) specifies rates of 
reimbursement and handling charges; (3) authorizes warranty audits of dealer records; and 
(4) establishes timelines for the submission and disapproval of warranty claims. The bill 
enumerates several actions of warrantors and dealers that constitute violations of the 
warranty provisions.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 605/ Page 4 
Damages and Unreasonable Miles on Delivery  
 
When a new recreational vehicle is damaged before transit to the dealer or is damaged in 
transit to the dealer and the manufacturer or distributor was responsible for transit, the 
dealer must (1) notify the manufacturer or distributor of the damage, as specified; 
(2) request authorization to replace the damaged components, parts, or accessories; and 
(3) reject the recreational vehicle within two days after delivery. If a dealer determines that 
a recreational vehicle, at the time of delivery, has an unreasonable amount of miles on the 
odometer, the recreational vehicle may be subject to rejection by the dealer and reversion 
to the manufacturer or distributor, with specified limitations.  
 
Enforcement 
 
MVA may suspend or revoke any dealer, manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch 
license on a finding that a party has violated the bill’s provisions. MVA may also impose 
a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation. A dealer, manufacturer, distributor, factory 
branch, or warrantor is entitled to a hearing to contest an action or fine imposed by MVA 
under these provisions.  
 
If a person suffers financial injury or other damage as a result of a violation of the bill by 
any other person, the injured person is authorized to bring a civil action to recover damages 
and reasonable attorney’s fees in any court of competent jurisdiction. However, the party 
bringing the civil action must first serve a written demand for mediation on the offending 
party, as specified. A dealer, manufacturer, distributor, factory branch, or warrantor is also 
authorized to apply for a grant of injunctive relief from a violation of the bill or a refusal 
to comply with a requirement of the bill.  
 
Current Law:  MVA is responsible for regulating businesses that manufacture, distribute, 
sell, lease, deliver, and title motor vehicles in the State. Generally, to operate one of these 
businesses, a person must first obtain a license from MVA and pay any applicable license 
fee. State law includes other requirements for persons and individuals working in the motor 
vehicle industry; for example, manufacturers, distributors, and factory branches must 
always act in good faith (i.e., maintaining honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable 
commercial standards of fair dealing in the trade) when doing business. Various 
enforcement provisions apply to violations of existing provisions that apply to vehicle 
manufacturers, distributors, dealers, and factory branches. 
 
MVA’s license fees are set by regulation. Annual license fees for manufacturers and 
distributors range from $90 to $900, depending on how many vehicles a licensed entity 
transferred to dealers during the previous license year. The annual license fee for a factory 
branch is $900. The annual license fee for a new or used car dealer is $225.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 605/ Page 5 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. MVA 
can handle the new regulatory activities with existing budgeted resources. Further, 
Transportation Trust Fund revenues are assumed to be maintained at their current level 
under the assumption that MVA establishes license fees under the bill that are the same as 
(or substantially similar to) those that currently apply to vehicle manufacturers, 
distributors, and factory branches.  
 
Any revenue from fines that MVA would otherwise collect for violations of the existing 
statutory provisions that are no longer applicable under the bill is foregone. However, the 
bill also establishes a new fine applicable to violations of the bill’s provisions. Overall, it 
is assumed that fine revenue is not materially affected by the bill’s changes. 
 
The bill does not materially affect the Office of Administrative Hearings.   
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s changes may have a significant positive effect on small 
business recreational vehicle dealers and distributors in the State. For example, the dealer 
agreements required by the bill may positively affect dealer and distributor business 
operations. While the bill also affects recreational vehicle manufacturers and factory 
branches, those entities are unlikely to be small businesses.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1173 and SB 930 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 504 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - February 27, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5