START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 634 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 634 
(Delegate Smith) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center – Student Information – United 
States Census Bureau 
 
 
This bill authorizes the governing board of the Maryland Longitudinal Data System 
(MLDS) Center to send student information to the U.S. Census Bureau. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  If the governing board of the MDLS Center authorizes the sending of such 
data, the MLDS Center can do so using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 190 of 2010 established MLDS to contain individual-level student 
data and workforce data from all levels of education and the State’s workforce. The 
legislation also established the MLDS Center within State government to serve as a central 
repository for the data, ensure compliance with federal privacy laws, perform research on 
the data sets, and fulfill education reporting requirements and approved public information 
requests. The MLDS Center is administratively housed within the Maryland State 
Department of Education. 
 
“Student information” with regard to the MLDS Center is defined as student 
Social Security number, program of study, enrollment, and name of educational institution. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 634/ Page 2 
Additional Comments:  To participate in the Post-Secondary Employment Outcomes 
(PSEO) project, a college or university must provide student transcript level data to the 
U.S. Census Bureau (as authorized by the bill). The project is developing experimental 
tabulations developed by researchers. PSEO data provides earnings and employment 
outcomes for college and university graduates by degree level, degree major, and 
post-secondary institution. These statistics are generated by matching university transcript 
data with a national database of jobs, using state-of-the-art confidentiality protection 
mechanisms to protect the underlying data. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 444 (Senator Zucker) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; Comptroller’s 
Office; U.S. Census Bureau; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2