START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 668 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 668 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Anne Arundel County - Sheriff - Salary 
 
 
This bill alters the salary of the Anne Arundel County Sheriff to be equal to the salary of a 
captain in the Anne Arundel County Police Department, at step 20 in the pay scale. 
Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the salary structure specified in the bill takes effect 
at the beginning of the next term of office. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by a minimum of $20,100 in 
FY 2027 and by at least $34,400 annually thereafter. County revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The annual salary of the Anne Arundel County Sheriff was 
last adjusted by Chapter 108 of 2014, which set the salary at $128,657 for calendar 2014 
and $133,000 for calendar 2015 and each subsequent year. 
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public officer from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 668/ Page 2 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Anne Arundel County expenditures increase by a minimum of 
$20,100 in fiscal 2027 and by at least $34,400 annually thereafter. Pursuant to 
constitutional requirements, the salary is not altered until the next term of office. The 
estimate does not include fringe benefits, accounts for the increase taking effect in 
December 2026, and is based on the current salary for a captain in the Anne Arundel 
County Police Department at step 20 in the pay scale ($167,383). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 658 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2