START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 131

Chapter 131

(House Bill 602)

AN ACT concerning

Employment Discrimination – Sexual Orientation

FOR the purpose of altering certain provisions of law prohibiting employment
discrimination on the basis of sex and gender identity to prohibit employment
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation; and generally relating to
employment discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–304
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–304.

(a) In this section, “providing less favorable employment opportunities” means:

(1) assigning or directing the employee into a less favorable career track, if
career tracks are offered, or position;

(2) failing to provide information about promotions or advancement in the
full range of career tracks offered by the employer; or

(3) limiting or depriving an employee of employment opportunities that
would otherwise be available to the employee but for the employee’s sex, SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, or gender identity.

(b) (1) An employer may not discriminate between employees in any
occupation by:

(i) paying a wage to employees of one sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION,
or gender identity at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sex, SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, or gender identity if both employees work in the same establishment and
perform work of comparable character or work on the same operation, in the same business,
or of the same type; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 131 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) providing less favorable employment opportunities based on sex,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, or gender identity.

(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection, an employee shall
be deemed to work at the same establishment as another employee if the employees work
for the same employer at workplaces located in the same county of the State.

(c) Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, subsection (b) of this
section does not prohibit a variation in a wage that is based on:

(1) a seniority system that does not discriminate on the basis of sex,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, or gender identity;

(2) a merit increase system that does not discriminate on the basis of sex,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, or gender identity;

(3) jobs that require different abilities or skills;

(4) jobs that require the regular performance of different duties or services;

(5) work that is performed on different shifts or at different times of day;

(6) a system that measures performance based on a quality or quantity of
production; or

(7) a bona fide factor other than sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, or gender
identity, including education, training, or experience, in which the factor:

(i) is not based on or derived from a gender–based differential in
compensation;

(ii) is job related with respect to the position and consistent with a
business necessity; and

(iii) accounts for the entire differential.

(d) This section does not preclude an employee from demonstrating that an
employer’s reliance on an exception listed in subsection (c) of this section is a pretext for
discrimination on the basis of sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, or gender identity.

(e) An employer who is paying a wage in violation of this subtitle may not reduce
another wage to comply with this subtitle.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 131

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3