START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 674

Chapter 674

(House Bill 690)

AN ACT concerning

Charles County – Adult Protective Services Review Board – Membership

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Adult Protective Services Review Board
in Charles County to authorize the appointment of a physician’s assistant or nurse
practitioner in the field of psychiatry to serve on the board instead of a psychiatrist;
and generally relating to the Adult Protective Services Review Board in Charles
County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Family Law
Section 14–402(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Family Law

14–402.

(a) (1) Each review board consists of 11 members appointed:

(i) by the county commissioners;

(ii) in Baltimore City, by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council;

(iii) in any county that has a county executive, by the county
executive with the advice and consent of the county council; or

(iv) if 2 or more counties have agreed to establish a multicounty
review board, jointly by the appropriate officials of the counties served by the board.

(2) Of the 11 members:

(i) 1 shall be a professional representative of a local department;

(ii) 1. in counties other than St. Mary’s County [or], Washington
County, OR CHARLES COUNTY:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 674 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

A. 1 shall be a physician’s assistant, nurse practitioner, or
physician who is not a psychiatrist; and

B. 1 shall be a psychiatrist; [and]

2. in St. Mary’s County and Washington County:

A. 1 shall be a physician’s assistant, nurse practitioner, or
physician who is not a psychiatrist; and

B. 1 shall be a psychiatrist or psychologist; AND

3. IN CHARLES COUNTY:

A. 1 SHALL BE A PHYSICIAN’S ASSISTANT, NURSE
PRACTITIONER, OR PHYSICIAN WHO IS NOT A PSYCHIATRIST; AND

B. 1 SHALL BE A PSYCHIATRIST OR A PHYSICIAN’S
ASSISTANT OR NURSE PRACTITIONER IN THE FIELD OF PSYCHIATRY;

(iii) 1 shall be a representative of a local commission on aging;

(iv) 1 shall be a professional representative of a local nonprofit social
service organization;

(v) 1 shall be a lawyer;

(vi) 2 shall be lay individuals;

(vii) 1 shall be a registered nurse;

(viii) 1 shall be a professional in the field of disabilities; and

(ix) 1 shall be a person with a physical disability.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2