START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 697 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 697 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Real Estate Brokers – Commercial Transactions – Buyer’s Rights 
 
 
This bill requires each real estate contract submitted to a party by a real estate broker, a 
nonresident real estate broker, an associate real estate broker, a real estate salesperson, or 
a nonresident real estate salesperson for use in the sale of a commercial real estate to 
contain, in bold-faced type, a statement that the buyer has the right to select the buyer’s 
own (1) title insurance company; (2) settlement company; (3) escrow company; or (4) title 
lawyer. The required statement must also contain, in bold-faced type, a statement that a 
seller may not be prohibited from offering owner financing as a condition of settlement. 
The bill establishes similar requirements for commercial real estate transactions. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Maryland Real Estate Commission 
finances or operations.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Commercial real estate” is defined as (1) real property improved by 
five or more single-family units; (2) improved and unimproved real property zoned for 
commercial, industrial, or nonresidential use by the local zoning authority of the county or 
municipality in which the property is located; or (3) unimproved real property zoned for 
improvement as multifamily units by the local zoning authority of the county or 
municipality in which the property is located. However, “commercial real estate” does not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 697/ Page 2 
include (1) property zoned for agricultural use and (2) single-family units, including a 
condominium or cooperative housing unit, for sale or for lease, or otherwise conveyed (or 
to be conveyed) on a single basis.          
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by the Maryland Real Estate 
Commission as a real estate broker before the individual may provide real estate brokerage 
services in the State. Similarly, an individual must be licensed by the commission as an 
associate real estate broker or a real estate salesperson before the individual, while acting 
on behalf of a real estate broker, may provide real estate brokerage services in the State.     
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1169 (Senator Hershey) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2