START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 680 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 680 
(Delegates T. Morgan and J. Long) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Nuclear Power Plants - Emergency Preparedness (Radiation and 
Emergency Preparedness and Protection Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Radiation Emergency Response Program in the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) and related duties for MDE. The bill establishes 
two annual fees (a $300,000 fee and a $60,000 fee, which may be adjusted annually for 
inflation) that must be paid by the owner of a nuclear power plant for each nuclear power 
plant owned. The fees must be remitted to MDE by July 1, 2024, and by each July 1 
thereafter. One of the fees is directed into the Radiation Emergency Response Fund, a new 
special fund established by the bill, to support the program. MDE must transfer the other 
fee to the Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) for radiological 
emergency response preparedness activities. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect assumed in FY 2024; it is assumed the first fees are paid on  
July 1, 2024. Special fund revenues for MDE increase by $600,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2025 from fees; special fund expenditures increase correspondingly. No overall impact 
on MDEM, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$600,000 
$600,000 
$600,000 
$600,000 
$600,000 
SF Expenditure 
$600,000 
$600,000 
$600,000 
$600,000 
$600,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 680/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Statement of Policy and Findings of the General Assembly 
 
The bill specifies that it is the policy of the State to (1) protect the public from 
(1) unnecessary and harmful exposure resulting from a nuclear incident and (2) protect the 
public against adverse health effects resulting from nuclear incidents and mitigate the 
impacts of nuclear incidents by establishing a state of readiness through emergency 
preparedness.  
 
The bill also establishes a finding of the General Assembly that the nuclear industry should 
bear the costs associated with developing and implementing plans to prepare for and 
mitigate the impacts of nuclear incidents.  
 
Radiation Emergency Response Program 
 
MDE must administer the program and serve as an “off-site response organization.” MDE 
must also serve as the lead State agency for protective actions for all nuclear incidents 
within the State. 
 
Under the program, MDE must (1) prepare a technical emergency radiation response plan 
for incorporation into the State Emergency Management Program; (2) respond to 
emergencies that involve a nuclear power plant; (3) participate in the Federal Emergency 
Management Administration’s (FEMA) Radiological Emergency Preparedness Program 
activities, as applicable; and (4) procure specialized supplies and equipment for responding 
to emergencies that involve a nuclear power plant.   
 
Fees Paid by Nuclear Power Plant Owners and the Distribution of the Fees 
 
By July 1, 2024, and by each July 1 thereafter, the owner of a nuclear power plant must 
pay the following fees to MDE for each nuclear power plant owned:  (1) a fee of $300,000 
for the operational costs of the Radiation Emergency Response Program; and (2) a fee of 
$60,000 for radiological emergency response preparedness. MDE is authorized to adjust 
the fees annually for inflation, as specified; however, the fees may not be increased by 
more than 3% in any given year.  
 
MDE must transfer the fee of $60,000 (adjusted for inflation, if applicable) collected from 
a nuclear power plant to MDEM for radiological emergency response preparedness 
activities. The other fee must be paid into the Radiation Emergency Response Fund.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 680/ Page 3 
Radiation Emergency Response Fund 
 
The stated purpose of the Radiation Emergency Response Fund is to support the costs of 
developing and implementing the Radiation Emergency Response Program. The fund, 
which is administered by MDE, consists of the fees collected from owners of nuclear power 
plants that MDE retains, money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest 
earnings, and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund.  
 
The fund may only be used for developing and implementing the Radiation Emergency 
Response Program, including for administrative expenses. Money expended from the fund 
for the program is supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that 
otherwise would be appropriated for the program.  
 
Key Definitions 
 
“Nuclear incident” means any occurrence, including an extraordinary nuclear occurrence, 
or series of occurrences at a nuclear power plant with the potential for causing bodily 
injury, sickness, disease, death, loss of or damage to property, or loss of use of property 
resulting from the radioactive, toxic, explosive, or other hazardous properties of the 
radioactive material used by a nuclear power plant or stored on its property.  
 
“Nuclear power plant” means any facility capable of producing electricity using nuclear 
energy (1) that is located in the State or with an emergency planning zone (specifically, a 
plume exposure pathway emergency planning zone) that includes any area of the State and 
(2) for which MDE participates in planning and response activities related to the facility. 
The term includes a facility with one or more nuclear power reactors that (1) has spent 
nuclear fuel stored onsite; (2) has not been fully dismantled and decommissioned in 
accordance with applicable federal law and regulations; or (3) has not been granted license 
termination by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). 
 
“Off-site response organization” means a state, local, or tribal governmental organization 
responsible for carrying out emergency response functions during a nuclear incident.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Regulation of Nuclear Power Plants 
 
The regulation of nuclear power plants is the primary responsibility of NRC. NRC is 
responsible for reviewing the safety and safeguards of nuclear power plants and, among 
other things, must (1) monitor, test, and recommend upgrading of systems designed to 
prevent substantial health or safety hazards; (2) evaluate methods of transporting special 
nuclear and other nuclear materials and of transporting and storing high-level radioactive 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 680/ Page 4 
wastes to prevent radiation hazards to employees and the general public; and (3) develop 
contingency plans for dealing with threats, thefts, and sabotage relating to special nuclear 
materials, high-level radioactive wastes, and nuclear facilities.   
 
State Emergency Preparedness and Response to Nuclear Incidents 
 
MDEM is the coordinating agency for all hazard emergency preparedness, response, and 
recovery, and is responsible for certain elements of emergency preparedness, planning, 
response, and recovery for radiological and nuclear incidents, including those at fixed 
nuclear power plants. MDEM is currently responsible for planning and executing exercises 
under the FEMA-required Radiological Emergency Preparedness Program, including all 
documentation and logistics associated with mandated annual exercises, providing training 
for all MDEM staff and State Coordinating Function representatives for fixed nuclear 
power plant emergency responses, training FEMA exercise evaluators on Maryland 
response protocols, and conducting communication drills. 
 
If an incident leading to a release of radiation were to occur at either of the two nuclear 
power plants in the area, MDEM would open and staff the State Emergency Operations 
Center to coordinate the direction and control of the disaster and to coordinate all efforts 
involved in Maryland’s response. The lead agency responsible for much of the decision 
making in any such large radiation emergency, however, is MDE. MDE’s Emergency 
Response Division (ERD) prepares for and responds to emergencies involving oil and 
hazardous chemical spills, nuclear power plant incidents, and other environmental crises. 
ERD exists to protect public safety and the environment through careful planning, training, 
and expert application of emergency response mechanisms to minimize impacts on human 
health and the environment.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDE is already engaged in emergency preparedness and response 
activities as they relate to nuclear power plants. According to MDE, as part of its 
Radiological Emergency Preparedness Program, MDE maintains an Accident Assessment 
Center, which is used during exercises and emergencies to coordinate and support response 
activities. In addition, MDE also maintains an Emergency Operations Center; in recent 
years, the center has served as an alternative to the State’s Emergency Operations Center 
discussed above, while MDEM awaits completion of its new facility. MDE currently has 
two staff dedicated to radiological emergency preparedness activities. Nevertheless, the 
bill establishes the program in statute, explicitly defines its activities, and establishes a new 
– and increased – funding source for the program, as discussed below. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
Special fund revenues to the Radiation Emergency Response Fund in MDE increase by 
$600,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025 due to the bill’s imposition of a $300,000 fee 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 680/ Page 5 
on the owners of two nuclear power plants (the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant and the 
Peach Bottom Nuclear Generating Station). Although the bill authorizes MDE to adjust the 
fee annually for inflation, as specified, this analysis assumes that MDE does not do so – at 
least in the five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note. To the extent that MDE 
chooses to adjust the fee for inflation in any given year, special fund revenues increase 
further.  
 
Although Calvert Cliffs is the only nuclear power plant operating in Maryland, the 
Peach Bottom facility in Pennsylvania must also pay the fees imposed under the bill 
because Peach Bottom is situated within less than 10 miles of the Maryland border, 
meaning that Maryland lies within the emergency planning zone for Peach Bottom. 
 
MDE advises that, from 2018 through 2022, it had an agreement in place with 
Exelon Corporation (now Constellation Energy) for Exelon to provide funding for 
radiological emergency preparedness activities. MDE advises that the annual payments it 
received from Exelon totaled approximately $380,000, the last of which was received in 
May 2022; since then, MDE advises that it has not received or accepted any funding from 
Constellation Energy related to its nuclear power plants. According to MDE, the payments 
from Exelon helped to fund positions for two full-time staff members that focus on 
emergency preparedness activities. However, MDE advises that by the end of fiscal 2024, 
the last of the funds provided by Exelon will be exhausted. 
 
MDE intends to use the special fund revenues generated by the bill and directed to the 
Radiation Emergency Response Fund to (1) pay for the two existing staff that work on 
radiological emergency preparedness activities to the extent there are no other available 
funds to cover the costs of those positions; (2) potentially hire additional staff, as needed; 
and (3) purchase additional personal protective equipment and more advanced radiological 
monitoring equipment for the program. The bill specifies that the fund may only be used 
for developing and implementing the program, including administrative expenses. This 
analysis assumes that MDE spends all available special funds each year under the program. 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures increase by $600,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025.   
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
In addition to the fees described above, MDE also collects an annual fee of $60,000 from 
the owner of each nuclear power plant for radiological emergency response preparedness. 
Pursuant to the bill, MDE must transfer those fees to MDEM. Accordingly, beginning in 
fiscal 2025, $120,000 in such fees are collected each year and transferred to MDEM. 
 
MDEM advises, however, that the bill has no overall impact on its finances because the 
bill, as it pertains to MDEM, largely codifies current practice. MDEM advises that it 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 680/ Page 6 
currently receives payments of $120,000 annually from Constellation Energy to support its 
radiological emergency response preparedness activities. MDEM further advises that the 
fee established by the bill will replace the existing payment it receives. MDEM currently 
has one full-time staff member dedicated to its radiological emergency response 
preparedness activities and does not anticipate a change in its staffing needs as a result of 
the bill. Accordingly, the bill has no overall impact on MDEM’s operations or finances.  
 
Additional Comments:  The Power Plant Research Program within the Department of 
Natural Resources released a comprehensive report on nuclear power in Maryland in 
January 2020. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 536 (Senator Jackson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Public Service Commission; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6