START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 63

Chapter 63

(House Bill 634)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center – Student Information – United
States Census Bureau

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Governing Board of the Maryland Longitudinal Data
System Center to authorize the Center to send certain student information to the
United States Census Bureau; and generally relating to the Maryland Longitudinal
Data System Center.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 24–701(a) and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 24–703.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

24–701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Governing Board” means the Governing Board of the Maryland Longitudinal
Data System Center.

24–703.2.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Aggregated data” means de–identified data that is summarized by
type of program of study or educational institution.

(3) “Student information” means:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 63 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) Student Social Security number;

(ii) Program of study;

(iii) Enrollment; and

(iv) Name of educational institution.

(4) “Tax information” means income tax records, wage information, and
other data stored by the Comptroller.

(b) (1) The Center and the Comptroller jointly shall develop a protocol for
research purposes for the:

(i) Center to send student information to the Comptroller;

(ii) Comptroller to match student information to tax information;
and

(iii) Comptroller to produce aggregated data from the matched
information on the average amount of wage or salary earnings from self–employment or
other sources of income for individuals within each educational institution or program of
study.

(2) The Comptroller may not produce any aggregated data that may be
identifiable based on the size or uniqueness of the population under consideration.

(c) The Center and the Comptroller jointly shall develop data handling and
security standards for the Comptroller to utilize for the protocol, including:

(1) Data retention and disposition policies;

(2) Authorized access and authentication for authorized access policies;

(3) Privacy compliance standards; and

(4) Breach notification and procedures.

(d) The Comptroller shall comply with any data privacy and security standards
in accordance with the federal Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act and other
relevant privacy laws and policies.

(E) THE GOVERNING BOARD MAY AUTHORIZE THE CENTER TO SEND
STUDENT INFORMATION TO THE UNITED STATES CENSUS BUREAU.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 63

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3