START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1013

Chapter 1013

(House Bill 651)

AN ACT concerning

St. Mary’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting
Permit

FOR the purpose of establishing a beer, wine, and liquor tasting permit in St. Mary’s
County; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in St. Mary’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 28–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 28–1308
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

28–102.

This title applies only in St. Mary’s County.

28–1308.

(A) THERE IS A BWLT BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR TASTING PERMIT.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE PERMIT ONLY TO A HOLDER OF A CLASS A
LICENSE.

(C) THE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO ALLOW THE ON–PREMISES
CONSUMPTION OF BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR FOR TASTING PURPOSES ONLY.

(D) THE HOLDER OF A CLASS A LICENSE MAY APPLY FOR AND THE BOARD
MAY ISSUE THE PERMIT THAT IS EFFECTIVE FOR A MAXIMUM OF:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1013 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ANY 26 DAYS IN A LICENSING PERIOD;

(2) ANY 52 DAYS IN A LICENSING PERIOD; OR

(3) 365 DAYS IN A LICENSING PERIOD.

(E) A PERMIT HOLDER SHALL NOTIFY THE BOARD OF THE HOLDER’S
INTENT TO HAVE A TASTING AT LEAST 7 DAYS BEFORE THE EVENT IF THE PERMIT IS
EFFECTIVE FOR ANY:

(1) 26 DAYS IN A LICENSING PERIOD; OR

(2) 52 DAYS IN A LICENSING PERIOD.

(F) AN INDIVIDUAL MAY CONSUME BEER, WINE, OR LIQUOR COVERED BY
THE LICENSE IN A QUANTITY NOT EXCEEDING:

(1) 0.5 OUNCE FROM EACH OFFERING AND 1.5 OUNCES FROM ALL
OFFERINGS OF LIQUOR IN A DAY;

(2) 1 OUNCE FROM EACH OFFERING AND 4 OUNCES FROM ALL
OFFERINGS OF WINE IN A DAY; AND

(3) 2 OUNCES FROM EACH OFFERING AND 8 OUNCES FROM ALL
OFFERINGS OF BEER IN A DAY.

(G) THE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE CONSUMPTION OF BEER, WINE, OR
LIQUOR ONLY ON THE LICENSED PREMISES OF THE HOLDER.

(H) THE PERMIT FEES ARE:

(1) FOR A PERMIT THAT IS EFFECTIVE FOR ANY 26 DAYS IN A
LICENSING PERIOD, $200;

(2) FOR A PERMIT THAT IS EFFECTIVE FOR ANY 52 DAYS IN A
LICENSING PERIOD, $250; AND

(3) FOR A PERMIT THAT IS EFFECTIVE FOR 365 DAYS IN A LICENSING
PERIOD, $300.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1013

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3