START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 669 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 669 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Workers' Compensation - Benefits - Hearing Loss 
 
 
This bill modifies the way occupational deafness and hearing loss must be calculated and 
determined for purposes of workers’ compensation benefits by (1) requiring hearing loss 
to be calculated at an additional frequency when determining occupational deafness; 
(2) specifying that an employer must provide compensation to a covered employee for 
hearing loss due to industrial noise in the additional frequency except under specified 
circumstances; and (3) altering how age-related nonoccupational deafness is calculated. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) increase minimally due to the bill’s 
modifications to the way occupational deafness and hearing loss must be calculated and 
determined, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company (Chesapeake) Effect:  Chesapeake 
expenditures increase minimally due to the bill’s modifications to the way occupational 
deafness and hearing loss must be calculated and determined, as discussed below. 
Chesapeake revenues increase correspondingly to cover any additional liabilities. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures increase minimally due to the bill’s modifications to the 
way occupational deafness and hearing loss must be calculated and determined, as 
discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 669/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  If an employee covered under workers’ compensation 
insurance has suffered an accidental personal injury, compensable hernia, or occupational 
disease, the employee is entitled to compensation benefits paid by the employer, its insurer, 
the Subsequent Injury Fund, or the Uninsured Employers’ Fund, as appropriate. 
Workers’ compensation benefits include wage replacement, medical treatment, and 
vocational rehabilitation expenses. Any workers’ compensation claim for hearing loss must 
be measured using audiometric instruments that meet the technical requirements specified 
by Workers’ Compensation Law. 
 
Under current law, the percentage of hearing loss for purposes of compensation for 
occupational deafness must be calculated based on average hearing loss at four frequency 
thresholds ranging from 500 to 3,000 hertz and including an offset based on the average 
amount of hearing loss from nonoccupational causes found in the population at any given 
age. Specifically, the average decibel loss calculated for an individual must subtract 
one-half of a decibel for each year of the covered employee’s age over 50 at the time of the 
last exposure to industrial noise.  
 
An employer must provide compensation to a covered employee for hearing loss due to 
industrial noise in the four frequency thresholds; however, an employer is not liable for 
compensation for an occupational deafness claim unless the covered employee has worked 
for the employer in the employment that exposed the employee to harmful noise for at least 
90 days. 
 
The bill modifies this calculation and requirement to pay compensation by:   
 
 
requiring hearing loss at a frequency of 4,000 hertz to be included in the calculation 
and average, in addition to the four existing frequency thresholds; 
 
including the 4,000 hertz threshold in the general requirement that an employer 
provide compensation for hearing loss due to industrial noise and exception from 
liability when a covered employee has not worked in the employment that exposed 
the employee to harmful noise for at least 90 days; and 
 
requiring, for the nonoccupational hearing loss offset, that the average decibel loss 
calculated for an individual subtract the lesser of one-half of a decibel for (1) each 
year of the covered employee’s age over 50 or (2) for each year subsequent to the 
date of the covered employee’s last injurious exposure to industrial noise.  
 
State/Chesapeake/Local/Small Business Fiscal Effect:  Chesapeake advises that, from 
2018 through 2023, it experienced 142 occupational deafness and hearing loss claims. A 
preliminary analysis conducted by Chesapeake indicates that, based on these claims, the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 669/ Page 3 
bill’s modification to how nonoccupational deafness must be calculated would have only 
increased each claim by an average of $12,620, paid out over multiple years. While not an 
insubstantial sum, these claims are relatively rare (as this was only 142 claims over about 
six years across the State, local governments, and Chesapeake’s other insureds). Additional 
claims may also be filed for occupational deafness because hearing loss at a frequency 
between 3,000 hertz and 4,000 hertz must be included in the occupational deafness 
calculation under the bill, but not under current law. 
 
Thus, State, Chesapeake, local government, and small business expenditures increase 
minimally beginning in fiscal 2025 due to the bill’s changes. Nonbudgeted revenues for 
Chesapeake increase corresponding to its increased costs to as it raises its premiums to 
account for any additional liabilities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 843 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; Subsequent Injury 
Fund; Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Workers’ Compensation Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3