START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 621 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 621 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Stadium License Annual Fee 
 
 
This bill decreases the license fee from $10,000 to $7,000 for a stadium beer, wine, and 
liquor license in Harford County. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  Harford County revenues decrease by $3,000 annually, beginning in 
FY 2025, due to the decrease in the annual license fee. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall but potential meaningful for a stadium that pays 
a decreased annual license fee for the stadium beer, wine, and liquor license. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Harford County, there is a stadium beer, wine, and liquor license. The 
Harford County Board of License Commissioners may issue the license for a stadium to 
the owner, lessee, or concession manager of a professional baseball stadium. The license 
authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption. 
The license holder may sell, serve, or allow the consumption of beer, wine, and liquor on 
the stadium parking lots only with the prior written approval of the board. The license 
holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor during specified times. An individual who serves 
beer, wine, and liquor on the licensed premises must hold a certificate from an alcohol 
awareness program that the board approves. An individual may generally only serve beer, 
wine, and liquor during a baseball game in plastic, Styrofoam, or paper containers, except 
on the club level or in a dining area where glass containers may be used, as specified. An 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 621/ Page 2 
individual may dispense wine and liquor during a baseball game only from a stationary 
structure that is in the stadium and equipped with a motor vehicle driver’s license scanner, 
except on the club level or in a dining area where patrons are seated. A license holder may 
not allow a roving vendor to dispense wine and liquor. A license holder is prohibited from 
allowing a person to carry beer, wine, and liquor onto or off of the licensed premises. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Harford County advises that currently there is one stadium license in 
effect in the county. Thus, annual license fee revenues from stadium beer, wine, and liquor 
licenses decrease by $3,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025. Harford County 
expenditures are not affected. 
 
The board advises that the reduction in the stadium beer, wine, and liquor license fee will 
negatively impact their revenue and, in turn, their ability to perform their operations. Such 
operations include their Alcohol Awareness Program and other educational initiatives. The 
board is funded by liquor licensing fees in Harford County.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 670 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2