START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 662 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 662 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Large Family Child Care Homes and Child Care Centers - Child Care Teachers - 
Minimum Age 
 
 
This bill requires that regulations governing the registration and operation of large family 
child care homes and the licensing and operation of child care centers require that child 
care teachers be a minimum of age 18.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland State Department of Education can implement the bill’s 
requirements with existing resources. Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State regulations require a child care teacher to be at least age 19.  
 
Subject to limited exception, large family child care homes and child care centers may not 
operate in the State unless they are registered/licensed. The State Board of Education is 
required to adopt regulations that relate to the registration of large family child care homes 
and the licensing and operation of child care centers. A large family child care home is a 
residence in which family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 
12 children. A child care center is an agency, institution, or establishment that, for part or 
all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, and at least twice a week, offers 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 662/ Page 2 
or provides child care to children who do not have the same parentage except as otherwise 
provided for in law or regulation.         
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may benefit large family child care homes and child care 
centers, as more individuals (i.e., applicants who are age 18) may be considered as child 
care teachers.         
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2