START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 628 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 628 
(Delegate S. Johnson) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Clinical Marriage and Family Therapists - Reciprocal 
Licensure Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists to waive the 
education, experience, and examination requirements for licensure as a clinical marriage 
and family therapist for an applicant that is licensed or certified to practice clinical marriage 
and family therapy in another state, territory, or jurisdiction if specified requirements are 
met. The board may not require the applicant to pass a national certification exam but may 
require that the applicant pass an examination of specified State law requirements.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.      
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board must waive the education, experience, and examination 
requirements for an applicant licensed or certified to practice clinical marriage and family 
therapy in another state, territory, or jurisdiction if the applicant:  
 
 
has no history of disciplinary action (past or pending) in a state, territory, or 
jurisdiction in which the applicant holds their license or certification;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 628/ Page 2 
 
has not committed any act or omission that would be grounds for discipline or denial 
of licensure under State law; and  
 
submits to the board a copy of a current license from each state, territory, or 
jurisdiction in which the applicant has been licensed, registered, or otherwise 
authorized to practice clinical marriage and family therapy.  
 
As under current law, an applicant must also submit an application and pay the application 
fee set by the board. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Licensure Requirements – In General  
 
To qualify for a license to practice clinical marriage and family therapy, an applicant must 
be at least 18 years old and of good moral character. Applicants must: 
 
 
hold a master’s or doctoral degree in a marriage and family field from an accredited 
educational institution that is approved by the board, or have completed a program 
of studies judged by the board to be substantially equivalent in subject matter and 
extent of training as may be required in board regulations; 
 
have completed any additional educational requirements established in board 
regulations and provide documentation evidencing the completion of such from an 
accredited college or university approved by the board; 
 
have completed not less than 2 years with a minimum of 2,000 hours of supervised 
experiences in marriage and family therapy approved by the board (of which 2 years 
must be completed after the award of the master’s, doctoral degree, or its substantial 
equivalent) and provide documentation evidencing completion; and 
 
pass a board-approved examination. 
 
Licensure Requirements – Out of State Licensees  
 
The board must waive the requirements for licensure to practice clinical marriage and 
family therapy if the applicant is licensed or certified as a clinical marriage and family 
therapist in another state, territory or jurisdiction that has requirements that are equivalent 
to or exceed the licensure requirements specified above. The applicant must also submit an 
application and fee to the board.           
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 628/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 409 (Senators Klausmeier and Gile) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3