START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 979

Chapter 979

(House Bill 668)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Sheriff – Salary

FOR the purpose of altering the salary of the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County; and generally
relating to the salary of the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–315(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

2–315.

(b) The Sheriff of Anne Arundel County shall receive an annual salary of:

(1) (I) $128,657 for calendar year 2014; and

[(2)] (II) $133,000 for calendar year 2015 [and each subsequent calendar
year] THROUGH CALENDAR YEAR 2024.

(2) BEGINNING IN CALENDAR YEAR 2025, THE SHERIFF OF ANNE
ARUNDEL COUNTY SHALL RECEIVE AN ANNUAL SALARY EQUAL TO THE SALARY OF
A CAPTAIN IN THE ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY POLICE DEPARTMENT AT STEP 20 IN
THE PAY SCALE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, pursuant to Article III, § 35
of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend or apply to the salary
or compensation of the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County while serving in a term of office
beginning before the effective date of this Act, but the provisions of this Act concerning the
salary or compensation of the Sheriff of Anne Arundel County shall take effect at the
beginning of the next following term of office. This limitation does not apply to an individual
appointed or elected after the effective date of this Act to fill out an unexpired term.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 979 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2