START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 613 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 613 
(Delegate Boyce, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Recreational Catching of Oysters or Clams - Requirements 
 
 
This bill repeals and modifies existing provisions authorizing recreational catching of 
oysters and clams and establishes a recreational oyster license available only to residents, 
with a portion of license application fee revenues used to replenish public fishery oyster 
bars. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase annually, potentially significantly, beginning 
in FY 2025. For illustrative purposes, special fund revenues increase by approximately 
$100,000 
for 
every 
10,000 
recreational 
oyster 
licenses 
issued 
(excluding 
complimentary/discounted licenses discussed below). Special fund expenditures also 
increase annually, beginning as early as FY 2025, due to the required use of a portion of 
the special fund revenues to replenish public fishery oyster bars. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Repeal/Modification of Existing Recreational Oyster and Clam Provisions 
 
The bill repeals a provision authorizing a resident to catch up to one bushel each of oysters 
and clams a day for the person’s own use and consumption without a license, in places and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 613/ Page 2 
at times prescribed by Department of Natural Resources (DNR) regulations. In place of 
that provision, the bill (1) establishes a recreational oyster license, available only to 
residents and (2) authorizes a resident to catch clams in accordance with DNR regulations, 
without specifying a daily catch limit in statute. The bill also modifies a provision that 
authorizes a nonresident to catch, in the tidal bays of Worcester County, up to one bushel 
of hard clams per day for the nonresident’s own use and consumption. Under the modified 
provision, a nonresident may catch, in the tidal bays of Worcester County, hard clams for 
the nonresident’s own use and consumption in accordance with regulations adopted by 
DNR (removing the daily catch limit specified in statute). 
 
Establishment of Recreational Oyster License 
 
 
In General 
 
The bill establishes a recreational oyster license, available only to residents, and generally 
requires a person at least age 16 to secure the license to harvest oysters in the tidal waters 
of the State. DNR must develop and publish an application form for obtaining a recreational 
oyster license. To obtain a license, a State resident at least age 16 must submit to DNR an 
application using the form developed and published by the department. The application 
must include (1) the last four digits of the applicant’s Social Security number, if the 
applicant has a Social Security number; (2) payment of a $10 application fee; and (3) any 
other information requested by DNR. An applicant may not willfully make a false 
statement or representation to the department on the application. 
 
A licensee must physically possess the license while harvesting or attempting to harvest 
oysters. The license is valid for one year following the date of issuance and may not be 
transferred. 
 
DNR may designate a person engaged in a commercial enterprise as an agent to sell 
recreational oyster licenses, and an agent may retain 50 cents for each recreational oyster 
license issued by the agent. 
 
DNR must use a portion, as determined by the department, of the application fee to 
replenish public fishery oyster bars by planting shell and juvenile oysters. 
 
DNR may adopt regulations to implement the bill’s recreational oyster license provisions 
(including the provisions below). 
 
 
Complimentary/Discounted Licenses 
 
DNR must issue a complimentary recreational oyster license to a resident of the State who 
certifies that the resident is (1) a former prisoner of war; (2) an American veteran who is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 613/ Page 3 
determined to be unemployable by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; (3) a 100% 
service-connected disabled American veteran; or (4) blind. DNR must also (1) issue a 
discounted recreational oyster license to a resident of the State who is a recipient of the 
Purple Heart Award and (2) determine the cost of the discounted application fee. 
 
 
Authorization to Catch Oysters Without a License 
 
An individual may catch oysters without a recreational oyster license if the individual  
(1) owns or leases property bordering tidal waters of the State or (2) is the spouse or 
immediate family member of an individual who owns or leases property bordering tidal 
waters of the State and resides on the property. An individual must register with DNR and 
provide all information requested by the department before catching oysters under this 
authorization. DNR may not establish a fee to register. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Authorizations in Statute to Catch Oysters and Clams 
 
Statute specifies that any resident of the State may catch oysters or clams on any area in 
the waters of the State from which catching oysters or clams is permitted under provisions 
of State fisheries law relating to oysters and clams. A resident may catch up to one bushel 
each of oysters (but see regulations below) and clams a day for the person’s own use and 
consumption without a license, in places and at times prescribed by DNR regulations. A 
nonresident may catch, in the tidal bays of Worcester County, up to one bushel of 
hard clams per day for the nonresident’s own use and consumption. 
 
Regulations – Recreational Oyster Fishery 
 
DNR regulations establish that (1) the recreational season, daily catch limits, days of the 
week, and times for catching oysters is established, and may be modified, through public 
notice and (2) regardless of the authorization in statute (discussed above) for a resident to 
catch up to one bushel of oysters a day for the person’s own use and consumption, the 
Secretary of Natural Resources, in order to implement the Maryland Chesapeake Bay 
Oyster Management Plan, may issue a public notice to establish or modify the season, daily 
catch limits, days of the week, or times for catching oysters for recreational or commercial 
purposes. DNR must issue a public notice that establishes those parameters for the 
recreational oyster fishery by July 1 of each year. (Statute relating to fishery management 
plans establishes that, regardless of other statutory provisions under State fisheries law, 
once a fishery management plan has been adopted by regulation, the State’s fishery 
resources must be harvested in accordance with the conservation and management 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 613/ Page 4 
measures in the fishery management plan and any regulations implementing or amending 
the plan.) 
 
A public notice must state its effective hour and date and must be published on DNR’s 
website at least 48 hours in advance of the effective hour and date. 
 
Regulations – Recreational Clam Fishery 
 
 
Soft-shell 
 
Under DNR regulations for the recreational soft-shell clam fishery, an individual may not 
catch more than one standard U.S. bushel of soft-shell clams per day, and an individual 
may not catch or possess soft-shell clams of the species Mya arenaria that are less than 
two inches in length, measured along the longest part of the shell. 
 
 
Hard-shell 
 
Under DNR regulations for the recreational hard-shell clam fishery, in general, an 
individual may not catch more than one standard U.S. bushel of hard-shell clams per day. 
An individual may not catch more than 250 hard-shell clams per day for personal 
consumption and use from the waters of Worcester County. 
 
Existing Complimentary/Discounted Licenses and License Exemptions 
 
The bill’s provisions establishing complimentary and discounted recreational oyster 
licenses are similar to existing provisions establishing complimentary and discounted 
angler’s licenses and Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing licenses (recreational 
licenses for fishing in nontidal waters and fishing for finfish in tidal waters, respectively). 
In addition, the bill’s authorization for specified individuals (owners/lessees of property 
bordering tidal waters and spouses/family members) to catch oysters without a recreational 
oyster license is similar to authorizations for similar individuals to fish without an angler’s 
license or Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues increase annually, potentially significantly, 
beginning in fiscal 2025, due to the collection of recreational oyster license application fee 
revenues. Special fund expenditures also increase annually, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025, due to the bill’s requirement that a portion of the application fee revenues 
collected, as determined by DNR, be used to replenish public fishery oyster bars by 
planting shell and juvenile oysters. 
 
The extent of the increase in special fund revenues, and the related increase in special fund 
expenditures (equal to some portion of the special fund revenues), cannot be reliably 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 613/ Page 5 
estimated. For context, approximately 126,000 residents have a Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing license, which authorizes a person to fish for finfish recreationally in 
tidal waters of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries and in the Atlantic Ocean and the 
Atlantic coastal bays and their tributaries. However, DNR indicates that individuals who 
enjoy sport fishing may not be the same residents who enjoy catching oysters, and it is 
likely that only a fraction of Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing licensees participate 
in the recreational oyster fishery. 
 
For illustrative purposes, for every 10,000 residents that secure a recreational oyster 
license (excluding those issued complimentary or discounted licenses), special fund 
revenues increase by approximately $100,000 (revenues may be slightly less than 
$100,000, depending on how many licenses are sold through agents who retain 50 cents of 
the $10 application fee). 
 
Because the bill does not expressly indicate where the recreational oyster license 
application fee revenues are deposited, this analysis assumes the fee revenues are deposited 
into the Fisheries Management and Protection Fund, which receives money received from 
fish and fisheries licenses under State fisheries law, unless otherwise provided in statute. 
 
DNR indicates that it can implement the recreational oyster license, and the 
complimentary/discounted licenses and specified registrations, by adding them to its 
licensing system, with existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses in the commercial fishing and seafood industry 
(in addition to individuals harvesting oysters recreationally) may meaningfully benefit 
from the bill to the extent replenishment of public fishery oyster bars funded by the 
recreational oyster license application fee revenues results in an increased amount of 
oysters harvested in future years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 613/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 25, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6