START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 601 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 601 
(Delegate Lehman, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Street Racing and Exhibition Driving – Prohibited Acts, Enforcement, and 
Penalties 
 
 
This bill increases penalties and points assessments for violations related to participation 
in racing or speed contests. The bill also establishes a statewide prohibition on exhibition 
driving on any highway or private property that is used for driving by the general public. 
By expanding application of an existing provision, the bill establishes a statewide 
prohibition on exhibition driving, racing, and other related activities in a special event zone. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in general fund revenues and potential minimal increase 
in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s penalty provisions beginning in FY 2025. 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues are not materially affected; the Motor Vehicle 
Administration (MVA) can implement the bill with existing resources. The Judiciary can 
handle the increased workload with existing resources. Enforcement can be handled with 
existing resources. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in expenditures due to the bill’s penalty 
provisions. Any changes to enforcement can be absorbed within existing resources. The 
bill is not anticipated to materially affect local revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  With the exception of offenses in a special event zone, 
Exhibit 1 contains a summary of the bill’s changes to existing penalties for offenses related 
to participation in racing or speed contests as well as the penalties for the new prohibitions 
established by the bill related to exhibition driving. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 601/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Comparison of Maximum Fines, Points Assessments, and Terms of Imprisonment Under  
Current Law and the Bill Related to Racing or Speed Contests and Exhibition Driving  
(Does Not Include Special Event Zone Offenses) 
 
 
Fine 
Points Assessed 
Possible Term of Imprisonment 
Violation  
Current 
Law 
The Bill 
Current 
Law  
The Bill 
Current Law 
The Bill 
Driving in a race or speed 
contest (general) 
Up to $500 
Up to $1,000 
5 points 
8 points 
n/a 
Up to 
60 days 
Driving in a race or speed 
contest (if serious bodily 
injury to another occurs) 
Up to $1,000 Up to $1,000 
5 points 
12 points 
Up to 
1 year 
Up to 1 year 
Participating in a race or speed 
contest as a timekeeper or 
flagman 
Up to $500 
Up to $500 
5 points 
8 points 
n/a 
n/a 
Engaging in exhibition driving 
(general)* 
n/a 
Up to $1,000 
n/a 
8 points 
n/a 
Up to 
60 days 
Engaging in exhibition driving 
(if serious bodily injury to 
another occurs)* 
n/a 
Up to $1,000 
n/a 
12 points 
n/a 
Up to 1 year 
 
* Indicates new prohibition established by the bill. 
 
Note:  Under current law, imprisonment is a possible penalty for driving in a race or speed contest only if serious bodily injury occurs. Because the 
bill establishes imprisonment as a possible penalty for all of the above offenses (except for participating in a race or speed contest as a timekeeper 
or flagman), prepayment (i.e., admitting guilt and paying the fine without appearing in court) is no longer an option for those offenses, and a person 
cited for one of those offenses must appear in court. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
 
HB 601/ Page 3 
Racing and Speed Contests and Exhibition Driving – General 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, the bill alters several existing penalties and establishes new 
prohibitions related to exhibition driving. Specifically, the bill: 
 
 
increases the maximum fine for driving in a race or speed contest that does not result 
in serious bodily injury from $500 to $1,000 and subjects a violator to up to 60 days 
of imprisonment, thereby requiring a person cited to appear in court; 
 
increases, from 5 points to 8 points, the points MVA must assess against the  
driver’s license of a participant (including a timekeeper or flagman) in a race or 
speed contest that does not result in serious bodily injury;  
 
increases, from 5 points to 12 points, the points MVA must assess against the 
driver’s license of a driver in a race or speed contest that results in serious bodily 
injury; and 
 
prohibits exhibition driving on a statewide basis and subjects violators to the same 
penalties as those established under the bill for driving in a race or speed contest 
(general violations and violations that result in serious bodily injury). 
 
Exhibition Driving – General 
 
The bill establishes a prohibition on exhibition driving on any highway or an any property 
that is used for driving by the public or in general. Under the bill, “exhibition driving” 
means the operation of a motor vehicle in close proximity to a crowd or gathering in a 
manner that intentionally results in two or more of the following: 
 
 
the excessive, abrupt acceleration or deceleration of the motor vehicle; 
 
the skidding, squealing, burning, or smoking of the tires of the motor vehicle; 
 
the swerving or swaying of the motor vehicle from side to side while accelerating; 
 
the engine of the motor vehicle producing an unreasonably loud, raucous, or 
disturbing noise or the grinding of the gears or the backfiring of the engine of the 
motor vehicle; 
 
any of the wheels of the motor vehicle losing contact with the ground; or 
 
the transportation of a passenger on or in an area of a motor vehicle that is not 
designed or intended for passenger transport, such as the hood or roof. 
 
The bill specifies that a court may consider two affirmative defenses raised by a person 
charged with exhibition driving. First, for a driver who caused the excessive, abrupt 
acceleration or deceleration of a motor vehicle or the skidding, squealing, burning, or 
smoking of the vehicle’s tires, a court may consider it a defense that the driver acted in a 
reasonable manner for safety purposes. Second, a court may consider it a defense that a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 601/ Page 4 
driver who transported a passenger on or in area of a vehicle not designed or intended for 
passenger transport was participating in a properly permitted parade at the time of the 
alleged violation.  
 
Exhibition Driving, Racing, Etc. – Special Event Zone 
 
Under current law, a person may not engage in specified activities within a “special event 
zone” in Worcester County, including exhibition driving; speeding; negligent driving; 
driving a motor vehicle in a race or speed contest that does not result in serious bodily 
injury; participating in a race or speed contest; or skidding, spinning of wheels, or causing 
excessive noise. A person convicted of exhibition driving in a special event zone in 
Worcester County must appear in court and is subject to a penalty of imprisonment for up 
to 60 days and/or a fine up to $1,000. MVA must assess one point for a violation or 
three points for a violation that contributes to an accident. A violation of any of the other 
prohibitions is subject to a $1,000 maximum fine; each of these violations is subject to its 
own points assessment and prepayment penalty. 
 
The definition of “exhibition driving” under this existing provision is similar to the 
definition of exhibition driving described above. A “special event” is any automotive or 
motor vehicle event occurring on (or in close proximity to) a highway that (1) has been 
permitted or approved by a unit of local government or (2) is expected to have 1,000 or 
more individuals in attendance, regardless of whether the event has been permitted or 
approved by a unit of local government. A “special event zone” is an area on (or alongside) 
a highway that is appropriately marked by warning signs or traffic control devices. The 
State Highway Administration may, on its own initiative or at the request of a local 
authority, designate an area on a State highway in Worcester County as a special event 
zone. Likewise, a local authority in Worcester County may designate an area on a highway 
under its jurisdiction as a special event zone. 
 
The bill expands application of these provisions and penalties statewide and makes 
clarifying changes. 
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues increase minimally as a result of both the higher 
fines established by the bill and the establishment of new prohibitions. Though the bill 
increases the points assessed for specified offenses, which may result in changes in 
administrative actions taken by MVA against the driver’s licenses of affected drivers, any 
such changes are not expected to materially affect TTF revenues. This analysis assumes 
that despite the bill’s effective date, any increase in revenues will not occur until 
fiscal 2025. 
 
As noted above, the bill increases the maximum fine for participation in a race or speed 
contest (as a driver) that does not result in serious bodily injury from $500 to $1,000. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 601/ Page 5 
Exhibit 2 shows citations and conviction data for this offense. Any increase in general 
fund revenues due to the bill’s higher penalties for this offense is expected to be minimal 
due to the relatively small number of citations and convictions for the offense each year. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Citation and Conviction Data for Driving in a Race or Speed Contest 
 
 
Fiscal 2022 
Fiscal 2023 
Violation 
Citations Convictions Citations Convictions 
Driving in a race or speed contest 
(general) 
197 
64* 
147 
72* 
 
* Of the 64 convictions in fiscal 2022, 36 defendants were found guilty at trial and 28 defendants prepaid 
(i.e., admitted guilt and paid the fine without appearing in court); in fiscal 2023, 32 defendants were found 
guilty at trial, and 40 defendants prepaid. 
 
Note:  Under current law, imprisonment is not a possible penalty for driving in a race or speed contest 
(general). Because the bill establishes imprisonment as a possible penalty for that offense, a person cited 
for it must appear in court – prepayment is no longer permitted. 
 
Source:  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
The number of citations that may be issued for the new prohibitions (exhibition driving – 
general, exhibition driving within a special event zone (statewide), and the other statewide 
special event zone offenses) established by the bill cannot be determined at this time. 
However, the annual number of citations and convictions for these new prohibitions is not 
expected to be significant. 
 
State Expenditures:  Beginning in fiscal 2025, general fund expenditures may increase 
minimally as a result of the bill’s establishment of new incarceration penalties due to more 
people being committed to State correctional facilities for convictions in Baltimore City. 
As noted above, the number of additional people convicted under the bill is expected to be 
minimal. 
 
Generally, persons serving a sentence of one year or less in a jurisdiction other than 
Baltimore City are sentenced to a local detention facility. The Baltimore Pretrial Complex, 
a State-operated facility, is used primarily for pretrial detentions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 601/ Page 6 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s new 
incarceration penalties. Counties pay the full cost of incarceration for people in their 
facilities for the first 12 months of the sentence. Per diem operating costs of local detention 
facilities have ranged from approximately $90 to $300 per incarcerated individual in recent 
years. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 208 and SB 147 of 2023 and SB 612 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 442 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Worcester counties; Town of Bel Air; Town of 
Leonardtown; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6