START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1014

Chapter 1014

(House Bill 654)

AN ACT concerning

St. Mary’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – Nonprofit Performing Arts Theater
License

FOR the purpose of establishing in St. Mary’s County a nonprofit performing arts theater
beer and wine license that authorizes the holder to sell or serve beer and wine in
certain nonprofit performing arts theaters at retail for on–premises consumption;
and generally relating to alcoholic beverages in St. Mary’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 28–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 28–1004
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

28–102.

This title applies only in St. Mary’s County.

28–1004.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “NONPROFIT PERFORMING ARTS THEATER” MEANS
AN AREA, A BUILDING, OR A STRUCTURE DESIGNED AND USED FOR PLAYS, ACTS,
DRAMAS, CONCERTS, OR SIMILAR EVENTS BY INDIVIDUALS PERFORMING ON A
STAGE.

(B) THERE IS A NONPROFIT PERFORMING ARTS THEATER BEER AND WINE
LICENSE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1014 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (1) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE FOR USE ON THE PREMISES
OF A PERFORMING ARTS THEATER THAT:

(I) HAS SEATING; AND

(II) IS OPERATED BY A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

(2) THE PRESIDENT AND TWO OTHER OFFICERS OF THE NONPROFIT
PERFORMING ARTS THEATER SHALL SIGN THE APPLICATION FOR THE LICENSE.

(D) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL OR SERVE BEER AND
WINE AT RETAIL FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(E) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL OR SERVE BEER AND WINE FROM 1
HOUR BEFORE TO 1 HOUR AFTER:

(1) A REGULAR PERFORMANCE; OR

(2) A FUND–RAISER PERFORMANCE THAT BENEFITS THE NONPROFIT
PERFORMING ARTS THEATER.

(F) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY PURCHASE BEER AND WINE FROM A RETAIL
LICENSE HOLDER OR A LICENSED WHOLESALER.

(G) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $300.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2