START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 45

Chapter 45

(House Bill 628)

AN ACT concerning

Health Occupations – Clinical Marriage and Family Therapists – Reciprocal
Licensure Requirements

FOR the purpose of altering the licensure requirements that the State Board of Professional
Counselors and Therapists may waive, and the circumstances under which the
requirements may be waived, for applicants for a license to practice clinical marriage
and family therapy in the State who are licensed or certified to practice clinical
marriage and family therapy in another state, territory, or jurisdiction; and
generally relating to the licensure of clinical marriage and family therapists.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 17–303
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 17–306
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

17–303.

(a) To qualify for a license to practice clinical marriage and family therapy, an
applicant shall be an individual who meets the requirements of this section.

(b) The applicant shall be of good moral character.

(c) The applicant shall be at least 18 years old.

(d) (1) Except as provided in § 17–306 of this subtitle, the applicant shall hold
a master’s or doctoral degree in a marriage and family field from an accredited educational
institution that is approved by the Board or have completed a program of studies judged by
the Board to be substantially equivalent in subject matter and extent of training as may be
required by the Board in regulation.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 45 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The applicant shall have completed any additional educational
requirements established by the Board in regulation.

(e) The applicant shall have completed not less than 2 years with a minimum of
2,000 hours of supervised experience in marriage and family therapy approved by the
Board, 2 years of which shall have been completed after the award of the master’s or
doctoral degree or its substantial equivalent.

(f) The applicant shall provide documentation to the Board evidencing the
completion of any educational requirements established by the Board in regulation,
completed at an accredited college or university approved by the Board.

(g) The applicant shall provide documentation evidencing the completion of 2
years of postgraduate supervised clinical experience as required by the Board.

(h) Except as otherwise provided in this title, the applicant shall pass an
examination approved by the Board.

17–306.

(a) [The] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE Board shall
waive the requirements for licensure UNDER § 17–303(D), (E), (F), AND (H) OF THIS
SUBTITLE for an applicant to practice clinical marriage and family therapy if the applicant:

(1) Is licensed or certified as a clinical marriage and family therapist in
another state, territory, or jurisdiction [that has requirements that are equivalent to or
exceed the requirements of § 17–303 of this subtitle];

(2) HAS NO HISTORY OF DISCIPLINARY ACTION, PAST OR PENDING, IN
A STATE, TERRITORY, OR JURISDICTION IN WHICH THE APPLICANT HOLDS A
LICENSE OR CERTIFICATION TO PRACTICE CLINICAL MARRIAGE AND FAMILY
THERAPY;

(3) HAS NOT COMMITTED ANY ACT OR OMISSION THAT WOULD BE
GROUNDS FOR DISCIPLINE OR DENIAL OF LICENSURE UNDER § 17–509 OF THIS
TITLE;

(4) SUBMITS TO THE BOARD A COPY OF A CURRENT LICENSE FROM
EACH STATE, TERRITORY, OR JURISDICTION IN WHICH THE APPLICANT HAS BEEN
LICENSED, REGISTERED, OR OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED TO PRACTICE CLINICAL
MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPY;

[(2)] (5) Submits an application on the form that the Board requires; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 45

[(3)] (6) Pays to the Board the application fee set by the Board.

(B) THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT REQUIRE AN APPLICANT TO PASS A NATIONAL
CERTIFICATION EXAM; BUT

(2) MAY REQUIRE AN APPLICANT TO PASS AN EXAMINATION OF THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE.

[(b)] (C) The Board shall adopt regulations to implement this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3