START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 690 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 690 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Charles County - Adult Protective Services Review Board - Membership 
 
   
This bill alters the membership requirements for the Adult Public Guardianship Review 
Board in Charles County by authorizing the appointment of a physician’s assistant or 
nurse practitioner in the field of psychiatry to serve on the board instead of a psychiatrist.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Charles County government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A vulnerable adult is an adult who lacks the physical or mental capacity to 
provide for his or her daily needs. It is the policy of the State for vulnerable adults to have 
access to and be provided with needed professional services sufficient to protect their 
health, safety, and welfare.  
 
If a local department of social services receives a report that an alleged vulnerable adult 
has been subjected to abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or exploitation, the department is 
required to conduct a thorough investigation. Following an investigation, if an individual 
is determined to require protective services but is unwilling or unable to accept protective 
services voluntarily, the director may petition the court for the appointment of a guardian. 
A director of a local department in the county where the vulnerable adult lives may be 
appointed as guardian.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 690/ Page 2 
Every county is required to have an adult public guardianship review board. Two or more 
counties may agree to establish a single multicounty review board. The review board must 
generally review each guardianship that a public agency holds every six months. 
Guardianships that a public agency has held for more than one year must be reviewed at 
least annually, with a file review to take place at least every six months. Each time the 
review board reviews a guardianship, the board must recommend whether the guardianship 
should be continued, modified, or terminated. 
 
Except in St. Mary’s and Washington counties, each 11‐member review board is required 
to have:   
 
 
one professional representative of a local department; 
 
one physician’s assistant, nurse practitioner, or physician who is not a psychiatrist; 
 
one psychiatrist; 
 
one representative of a local commission on aging; 
 
one professional representative of a local nonprofit social service organization; 
 
one lawyer; 
 
two lay individuals; 
 
one registered nurse; 
 
one professional in the field of disabilities; and 
 
one person with a physical disability. 
 
Members are not entitled to compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses. The 
membership of the board in St Mary’s and Washington counties is identical to the listing 
above except for the psychiatrist requirement; St. Mary’s and Washington counties allow 
for a psychiatrist or psychologist on the review board. 
 
In Charles County, the term of a member is four years.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles County; Department of Human Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 690/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3