START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 636 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 636 
(Allegany County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Allegany County - Property Tax Credit - Evergreen Heritage Center 
 
   
This bill authorizes Allegany County and municipalities in the county to grant a property 
tax credit for property that is owned by Evergreen Heritage Center Foundation or 
Evergreen Heritage Center Holdings. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Allegany County property tax revenues may decrease by approximately 
$5,300 annually beginning in FY 2025 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. 
County expenditures are not affected.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Evergreen Heritage Center Holdings could 
realize a reduction in county property taxes.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Exhibit 1 lists the current mandatory and optional property tax credits that 
are authorized in Allegany County. Allegany County is projected to collect approximately 
$46.9 million in property tax revenues in fiscal 2024, as shown in the County Revenue 
Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the Department of 
Legislative Services website. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 636/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Allegany County Property Tax Credits 
 
Optional Tax Credits 
Frostburg Community Hospital 
Western Maryland Scenic Railroad 
Frostburg Lions Club 
La Vale Lions Club Foundation 
Carver Community Center 
Cumberland Cultural Foundation/Gilchrist Museum 
Allegany County Agricultural Expo 
Allegany County Building Trades Education Foundation 
Bell Tower Building 
Cumberland Outdoor Club 
Public industrial park owned/managed/operated by a 501(c)(6) 
Property subdivided for future residential development 
Frostburg Museum Association 
Allegany County Animal Shelter Management Foundation 
Family Junction 
LaVale Swim Club 
The Lions Center for Rehabilitation and Extended Care 
Cumberland Economic Development Corporation 
Upper Potomac Jaycees 
Allegany Beagle Club 
Cumberland/Allegany County Industrial Foundation 
Rehabilitated property or new construction 
Western Maryland Street Rod Association 
Machinery/equipment used in manufacturing/electricity generation 
Riverside Industrial Park 
Western Maryland Health System Braddock Hospital 
Memorial Hilltop Centre 
 
Mandatory Tax Credits 
Personal property owned by nonprofit TV broadcast translator station 
South Cumberland Business and Civic Association 
Bona fide labor union 
Real property leased by religious organization to La Vale Athletic Association 
Improvements to certified historical/agriculturally significant real property  
Cresaptown Civic Improvement Association 
Potomac Park Citizens Committee 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 636/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Evergreen Heritage Center Holdings owns one property located in 
Mt. Savage, Maryland. The property has a fiscal 2025 assessment of $546,300. As a result 
of the property tax credit under the bill, Allegany County property tax revenues may 
decrease by approximately $5,300 annually beginning in fiscal 2025. This estimate is based 
on a county property tax rate of $0.9750 per $100 of assessment.  
 
The Evergreen Heritage Center, located on 130 acres in Western Maryland, is a historic 
farm that pre-dates the Revolutionary War. The property has been on the Maryland 
Historical Trust inventory of properties since 1976 and was added to the National Register 
in 2015. The heritage center features a six-bedroom farmhouse and barn originally built 
more than 200 years ago, plus over 100 acres of managed forest, multiple gardens and 
orchards, and landscaped grounds.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 502 (Senator McKay) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Evergreen Heritage Center Foundation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3