START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 609 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 609 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Finance and Education, Energy, and the 
Environment 
 
Education - Public Libraries - Collective Bargaining (Library Workers 
Empowerment Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes a collective bargaining process for full- or part-time nonmanagement 
employees of public library systems throughout the State. As a result, the bill repeals 
provisions of law rendered obsolete by the bill’s Statewide applicability. The bill only 
applies prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or 
application to (1) the composition of a collective bargaining unit that is in existence on the 
bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date, unless the collective bargaining unit dissolves after that 
date; (2) a collective bargaining agreement entered into before the bill’s July 1, 2024 
effective date; or (3) collective bargaining negotiations that began before the bill’s 
July 1, 2024 effective date. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent eligible library employees’ salaries increase due to the 
collective bargaining process, general fund expenditures increase to pay increased 
retirement costs beginning in FY 2029. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local library systems can handle payroll deductions for union and service 
fees using existing resources. Local public library expenditures may increase significantly 
due to the hiring of outside mediators, increases in library employee salaries, and increases 
in retirement costs for non-State eligible employees. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 609/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An employee may form, join, and participate in an employee organization; 
bargain collectively through a representative of their choice; and engage in lawful 
concerted activities for their mutual aid and protection. An employee also may refuse to 
join or participate in the activities of an employee organization. 
 
There may be up to two bargaining units at each public library system (one bargaining unit 
for employees and one for supervisory employees), as specified. 
 
Represent All Employees Fairly 
 
The employer must recognize the right of the certified exclusive representative to represent 
the employees in the unit in collective bargaining and the settlement of grievances. The 
certified exclusive representative of a unit must (1) serve as the sole agent for the unit in 
collective bargaining and (2) represent all employees in the unit fairly and in good faith, in 
a manner that is not arbitrary or discriminatory. 
 
Certification of an Employee Organization  
 
An employee organization with written proof that at least 30% of the employees in the 
bargaining unit have designated the employee organization to represent them or are 
members of the employee organization, may file a petition with the employer, as specified. 
Before the petition of interest may be processed, the proof of interest must be verified by a 
neutral decision maker from a referral list or list of arbitrators provided by the federal 
Mediation and Conciliation Service as specified. The employee organization and the 
library system must equally bear any costs associated with the verification. 
 
A bargaining unit may only hold an election once per year. The employer must notify all 
employees within the bargaining unit that an election will be held and request a neutral 
decision maker from the federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to oversee and conduct 
an election by secret ballot. The ballot must include choices for exclusive representation 
by any employee organization seeking to obtain or continue representation rights, as 
specified, and no exclusive representation. 
 
If the employer disagrees with the petitioning employee organization or the petitioning 
employees as to the inclusion or exclusion of specific employees and the classifications of 
employees in the bargaining unit, all the employees in the petitioned-for group must have 
the opportunity to vote in the election, as specified. If the total number of ballots of 
challenged employees have an impact on the election result, the parties must immediately 
refer the dispute to the neutral decision maker to resolve the dispute through a hearing. The 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 609/ Page 3 
neutral decision maker must hold a hearing on the dispute, as specified. The neutral 
decision maker’s findings are final and binding on the parties. 
 
An employee organization must be certified as exclusive representative following an 
election if the employee organization has received the vote of a majority of the valid votes 
cast. If an election includes three or more choices and no choice receives the majority of 
votes, the neutral decision maker must conduct a runoff election between the two choices 
that received the largest number of votes. The choice receiving the largest number of votes 
must be certified. 
 
Employees represented by an employee organization may petition for decertification as 
specified. The petition must be processed as described. 
 
Topics for Collective Bargaining 
 
If an employee organization is certified as specified, the employer and the certified 
exclusive representative must enter into a collective bargaining agreement that contains 
provisions regarding wages, hours, and the terms and conditions of employment; the 
grievance process regarding the interpretation and implementation of the agreement, as 
specified; and other topics that the parties may mutually agree to that are suitable for 
bargaining. 
 
Dues 
 
The employer must automatically deduct dues from an employee who is a member of the 
union and who submits authorization for dues deduction. The dues must be remitted to the 
certified exclusive representative. The employer must automatically stop making payroll 
deductions on behalf of a certified exclusive representative if the certified exclusive 
representative is decertified, the certified exclusive representative’s right to dues is 
revoked, the employee ceases to be a member of the bargaining unit, or the employee 
revokes the authorization for payments, as specified. 
 
Provisions for the Agreement 
 
An employee is not allowed to engage in a strike. The authority of the funding body 
(i.e., the county council or governing body of the county, as specified) of the applicable 
county to determine the budget of the employer is not restricted. 
 
The bill establishes terms that must be met in a collective bargaining agreement, a process 
for reaching an agreement and when an impasse must be declared. The bill also establishes 
processes and requirements for mediating an impasse, selecting a mediator, and resolving 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 609/ Page 4 
a dispute. Any costs associated with this must be shared equally by the employer and the 
certified exclusive representative. 
 
The funding body of the applicable county is not bound by any decision made under the 
mediation process and must act in accordance with the bill. The funding body may accept 
or reject the recommendation of approval by the library board of trustees. 
 
The employer must submit a term of collective bargaining agreement or memorandum of 
understanding (MOU) to the funding body of the applicable county with the employer’s 
recommendation regarding whether the agreement or mediator’s decision requires an 
appropriation of additional funds. 
 
Terms That May Have a Fiscal Impact 
 
The funding body of the applicable county may approve or reject a request for additional 
funding, in whole or in part. If the funding body approves a request, the funding body must 
take all actions necessary to process the request for additional funding. 
 
If any part of a request for additional funding submitted to the funding body is rejected, the 
request for additional funds must be returned to the employer and the certified exclusive 
representative for renegotiation within the limits of the funding allocated by the 
funding body. The renegotiation must be completed within a timetable established by the 
funding body. 
 
If an impasse is reached, the employer and the certified exclusive representative must each 
submit a final offer, within the limits of the funding allocated by the funding body. The 
funding body must select one of the offers. The selection of the funding body is binding on 
all parties. 
 
Employers and Employee Organizations 
 
The employer and the employee organization are mutually obligated to meet and negotiate 
as specified. The obligation to negotiate in good faith requires that an effort be made to 
arrive at an agreement and reduce the agreement to writing within a reasonable period of 
time but does not require that concessions be made on either side. 
 
The bill specifies the exclusive rights of the employer and, subject to applicable provisions 
of a collective bargaining agreement or MOU, the employer may take specified actions 
including direct, hire, promote, and demote its employees. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 609/ Page 5 
The employer and the employee organizations are prohibited from certain activities, 
including interfering with, restraining, or coercing an employee in the exercise of any right 
given to the employee by the bill; and refusing to bargain in good faith. 
 
An employee who is a member of a bargaining unit with an exclusive representative may, 
without the intervention of an employee organization, discuss any matter with the 
employer. This does not waive the right of the employee organization to be the exclusive 
bargaining representative for issues related to wages, hours, and working conditions and is 
not intended to create an alternative path to alter terms and conditions of the collective 
bargaining agreement between the parties. 
 
Collective Bargaining Agreement Supersedes and Arbitration for Disciplinary Actions 
 
Except as otherwise provided by law, if employees have entered into a collective 
bargaining agreement with the employer, the collective bargaining agreement supersedes 
any conflicting regulation or administrative policy of the employer. A collective bargaining 
agreement may include a provision for arbitration of disciplinary actions. 
 
Prohibited Activities 
 
In general, strikes, work stoppages, lockouts, and secondary boycotts are prohibited. 
Employees and employee organizations may not engage in, sponsor, initiate, support, 
direct, or condone a strike, work stoppage, or secondary boycott. Employee organizations 
may not engage in, initiate, sponsor, or support, directly or indirectly, picketing of the 
employer, its property, or field or office facilities in furtherance of a strike, work stoppage, 
or secondary boycott. 
 
If an employee organization violates these prohibitions, the employer may (1) revoke the 
employee organization’s designation as certified exclusive representative; (2) disqualify the 
employee organization from participating in representation elections for a period of up to 
two years; and (3) terminate immediately the payroll deductions for the employee 
organization’s dues. 
 
An employee who violates these prohibitions is subject to immediate disciplinary action, 
which may include permanent dismissal from employment for just cause. 
 
The employer may not direct a lockout against employees; however, this may not be 
construed to prohibit the employer from exercising its managerial rights. 
 
Current Law:  Each board of library trustees must establish policies for staff 
classification; salaries; work conditions; suspension with pay; grievance procedures; 
benefits, including vacation and sick leave; hours of work; and any other personnel 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 609/ Page 6 
procedures and practices necessary for the efficient operation of the library. A library board 
of trustees may advise in the preparation of, and approve, the library budget. 
 
Employees of the Baltimore County Public Library System, Howard County Library 
System and the Prince George’s County Memorial Library System have the rights to 
organize and bargain collectively through representatives of their choosing. 
Howard County Library System employees have not chosen to use this authorization. As 
employees of Montgomery County, employees of the Montgomery County Public Library 
System may bargain collectively. Baltimore County Public Library System and Enoch Pratt 
Free Library employees in Baltimore City formed a union in 2022. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although the bill may affect State expenditures for retirement as 
early as fiscal 2029, any such impact is expected to be minimal. The State pays retirement 
benefits for eligible library employees based on the salaries of eligible library employees 
in the second prior fiscal year. If library employees choose to bargain collectively, the 
employee salary base may increase beginning in fiscal 2027 at the earliest, depending on 
the outcomes of the collective bargaining process. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local library systems can handle any payroll deduction for union 
fees using existing resources. Local library system expenditures may increase by a 
significant amount due to (1) increased costs for collective bargaining, including the hiring 
of outside fact finders and mediators and (2) increased salaries for employees, subject to 
the outcome of collective bargaining negotiations. In addition, the bill may affect local 
retirement expenditures for library employees who are not librarians or clerical staff; 
however, any impact is expected to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 65 and SB 352 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 591 (Senator Lam, et al.) - Finance and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State Library Agency; Public Employee 
Relations Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 609/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7