START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 688 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 688 
(Delegate Barnes) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Historical Trust - Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance 
Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of 
$5.0 million to the Maryland Historical Trust (MHT) to fund grants under the Historical 
and Cultural Museum Assistance Program for fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter. 
The bill also repeals a provision that prohibits MHT from making a grant under the program 
to a museum that is currently receiving operating support from the Maryland State Arts 
Council. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures are assumed to increase by $5.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. Special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase correspondingly by $5.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026.   
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase annually beginning 
in FY 2026, due to receipt of grant funds and spending of those funds. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 688/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
The Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program  
 
The Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program of MHT provides political 
subdivisions and nonprofit organizations with financial assistance for museums in the 
State. Grants made by the program from the Historic Preservation and Historical and 
Cultural Museum Assistance Grant Fund (MHT Grant Fund) to political subdivisions and 
nonprofit organizations are used by museums for: 
 
 
research related to collections, exhibits, or other educational activities; 
 
the care, conservation, interpretation, and documentation of collections; 
 
the planning, design, and construction of exhibits; 
 
educational programs and projects; 
 
the development of master plans for museums, including activities required to 
achieve accreditation by the American Association of Museums or another 
appropriate entity; 
 
minor structural modifications to existing museum facilities; 
 
the development of plans and specifications and the provision of architectural, 
engineering, or other special services directly related to the construction or 
rehabilitation of museum facilities; or 
 
operating support for any museum-related activity, including activities described 
above. 
 
Historic Preservation and Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Grant Fund  
 
The MHT Grant Fund supports MHT’s Historic Preservation Grant Program (MHT Grant 
Program) and Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program. The MHT Grant Fund 
consists of, among other things, money appropriated in the State budget to the MHT Grant 
Program or the Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program. MHT may not make 
a grant under the Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program to a museum that 
(1) currently is receiving operating support from the Maryland State Arts Council; (2) is 
operated wholly or partly by the State; or (3) has not existed as a nonprofit organization for 
at least three years before applying for the grant.  
 
Authorized uses of the MHT Grant Fund include, among other things, (1) making grants 
to political subdivisions and nonprofit organizations for use by museums under the 
Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program and (2) paying for reasonable and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 688/ Page 3 
necessary administrative costs directly related to the administration of the MHT Grant 
Fund of up to 5% of the annual general fund appropriation to the MHT Grant Fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:        
 
General Funds 
 
Under the bill, the Governor may include an appropriation of $5.0 million for the program 
in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2025 and each fiscal year thereafter. Although funding 
for the program is not mandated, this analysis assumes that annual funding for the program 
of $5.0 million is included in the annual budget bill for fiscal 2026 (the first budget 
prepared by the Governor after the bill’s July 1, 2024, effective date) and each fiscal year 
thereafter. Thus, general fund expenditures are assumed to increase by $5.0 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
Special Funds – Historic Preservation and Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance 
Grant Fund 
 
 
Revenues 
 
Special fund revenues increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026, due to 
receipt of the general fund appropriations by the MHT Grant Fund. As stated above, the 
MHT Grant Fund consists of, among other things, money appropriated in the State budget 
to the Historical and Cultural Museum Assistance Program.  
 
 
Expenditures 
 
Special fund expenditures increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026, 
reflecting administrative costs and grant funding. This analysis assumes that all available 
funding is spent/awarded each fiscal year. Although the bill authorizes appropriations of 
$5.0 million annually “to fund grants under the program,” existing statute specifies that the 
MHT Grant Fund holds money appropriated in the State budget to the program and that 
the fund may be used to pay for reasonable and necessary administrative costs of up to 5% 
of the annual general fund appropriation to the fund, which, with respect to the $5.0 million 
appropriation to the program, is $250,000.  
 
Therefore, a portion of the funding, $188,971 in fiscal 2026, is assumed to be used by MHT 
to hire two full-time administrative staff (an administrator and an assistant administrator) 
to administer all aspects of the grant program. MHT advises that the program has not had 
funding or staff in recent years. The estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start‐up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. After accounting for administrative costs, 
$4.8 million is available in fiscal 2026 to fund grants to eligible entities. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 688/ Page 4 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$173,897 
Operating Expenses 
15,074 
Administrative Costs Subtotal 
188,971 
Grants 
   4,811,029 
Total FY 2026 Special Fund Expenditures 
$5,000,000 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) full salaries with annual increases and employee 
turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and (3) grant funding 
consisting of the remainder of the $5.0 million annual appropriation.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase annually 
beginning in fiscal 2026, due to receipt of grant funds and spending of those funds. Local 
governments are eligible recipients of funding under the program.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business may meaningfully benefit from grant funding 
under the bill. MHT indicates that vendors who provide strategic planning, collections 
conservation, and exhibit development, which would be supported by grant funds under 
the bill, are often small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 616 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Historical Trust; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4