START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 651 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 651 
(St. Mary's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
St. Mary's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Beer, Wine, and Liquor Tasting 
Permit 
 
 
This bill establishes a beer, wine, and liquor tasting (BWLT) permit in St. Mary’s County 
and authorizes the St. Mary’s County Board of License Commissioners to issue the permit 
to the holder of a Class A license for on-premises consumption of beer, wine, and liquor 
for tasting purposes only. The permit fees are $200 for a 26-day licensing period; $250 for 
a 52-day licensing period; and $300 for a 365-day licensing period. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  St. Mary’s County revenues increase to the extent BWLT permits are issued 
under the bill. St. Mary’s County can handle additional enforcement activity with existing 
resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The board may issue a BWLT permit to a Class A license holder. The 
BWLT permit authorizes the holder to serve samples of beer, wine, and liquor to customers 
in a quantity not exceeding:   
 
 
0.5 ounce of liquor from each offering and 1.5 ounces from all offerings of liquor 
in a day; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 651/ Page 2 
 
one ounce of wine from each offering and four ounces from all offerings of wine in 
a day; and 
 
two ounces of beer from each offering and eight ounces from all offerings of beer 
in a day.  
 
A holder of a 26-day or 52-day BWLT permit must notify the board at least seven days 
prior to a tasting. 
 
Current Law:  In St. Mary’s County, there is a beer and wine tasting (BWT) permit that 
the board may issue to Class A licensee. The permit authorizes the holder to allow 
on-premises consumption of beer and wine for tasting purposes only, as specified. The 
permit fees are $150 for a 26-day licensing period; $200 for a 52-day licensing period; and 
$250 for a 365-day licensing period. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2