START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 678 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 678 
(Delegates Harris and Boafo) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public Higher Education - Communities of Interest - Targeted Recruitment and 
Outreach Efforts 
 
 
This bill requires each public four-year institution of higher education (excluding the 
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC)) to conduct targeted recruitment and 
outreach efforts each year. To that end, the other constituent institutions of the University 
System of Maryland (USM), Morgan State University (MSU), and St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland (SMCM) must each adopt and annually update a written policy that identifies 
communities of interest in the State as well as the institution’s targeted recruitment and 
outreach efforts for the community of interest – all with the goal of promoting diversity 
and inclusion at each institution by attracting and graduating a diverse student body 
committed to service. By August 1, 2024, and annually thereafter, the affected constituent 
institutions of USM, MSU, and SMCM must report to the Governor, the President of the 
Senate, and the Speaker of the House on information regarding the implementation of the 
bill, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Higher education expenditures for at least some public four-year institutions 
of higher education (excluding UMGC) increase, potentially materially, to hire additional 
staff. However, costs depend on the policies developed by each public four-year institution, 
and some institutions may be able to conduct targeted recruitment and outreach efforts by 
reallocating existing recruitment resources. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 678/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands the principles of higher education for Maryland to 
include that public higher education should be committed to promoting diversity and 
inclusion at each institution by attracting and graduating a diverse student body committed 
to service. 
 
“Community of interest” is defined as a community in the State identified by a public 
four-year higher education institution that has individuals from historically 
underrepresented groups, demographics, or geographic areas that the institution has 
determined are underrepresented in the enrollment of the institution or other institutions of 
higher education in the State. 
 
“Targeted recruitment and outreach efforts” is defined as efforts specifically identified by 
a public four-year higher education institution and a community of interest to increase 
applications of students from the identified community of interest. It includes 
(1) establishing partnerships with community-based organizations, local school systems, 
or specific high schools and the public four-year higher education institution; (2) attending 
college fairs; (3) holding specific recruitment events in the community of interest; 
(4) establishing a student ambassador program; (5) holding college access workshops in 
the community of interest, with a focus on the admissions application process; and 
(6) providing dedicated support services and staff for the community of interest during the 
application process. 
 
Reporting Requirement 
 
The annual report must cover (1) the communities of interest identified by the institution; 
(2) targeted recruitment and outreach efforts completed in the previous school year for each 
identified community of interest (not required for the initial report); (3) planned efforts for 
the next school year in each community of interest; and (4) application and admission data 
for individuals in each identified community of interest. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Principles of Public Higher Education Detailed in Statute 
 
Public higher education in Maryland should be based on the following principles:   
 
 
the people of Maryland expect quality in all aspects of public higher education:  
teaching, research, and public service; 
 
public higher education should be accessible to all those who seek and qualify for 
admission; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 678/ Page 3 
 
public higher education should provide a diversity of quality educational 
opportunities; 
 
adequate funding by the State is critical if public higher education is to achieve its 
goal; 
 
the people of Maryland are entitled to efficient and effective management of public 
higher education; and 
 
the people of Maryland are entitled to capable and creative leadership in public 
higher education. 
 
State Expenditures:  Higher education expenditures for public four-year institutions of 
higher education (excluding UMGC) likely increase, potentially materially, to hire 
additional staff to conduct targeted recruitment and outreach efforts and meet the reporting 
requirement. However, any such additional costs depend on the policies developed by each 
institution. Some institutions may be able to redirect existing resources to do so; others 
may already fulfill most of the requirements under the bill and simply need to report on 
them. Nonetheless, even at institutions that are currently conducting targeted recruitment 
and outreach, additional staff may be required to grow their efforts. Due to being exempted 
from the requirements of the bill, UMGC is not affected. Ultimately, the scale and intensity 
of recruitment and targeted outreach efforts depend on the resources available at each 
institution. 
 
For example, among the constituent institutions of USM, Towson University anticipates 
needing three to five full-time staff, with additional programing and travel costs, at an 
estimated cost of $500,000 annually. The University of Maryland, Baltimore County 
advises that it already undertakes many of the activities listed in the bill; however, an 
additional half-time position may be required to handle additional reporting under the bill. 
 
Conversely, MSU advises that the requirements of the bill can be accomplished using 
existing resources. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that the varying cost estimates are likely 
reflective of the scale of programs envisioned and the current resources available.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 678/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4