START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 669

Chapter 669

(House Bill 630)

AN ACT concerning

State Retirement and Pension System – ~~Transfers~~ ~~of~~ Service Credit

FOR the purpose of repealing a requirement for certain transfers of service to be calculated
under a certain formula; correcting a reference to a contribution rate for transfers of
service into the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System; providing for eligibility
and service credit in the Employees’ Pension System for certain contractual
employment by certain members; and generally relating to ~~the~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~of~~ service
credit in the State Retirement and Pension System.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 37–203(f) and 37–203.1(a) and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

37–203.

(f) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, after an individual
transfers service credit to a new system under this title, the individual:

(i) shall pay the rate of contribution applicable to a member of the
new system; and

(ii) is eligible for a pension and annuity as provided under the new
system, determined by taking into account the transferred service credit.

(2) Except as provided in § 37–204 of this subtitle, if an individual transfers
from a noncontributory system to a contributory system, on retirement the individual’s
retirement allowance shall be reduced by the actuarial equivalent of the member
contributions that would have been deducted if the individual had earned the transferred
service credit under the new system, including regular interest on those contributions.

[(3) If an individual retires within 5 years after transferring into a new
system, the benefits payable with respect to the transferred service credit may not be

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 669 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

greater than the benefits that would have been payable by the previous system with respect
to that service if the individual had remained in the previous system.]

37–203.1.

(a) (1) An individual may transfer service credit from a contributory system to
the State Alternate Contributory Employees’ Pension System, the State Alternate
Contributory Teachers’ Pension System, the State Contributory Employees’ Pension
System, the State Contributory Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System, the State
Contributory Teachers’ Pension System, the State Reformed Contributory Employees’
Pension System, or the State Reformed Contributory Teachers’ Pension System if, within
1 year after becoming a member of the pension system, the individual:

(i) completes a claim for the service credit and files it with the Board
of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System on a form that the Board of
Trustees provides; and

(ii) deposits in the annuity savings fund of:

1. the Employees’ Pension System or Teachers’ Pension
System member contributions at the rate applicable for the period of service if the member
had earned the transferred service credit in the new system, including regular interest on
the contributions at the rate of 5% per year compounded annually; or

2. the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System member
contributions at the rate [of 4% of the individual’s earnable compensation while a member
of the contributory system after June 30, 2000] APPLICABLE FOR THE PERIOD OF
SERVICE IF THE MEMBER HAD EARNED THE TRANSFERRED SERVICE CREDIT IN THE
NEW SYSTEM, including regular interest on the contributions at the rate of 5% per year
compounded annually.

(2) Subject to § 414(h) of the Internal Revenue Code, the contributory
system shall refund the individual’s accumulated contributions in excess of the amount
determined under paragraph (1) of this subsection on request.

(g) [(1)] Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, after an individual
transfers service credit to a new system under this title, the individual:

[(i)] (1) shall pay the rate of contribution applicable to a member of
the new system; and

[(ii)] (2) is eligible for a pension and annuity as provided under the
new system, determined by taking into account the transferred service credit.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 669

[(2) If an individual retires within 5 years after transferring into a new
system, the benefits payable with respect to the transferred service credit may not be greater
than the benefits that would have been payable by the previous system with respect to that
service if the individual had remained in the previous system.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Board of Trustees” means the Board of Trustees for the State Retirement
and Pension System.

(3) “Department” means the Department of Legislative Services.

(b) This section applies to a member of the Employees’ Pension System:

(1) who is an employee of the Department on July 1, 2024;

(2) who was employed by the Department prior to July 1, 2024, as a
contractual employee;

(3) whose employment as a contractual employee exceeded 5 years; and

(4) who has not been employed by another unit of State government after
first being employed by the Department.

(c) (1) Subject to paragraphs (2) through (4) of this subsection, a member
described under subsection (b) of this section is entitled to eligibility and service credit for
periods of employment with the Department as a contractual employee.

(2) Eligibility and service credit provided under this section may not exceed
10 years.

(3) A member shall receive eligibility and service credit under this section
by completing a claim for the credit on a form that the Board of Trustees provides and filing
it with the Board of Trustees by December 31, 2024.

(4) (i) Except as provided under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, a
member receiving credit under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall, prior to retirement,
deposit into the annuity savings fund the member contributions that would have been due
for the period of employment for which the member receives credit under this section if the
member had been enrolled in the Employees’ Pension System, plus regular interest on those
contributions.

(ii) If a member does not deposit the amounts required under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the member’s retirement allowance shall be reduced by

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 669 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the actuarial equivalent of the accumulated contributions not paid under subparagraph (i)
of this paragraph, with regular interest to the date of retirement.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~July~~
~~1,~~ ~~2024.~~

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 6 months and, at the end
of December 31, 2024, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4