START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 635 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 635 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages - Performing Arts Nonprofit Organization 
License 
 
  
This bill establishes a performing arts nonprofit organization beer, wine, and liquor license 
in Harford County. The Harford County Board of License Commissioners may issue the 
license for use on the premises of a performing arts nonprofit organization. The annual 
license fee is $750. The bill also establishes recordkeeping and reporting requirements for 
license holders and penalty provisions, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Harford County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2025, to the extent that 
performing arts nonprofit organization licenses are issued and penalties are collected under 
the bill. Harford County can handle any additional enforcement activities with existing 
resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Performing arts nonprofit organization” means a nonprofit organization 
that organizes the production of plays, acts, dramas, concerts, or similar events by 
individuals performing on a stage or the showing of films. The license authorizes the holder 
to sell or serve beer, wine, and liquor at retail for on-premises consumption at up to three 
locations designated at the time of application.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 635/ Page 2 
The locations designated at the time of application must (1) be suitable for the production 
of plays, acts, dramas, concerts, or similar events by individuals performing on a stage or 
the showing of films and (2) meet any other requirements established by the board. The 
license holder may alter the authorized locations each time the license is renewed. 
 
The license holder may sell or serve beer, wine, and liquor (1) one hour before and after a 
performance; (2) during a performance; (3) during an intermission; and (4) during a 
reception within one hour before or after a performance. The license holder must serve or 
offer for sale snacks at all times when beer, wine, and liquor are sold.  
 
The bill establishes various record, bookkeeping, and reporting requirements for license 
holders. In addition, the bill authorizes the Comptroller’s Office to immediately suspend 
for a maximum of 30 days the license of a license holder who fails to comply with these 
requirements, as specified. 
 
If a report required by the bill or an investigation conducted by specific individuals 
indicates that the license holder violated the bill’s requirements, the Harford County Board 
of License Commissioners must summon the license holder and conduct a hearing. 
Violators are subject to a fine between $250 and $2,000 and may have their license 
suspended or revoked. 
 
This license is nontransferable. The license holder must purchase beer, wine, and liquor 
from an authorized licensed wholesaler.  
 
Issuance of a performing arts nonprofit organization license does not prohibit the board 
from issuing a Class C per diem license that applies to the performing arts nonprofit 
organization for an event outside the scope of the license.  
 
Current Law:  In Harford County, there are Class C per diem beer and wine and Class C 
per diem beer, wine, and liquor licenses that may be issued to nonprofit organizations, as 
specified.  
 
Chapters 397 and 398 of 2023 established a performing arts theater beer and wine license 
in Harford County that the board may issue for use on the premises of a performing arts 
theater operated by a nonprofit organization, as specified. 
 
Local Revenues:  Harford County revenues increase by $750 for each performing arts 
nonprofit organization beer, wine, and liquor license issued under the bill. Harford County 
estimates that it will issue one license beginning in fiscal 2025; therefore, Harford County 
revenues increase by at least $750 from license fees beginning in fiscal 2025. In addition, 
Harford County revenues may increase to the extent penalties are collected under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 635/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 734 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3