START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

Chapter 525

(House Bill 605)

AN ACT concerning

Motor Vehicles – Recreational Vehicle Dealer Agreements

FOR the purpose of requiring recreational vehicle dealers to hold a dealer agreement with
a recreational vehicle manufacturer to sell the manufacturer’s recreational vehicles
in the State; establishing licensing requirements for a recreational vehicle
manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch; altering the required terms and
conditions of a recreational dealer agreement, including terms and conditions related
to termination and nonrenewal of an agreement, transfer of dealer ownership,
warranty obligations, dealer inspection and rejection of recreational vehicles, and
prohibited acts, dispute resolution, and penalties; and generally relating to
recreational vehicle dealer agreements.

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 15–201.1; and 15–1001 through 15–1015 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 10. Recreational Vehicle Dealer Agreements”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

15–201.1.

THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT APPLY TO MANUFACTURERS OR DISTRIBUTORS OF,
OR FACTORY BRANCHES FOR, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

SUBTITLE 10. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE DEALER AGREEMENTS.

15–1001.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “AREA OF SALES” MEANS THE GEOGRAPHICAL AREA AGREED TO BY THE
DEALER AND THE MANUFACTURER IN AN AGREEMENT THAT GRANTS THE DEALER

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO DISPLAY OR SELL THE MANUFACTURER’S NEW
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OF A PARTICULAR LINE–MAKE.

(C) (1) “COERCE” MEANS TO COMPEL OR ATTEMPT TO COMPEL AN
ACTION OR INACTION BY THREAT OF HARM, BREACH OF CONTRACT, OR OTHER
ADVERSE ACTION OR CONSEQUENCES.

(2) “COERCE” INCLUDES THREATENING TO TERMINATE, CANCEL, OR
NOT RENEW A DEALER AGREEMENT WITHOUT GOOD CAUSE, OR HOLD OR DELAY
PRODUCT DELIVERY AS AN INDUCEMENT TO AMEND THE DEALER AGREEMENT.

(D) “DEALER” MEANS ANY PERSON LICENSED OR REQUIRED TO BE
LICENSED TO SELL RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

(E) “DEALER AGREEMENT” MEANS A WRITTEN AGREEMENT OR CONTRACT
ENTERED INTO BETWEEN A DEALER AND A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR:

(1) THAT STATES THE RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE
PARTIES; AND

(2) UNDER WHICH THE DEALER MAY SELL NEW RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES.

(F) “DISTRIBUTOR” MEANS ANY PERSON THAT PURCHASES NEW
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES FOR RESALE TO DEALERS.

(G) “FACTORY BRANCH” MEANS A BRANCH OFFICE OF A MANUFACTURER
FROM WHICH THE MANUFACTURER:

(1) SELLS OR PROMOTES SALES OF A PARTICULAR BRAND OR MAKE
OF NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLES TO DEALERS IN THE STATE;

(2) DIRECTS AND SUPERVISES THE MANUFACTURER’S
REPRESENTATIVES IN THE STATE; OR

(3) SUPERVISES OR CONTACTS DEALERS OR PROSPECTIVE DEALERS
IN THE STATE.

(H) “FACTORY CAMPAIGN” MEANS AN EFFORT ON THE PART OF A
WARRANTOR TO CONTACT RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OWNERS OR DEALERS TO
ADDRESS A PART OR EQUIPMENT ISSUE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(I) “FAMILY MEMBER” MEANS A SPOUSE, CHILD, GRANDCHILD, PARENT,
SIBLING, NIECE, OR NEPHEW, OR A SPOUSE OF A CHILD, GRANDCHILD, PARENT,
SIBLING, NIECE, OR NEPHEW.

(J) “LICENSE” MEANS A MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY
BRANCH LICENSE ISSUED BY THE ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(K) “LINE–MAKE” MEANS A SPECIFIC SERIES OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
THAT:

(1) IS TARGETED TO A PARTICULAR MARKET SEGMENT, AS
DETERMINED BY ITS DECOR, FEATURES, EQUIPMENT, SIZE, WEIGHT, AND PRICE
RANGE;

(2) HAS LENGTHS AND INTERIOR FLOOR PLANS THAT DISTINGUISH
THE RECREATIONAL VEHICLES FROM OTHER SIMILAR MODELS; AND

(3) BELONGS TO A SINGLE DISTINCT CLASSIFICATION OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PRODUCT TYPE THAT HAS A SUBSTANTIAL DEGREE OF
COMMONALITY IN THE CONSTRUCTION, CHASSIS, FRAME, AND BODY STYLE.

(L) “MANUFACTURER” MEANS ANY PERSON ENGAGED IN THE
MANUFACTURING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

(M) “MODEL” MEANS A SERIES OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PRODUCTS
IDENTIFIED BY A COMMON SERIES TRADE NAME OR TRADEMARK.

(N) “PROPRIETARY PART” MEANS ANY PART MANUFACTURED BY OR FOR
THE MANUFACTURER OR SOLD EXCLUSIVELY BY THE MANUFACTURER.

(O) (1) “RECREATIONAL VEHICLE” MEANS A VEHICLE THAT IS:

(I) EITHER SELF–PROPELLED OR TOWED BY A TOW VEHICLE;
AND

(II) DESIGNED TO PROVIDE TEMPORARY LIVING QUARTERS
FOR RECREATIONAL, CAMPING, OR TRAVEL USE.

(2) “RECREATIONAL VEHICLE” INCLUDES:

(I) A MOTOR HOME;

(II) A TRAVEL TRAILER;
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) A FIFTH–WHEEL TRAVEL TRAILER;

(IV) A TRUCK CAMPER; AND

(V) A FOLDING CAMPING TRAILER.

(P) “TRANSIENT CUSTOMER” MEANS A CUSTOMER WHO IS TEMPORARILY
TRAVELING THROUGH A DEALER’S AREA OF SALES.

(Q) (1) “WARRANTOR” MEANS ANY PERSON THAT GIVES A WARRANTY IN
CONNECTION WITH NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARTS, ACCESSORIES, OR
COMPONENTS.

(2) “WARRANTOR” DOES NOT INCLUDE SERVICE CONTRACTS,
INSURANCE, OR EXTENDED WARRANTIES SOLD FOR SEPARATE CONSIDERATION BY
A DEALER OR PERSON NOT AFFILIATED WITH A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR.

15–1002.

(A) A MANUFACTURER MAY NOT TRANSFER ANY NEW RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE TO ANY DEALER OR DISTRIBUTOR IN THE STATE UNLESS THE
MANUFACTURER IS LICENSED BY THE ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) A DISTRIBUTOR MAY NOT TRANSFER ANY NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
TO ANY DEALER IN THE STATE UNLESS THE DISTRIBUTOR IS LICENSED BY THE
ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) A PERSON MAY NOT CONDUCT THE BUSINESS OF A FACTORY BRANCH OF
A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE MANUFACTURER UNLESS THE PERSON IS LICENSED BY
THE ADMINISTRATION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

15–1003.

(A) IN ADDITION TO THE INFORMATION REQUIRED UNDER SUBTITLE 1 OF
THIS TITLE, EACH APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL
INCLUDE:

(1) THE ADDRESS OF THE PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS OF THE
APPLICANT;

(2) THE ADDRESS OF EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS FROM WHICH THE
APPLICANT WILL MAKE SUBSTANTIAL CONTACTS WITH DEALERS IN THE STATE; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(3) THE NATURE OF THE BUSINESS TO BE CONDUCTED AT EACH
ADDRESS.

(B) EACH APPLICANT FOR A LICENSE SHALL SUBMIT AS PART OF THE
APPLICATION:

(1) A COPY OF EACH FORM FOR ANY NEW VEHICLE WARRANTY
CURRENTLY PROVIDED OR OFFERED BY THE APPLICANT;

(2) A COPY OF EACH FRANCHISE CONTRACT AND ANY OTHER
CONTRACT WITH DEALERS USED BY THE APPLICANT, TOGETHER WITH A LIST OF
DEALERS IN THE STATE WHO HOLD A FRANCHISE FROM THE APPLICANT;

(3) A COPY OF THE VEHICLE PREPARATION AND DELIVERY
OBLIGATIONS OF THE DEALERS DESCRIBED IN ITEM (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(4) A STATEMENT OF THE COMPENSATION STRUCTURE THE
APPLICANT AGREES TO PAY A DEALER FOR PARTS SUPPLIED AND WORK DONE BY A
DEALER UNDER:

(I) THE PREPARATION AND DELIVERY OBLIGATIONS OF THE
DEALER; OR

(II) ANY OUTSTANDING EXPRESS OR IMPLIED NEW
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE WARRANTY.

15–1004.

(A) EACH LICENSEE SHALL PAY AN ANNUAL FEE TO THE ADMINISTRATION
FOR EACH LICENSE YEAR OR PART OF A LICENSE YEAR FOR WHICH THE LICENSE IS
ISSUED.

(B) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE FOR A MANUFACTURER OR A DISTRIBUTOR
SHALL BE ESTABLISHED BY THE ADMINISTRATION BASED ON THE COMBINED
NUMBER OF NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLES TRANSFERRED BY THE MANUFACTURER
OR DISTRIBUTOR TO DEALERS IN THE STATE DURING THE PRECEDING LICENSE
YEAR.

(C) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE FOR A FACTORY BRANCH SHALL BE
ESTABLISHED BY THE ADMINISTRATION.

15–1005.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) AFTER THE ADMINISTRATION NOTIFIES A MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR OF NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OF THE APPROVAL OF AN
APPLICATION FOR A LICENSE AND BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATION ISSUES A
LICENSE, THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL FILE WITH THE
ADMINISTRATION A SURETY BOND IN THE FORM AND WITH THE SURETY THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION REQUIRES.

(B) (1) THE AMOUNT OF THE SURETY BOND SHALL BE BASED ON THE
NUMBER OF NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLES TRANSFERRED BY THE MANUFACTURER
OR DISTRIBUTOR TO DEALERS IN THE STATE DURING THE PRECEDING LICENSE
YEAR, AS FOLLOWS:

(I) IF 1 TO 50 VEHICLES WERE TRANSFERRED, A $25,000
SURETY BOND;

(II) IF 51 TO 500 VEHICLES WERE TRANSFERRED, A $50,000
SURETY BOND;

(III) IF 501 TO 10,000 VEHICLES WERE TRANSFERRED, A
$100,000 SURETY BOND; AND

(IV) IF MORE THAN 10,000 VEHICLES WERE TRANSFERRED, A
$300,000 SURETY BOND.

(2) EACH SURETY BOND SHALL CONTINUOUSLY MAINTAIN THE
AMOUNT SPECIFIED IN THIS SUBSECTION.

(3) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR NEED NOT FILE MORE THAN
ONE BOND REGARDLESS OF THE NUMBER OF MAKES OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
MANUFACTURED OR DISTRIBUTED.

15–1006.

A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSEE TO
CONDUCT THE BUSINESS OF A MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY
BRANCH DURING THE LICENSE YEAR FOR WHICH IT IS ISSUED.

15–1007.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “GOOD FAITH” MEANS HONESTY IN FACT AND THE
OBSERVANCE OF REASONABLE COMMERCIAL STANDARDS OF FAIR DEALING IN THE
TRADE.

(B) A MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY BRANCH, WHETHER
DIRECTLY OR THROUGH AN AGENT, AN EMPLOYEE, OR A REPRESENTATIVE, MAY NOT
FAIL TO ACT IN GOOD FAITH:

(1) IN ACTING OR PURPORTING TO ACT UNDER THE TERMS,
PROVISIONS, OR CONDITIONS OF ANY FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; OR

(2) IN ANY TRANSACTION OR CONDUCT GOVERNED BY THIS
SUBTITLE.

15–1008.

(A) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR MAY NOT SELL A NEW
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE IN THE STATE TO OR THROUGH A DEALER WITHOUT
HAVING FIRST ENTERED INTO A WRITTEN DEALER AGREEMENT THAT HAS BEEN
SIGNED BY BOTH PARTIES.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS SPECIFIED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE MANUFACTURER SHALL DESIGNATE THE DURATION OF THE DEALER
AGREEMENT AND THE AREA OF SALES EXCLUSIVELY ASSIGNED TO A DEALER IN THE
DEALER AGREEMENT AND MAY NOT MAKE CHANGES TO THE TERMS SPECIFIED IN
THE AGREEMENT.

(2) THE TERMS SPECIFIED IN THE DEALER AGREEMENT MAY BE
ALTERED WITH WRITTEN MUTUAL CONSENT OF BOTH PARTIES.

(C) A DEALER MAY NOT SELL A NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLE IN THE STATE
UNLESS:

(1) THE DEALER IS LICENSED BY THE ADMINISTRATION UNDER
SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS TITLE;

(2) THE DEALER HAS ENTERED INTO A DEALER AGREEMENT; AND

(3) THE DEALER IS SELLING WITHIN THE AREA OF SALES
DESIGNATED IN THE DEALER AGREEMENT.

(D) (1) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL DISTRIBUTE
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES TO ITS DEALERS IN A FAIR AND EQUITABLE MANNER.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) ON REQUEST, A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL
PROVIDE INFORMATION ON ITS MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION TO DEALERS.

(E) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL PROVIDE ADEQUATE
REPAIR INSTRUCTIONS TO ITS LICENSED DEALERS TO FACILITATE THE DEALERS
PERFORMING PROPER SERVICE AND REPAIRS ON RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

15–1009.

(A) (1) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR MAY TERMINATE, CANCEL,
OR FAIL TO RENEW A MODEL, LINE–MAKE, OR DEALER AGREEMENT WITH A DEALER
ONLY FOR GOOD CAUSE.

(2) (I) THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR HAS THE BURDEN
OF SHOWING GOOD CAUSE FOR THE TERMINATION OR CANCELLATION OF OR
FAILURE TO RENEW A MODEL, LINE–MAKE, OR DEALER AGREEMENT WITH A
DEALER.

(II) THE DETERMINATION OF GOOD CAUSE SHALL BE BASED ON:

1. THE EXTENT OF THE DEALER’S PENETRATION INTO
THE RELEVANT MARKET AREA FOR THE RELEVANT MODEL OR LINE–MAKE;

2. THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE DEALER’S
INVESTMENT IN THE DEALER’S BUSINESS;

3. THE ADEQUACY OF THE DEALER’S SERVICE
FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT, PARTS, SUPPLIES, AND PERSONNEL;

4. THE EFFECT OF THE PROPOSED ACTION ON THE
COMMUNITY;

5. THE EXTENT AND QUALITY OF THE DEALER’S SERVICE
UNDER RECREATIONAL VEHICLE WARRANTIES;

6. ANY FAILURE OF THE DEALER TO FOLLOW
AGREED–ON PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS RELATED TO THE OVERALL OPERATION
OF THE DEALERSHIP CONSISTENT WITH THE LAW AND THE DEALER AGREEMENT;
AND

7. THE DEALER’S PERFORMANCE UNDER THE TERMS OF
THE DEALER AGREEMENT.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(B) ON RENEWAL OF A DEALER AGREEMENT, A MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR MAY NOT REQUIRE ADDITIONAL INVENTORY STOCKING
REQUIREMENTS OR INCREASED SALES TARGETS IN EXCESS OF THE MARKET
GROWTH IN THE DEALER’S AREA OF SALES.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED IN THIS SUBSECTION, A
MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL PROVIDE A DEALER WITH WRITTEN
NOTICE AT LEAST 120 DAYS BEFORE THE TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR
NONRENEWAL OF A MODEL, LINE–MAKE, OR DEALER AGREEMENT.

(2) THE NOTICE SHALL STATE ALL REASONS FOR THE PROPOSED
TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL.

(3) (I) WITHIN 30 DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT OF THE NOTICE, A
DEALER MAY PROVIDE WRITTEN NOTICE OF INTENT TO RECTIFY ALL CLAIMED
DEFICIENCIES.

(II) IF THE DEFICIENCIES ARE RECTIFIED BY THE DEALER
WITHIN 120 DAYS FOLLOWING THE NOTICE OF INTENT TO RECTIFY, THE
MANUFACTURER’S OR DISTRIBUTOR’S NOTICE OF TERMINATION IS VOID.

(III) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (5) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF A
DEALER FAILS TO PROVIDE TIMELY WRITTEN NOTICE OF INTENT TO RECTIFY OR
FAILS TO RECTIFY WITHIN 120 DAYS AFTER NOTICE OF INTENT TO RECTIFY, THE
TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL OF THE DEALER AGREEMENT
SHALL TAKE EFFECT.

(4) THE 120–DAY NOTICE PERIOD SHALL BE REDUCED TO 30 DAYS IF
THE TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL IS DUE TO:

(I) A DEALER OR ONE OF THE DEALER’S OWNERS BEING
CONVICTED OF, OR ENTERING A PLEA OF NOLO CONTENDERE TO, A FELONY;

(II) THE ABANDONMENT OR CLOSING OF THE BUSINESS
OPERATIONS OF THE DEALER FOR 10 CONSECUTIVE BUSINESS DAYS, UNLESS THE
CLOSING IS DUE TO A CAUSE THAT IS OUT OF THE DEALER’S CONTROL;

(III) A SIGNIFICANT MISREPRESENTATION BY A DEALER
MATERIALLY AFFECTING THE BUSINESS RELATIONSHIP; OR

(IV) A SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A DEALER’S LICENSE,
OR FAILURE BY A DEALER TO RENEW A DEALER’S LICENSE.
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) THE NOTICE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION DO NOT APPLY IF THE
REASON FOR TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL IS INSOLVENCY, THE
OCCURRENCE OF AN ASSIGNMENT FOR THE BENEFIT OF CREDITORS, OR
BANKRUPTCY.

(D) (1) A DEALER MAY TERMINATE, CANCEL, OR NOT RENEW A MODEL, A
LINE–MAKE, OR THE DEALER AGREEMENT WITH A MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR WITH OR WITHOUT GOOD CAUSE AT ANY TIME BY GIVING 30 DAYS’
WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR.

(2) (I) IF THE TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL
OF THE MODEL, LINE–MAKE, OR DEALER AGREEMENT IS FOR GOOD CAUSE, THE
DEALER HAS THE BURDEN OF SHOWING GOOD CAUSE.

(II) A DETERMINATION OF GOOD CAUSE MAY BE BASED ON:

1. A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR BEING
CONVICTED OF, OR ENTERING A PLEA OF NOLO CONTENDERE TO, A FELONY;

2. THE BUSINESS OPERATIONS HAVING BEEN
ABANDONED OR CLOSED FOR 10 CONSECUTIVE DAYS, UNLESS THE CLOSING IS DUE
TO A CAUSE THAT IS OUT OF THE CONTROL OF THE MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR;

3. A SIGNIFICANT MISREPRESENTATION BY THE
MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR THAT MATERIALLY AFFECTS THE BUSINESS
RELATIONSHIP;

4. A DECLARATION BY THE MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR OF INSOLVENCY, THE OCCURRENCE OF AN ASSIGNMENT FOR THE
BENEFIT OF CREDITORS, OR BANKRUPTCY;

5. A MANUFACTURER’S OR DISTRIBUTOR’S MATERIAL
VIOLATION OF THE DEALER AGREEMENT THAT IS NOT CURED WITHIN 120 DAYS
AFTER WRITTEN NOTICE BY THE DEALER;

6. A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR COERCING OR
ATTEMPTING TO COERCE A DEALER;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

7. A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR VIOLATING AN
AREA OF SALES PROTECTION OR ALLOWING OTHER DEALERS TO VIOLATE AN AREA
OF SALES PROTECTION; OR

8. A MATERIAL VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION THAT IS
NOT CURED WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE VIOLATION BY THE
DEALER.

(E) IF THE DEALER AGREEMENT IS TERMINATED, CANCELED, OR NOT
RENEWED BY THE DEALER FOR GOOD CAUSE, WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE
TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL, THE MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR SHALL, AT REQUEST OF THE DEALER, REPURCHASE:

(1) ALL NEW, UNALTERED, UNDAMAGED, AND UNTITLED
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES THAT WERE ACQUIRED FROM THE MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR WITHIN 18 MONTHS BEFORE THE TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR
NONRENEWAL, AT 100% OF THE INVOICE COST, INCLUDING TRANSPORTATION
COSTS, EXCEPT THAT IF ANY RECREATIONAL VEHICLE IS DAMAGED, THE AMOUNT
DUE TO THE DEALER SHALL BE REDUCED BY THE COST TO REPAIR THE DAMAGE;

(2) ALL NEW, UNDAMAGED ACCESSORIES AND PROPRIETARY PARTS
WITH THE ORIGINAL INVOICE SOLD TO THE DEALER FOR RESALE WITHIN 12 MONTHS
BEFORE THE TERMINATION, CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL OF THE DEALER
AGREEMENT, AT 105% OF THE DEALER’S ORIGINAL PRICE PAID; AND

(3) ANY PROPERLY FUNCTIONING DIAGNOSTIC EQUIPMENT,
SPECIALTY TOOLS, CURRENT SIGNAGE, OR OTHER EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY
THAT WAS PURCHASED WITHIN 5 YEARS BEFORE THE TERMINATION,
CANCELLATION, OR NONRENEWAL AND CAN NO LONGER BE USED IN THE NORMAL
COURSE OF BUSINESS, AT 100% OF THE DEALER’S ORIGINAL PRICE PAID, PLUS
FREIGHT, DESTINATION, DELIVERY, AND ANY APPLICABLE TAX.

(F) IF THE DEALER AGREEMENT IS TERMINATED, CANCELED, OR NOT
RENEWED BY THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR WITHOUT GOOD CAUSE, THE
MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL REPURCHASE DEALER INVENTORY AS
PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

(G) A DEALER IS NOT PROHIBITED FROM SELLING THE REMAINING
IN–STOCK INVENTORY OF A PARTICULAR MODEL OR LINE–MAKE AFTER A DEALER
AGREEMENT HAS BEEN TERMINATED, CANCELED, OR NOT RENEWED BY THE
MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) WHEN TAKING ON AN ADDITIONAL LINE–MAKE OF A RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE, A DEALER SHALL NOTIFY IN WRITING ANY MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR WITH WHOM THE DEALER HAS A DEALER AGREEMENT OF A SIMILAR
LINE–MAKE AT LEAST 30 DAYS BEFORE ENTERING INTO A DEALER AGREEMENT FOR
THE ADDITIONAL LINE–MAKE.

15–1010.

(A) (1) IF A DEALER DESIRES TO MAKE A TRANSFER IN OWNERSHIP BY
SALE OF THE BUSINESS ASSETS, STOCK TRANSFER, OR ANY OTHER METHOD, THE
DEALER SHALL GIVE A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR THAT HAS ENTERED INTO
A DEALER AGREEMENT WITH THE DEALER WRITTEN NOTICE AT LEAST 10 BUSINESS
DAYS BEFORE THE TRANSFER, INCLUDING ALL SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AS
MAY BE REASONABLY REQUIRED BY THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR TO
DETERMINE WHETHER AN OBJECTION TO THE TRANSFER MAY BE MADE.

(2) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR MAY NOT OBJECT TO THE
PROPOSED TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP UNLESS THE PROSPECTIVE TRANSFEREE:

(I) HAS BEEN TERMINATED FOR CAUSE BY THE
MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR;

(II) HAS BEEN CONVICTED OF A FELONY OR ANY CRIME OF
MORAL TURPITUDE;

(III) LACKS ANY DEALER LICENSE REQUIRED BY LAW;

(IV) LACKS AN ACTIVE LINE OF CREDIT SUFFICIENT TO
PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURER’S OR DISTRIBUTOR’S PRODUCT; OR

(V) HAS UNDERGONE BANKRUPTCY, INSOLVENCY, A GENERAL
ASSIGNMENT FOR THE BENEFIT OF CREDITORS, OR THE APPOINTMENT OF A
RECEIVER, TRUSTEE, OR CONSERVATOR TO TAKE POSSESSION OF THE
TRANSFEREE’S BUSINESS PROPERTY.

(B) (1) IF THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR OBJECTS TO A
PROPOSED CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR SHALL
GIVE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE DEALER WITHIN 7 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER RECEIPT
OF THE DEALER’S NOTIFICATION AND COMPLETE DOCUMENTATION.

(2) IF THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR DOES NOT GIVE TIMELY
NOTICE OF THE OBJECTION, THE TRANSFER SHALL BE DEEMED APPROVED.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(C) (1) A DEALER SHALL HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO DESIGNATE, IN
WRITING, A FAMILY MEMBER AS A SUCCESSOR TO THE DEALER’S BUSINESS IN THE
EVENT OF DEATH, INCAPACITY, OR RETIREMENT OF THE DEALER.

(2) A MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR MAY OBJECT TO THE
SUCCESSOR WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE DEALER’S
SUCCESSION PLAN ONLY IF THE SUCCESSOR:

(I) WAS CONVICTED OF A FELONY OR CRIME OF MORAL
TURPITUDE;

(II) DECLARED BANKRUPTCY OR INSOLVENCY WITHIN THE
PREVIOUS 10 YEARS;

(III) LACKS AN ACTIVE LINE OF CREDIT SUFFICIENT TO
PURCHASE THE MANUFACTURER’S OR DISTRIBUTOR’S PRODUCT;

(IV) LACKS ANY DEALER’S LICENSE REQUIRED BY LAW; OR

(V) WOULD CAUSE OR HAS CAUSED A BREACH OF THE DEALER
AGREEMENT.

15–1011.

(A) (1) EACH WARRANTOR SHALL:

(I) SPECIFY IN WRITING EACH DEALER’S OBLIGATIONS FOR
PREPARATION, DELIVERY, AND WARRANTY SERVICE FOR THE WARRANTOR’S
PRODUCTS;

(II) COMPENSATE THE DEALER FOR WARRANTY SERVICE
PERFORMED BY THE DEALER THAT IS COVERED BY THE WARRANTY; AND

(III) PROVIDE THE DEALER A SCHEDULE OF COMPENSATION TO
BE PAID AND THE REASONABLE TIME ALLOWANCE FOR THE PERFORMANCE OF ANY
SERVICE AND REPAIRS UNDER A WARRANTY.

(2) IF THE SCHEDULE OF COMPENSATION DOES NOT INCLUDE A
PARTICULAR SERVICE OR REPAIR, A WARRANTOR SHALL REIMBURSE THE DEALER
A REASONABLE AMOUNT FOR THE SERVICE OR REPAIR.

(B) (1) A WARRANTOR SHALL REIMBURSE THE DEALER FOR ANY
WARRANTY PART AT WHOLESALE COST PLUS A 30% HANDLING CHARGE.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE MAXIMUM HANDLING CHARGE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION IS
$300.

(3) A WARRANTOR SHALL REIMBURSE A DEALER THE COST OF
FREIGHT TO RETURN A WARRANTY PART, AN ACCESSORY, OR A COMPONENT TO THE
WARRANTOR, IF THE RETURN IS REQUESTED BY THE WARRANTOR.

(C) WARRANTY AUDITS OF DEALER RECORDS MAY BE CONDUCTED BY THE
WARRANTOR ON A REASONABLE BASIS.

(D) (1) A DEALER SHALL SUBMIT A WARRANTY CLAIM WITHIN 45 DAYS
AFTER COMPLETING THE WORK.

(2) A WARRANTOR MAY DISAPPROVE WARRANTY CLAIMS ONLY IN
WRITING WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE DATE THE WARRANTY CLAIM WAS SUBMITTED
BY THE DEALER IN THE MANNER PRESCRIBED BY THE WARRANTOR.

(3) CLAIMS NOT DISAPPROVED IN WRITING WITHIN 45 DAYS SHALL
BE DEEMED TO BE APPROVED AND SHALL BE PAID BY THE WARRANTOR WITHIN 60
DAYS.

(E) A DEALER SHALL GIVE NOTICE TO A WARRANTOR AS SOON AS
REASONABLY POSSIBLE IF THE DEALER IS UNABLE OR UNWILLING TO PERFORM
MATERIAL OR REPETITIVE WARRANTY REPAIRS.

(F) IT IS A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION FOR ANY WARRANTOR TO:

(1) FAIL TO PERFORM ANY OF ITS WARRANTY OBLIGATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO ITS WARRANTED PRODUCTS;

(2) FAIL TO INCLUDE WRITTEN NOTICES OF FACTORY CAMPAIGNS TO
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OWNERS AND DEALERS FOR THE EXPECTED DATE BY
WHICH PARTS AND EQUIPMENT WILL BE AVAILABLE TO DEALERS TO PERFORM THE
CAMPAIGN WORK;

(3) IF THE CARRIER IS DESIGNATED BY THE MANUFACTURER,
DISTRIBUTOR, OR WARRANTOR, FAIL TO COMPENSATE A DEALER FOR AUTHORIZED
REPAIRS PERFORMED BY A DEALER FOR A PRODUCT DAMAGED IN TRANSIT TO THE
DEALER;

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(4) FAIL TO COMPENSATE ANY DEALER FOR AUTHORIZED WARRANTY
SERVICE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TIME ALLOWANCES SET FORTH IN THE
SCHEDULE OF COMPENSATION, IF PERFORMED IN A TIMELY MANNER;

(5) INTENTIONALLY MISREPRESENT TO PURCHASERS OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES THAT A DEALER IS A WARRANTOR OR CO–WARRANTOR;
OR

(6) REQUIRE A DEALER TO MAKE WARRANTIES TO CUSTOMERS IN
ANY MANNER RELATED TO THE MANUFACTURING OF A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.

(G) IT IS A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION FOR A DEALER TO:

(1) FAIL TO PERFORM PREDELIVERY INSPECTION FUNCTIONS AS
SPECIFIED BY THE WARRANTOR;

(2) FAIL TO PERFORM WARRANTY SERVICE WORK AUTHORIZED BY
THE WARRANTOR IN A REASONABLY TIMELY MANNER ON ANY TRANSIENT
CUSTOMER’S RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OF THE SAME LINE–MAKE;

(3) FAIL TO TRACK ACTUAL TIME EXPENDED TO PERFORM WARRANTY
WORK NOT GOVERNED BY TIME ALLOWANCE IN THE SCHEDULE OF COMPENSATION;

(4) CLAIM AN AGENCY RELATIONSHIP WITH A WARRANTOR; OR

(5) MISREPRESENT THE TERMS OF A WARRANTY.

(H) UNLESS SPECIFIED IN THE TERMS OF A DEALER AGREEMENT, IT IS A
VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION FOR:

(1) A WARRANTOR TO FAIL TO INDEMNIFY, DEFEND, AND HOLD
HARMLESS A DEALER AGAINST ANY LOSSES OR DAMAGES TO THE EXTENT THE
LOSSES OR DAMAGES ARE CAUSED BY THE NEGLIGENCE OR MISCONDUCT OF THE
WARRANTOR; OR

(2) A DEALER TO FAIL TO INDEMNIFY, DEFEND, AND HOLD HARMLESS
A WARRANTOR AGAINST ANY LOSSES OR DAMAGES TO THE EXTENT THE LOSSES OR
DAMAGES ARE CAUSED BY THE NEGLIGENCE OR MISCONDUCT OF THE DEALER.

(I) INDEMNIFICATION UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE COURT
COSTS, REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES, AND EXPERT WITNESS FEES INCURRED BY
THE DEFENDING PARTY.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

15–1012.

(A) WHEN A NEW RECREATIONAL VEHICLE IS DAMAGED BEFORE TRANSIT
TO THE DEALER, OR IS DAMAGED IN TRANSIT TO THE DEALER AND THE
MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRANSIT, THE DEALER
SHALL:

(1) NOTIFY THE MANUFACTURER OR DISTRIBUTOR OF THE DAMAGE
WITHIN THE TIME FRAME SPECIFIED IN THE DEALER AGREEMENT;

(2) REQUEST AUTHORIZATION TO REPLACE THE COMPONENTS,
PARTS, OR ACCESSORIES DAMAGED; AND

(3) REJECT THE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE WITHIN 2 DAYS AFTER
PHYSICAL DELIVERY OF THE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.

(B) (1) IF A DEALER DETERMINES THAT A RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AT
THE TIME OF DELIVERY HAS AN UNREASONABLE AMOUNT OF MILES ON THE
ODOMETER, THE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE MAY BE SUBJECT TO REJECTION BY THE
DEALER AND REVERSION OF THE RECREATIONAL VEHICLE TO THE MANUFACTURER
OR DISTRIBUTOR.

(2) A DEALER MAY NOT DEEM LESS THAN THE DISTANCE BETWEEN
THE DEALER AND THE MANUFACTURER’S FACTORY OR A DISTRIBUTOR’S POINT OF
DISTRIBUTION, AS APPROPRIATE, PLUS 100 MILES AS AN UNREASONABLE AMOUNT
OF MILES.

15–1013.

(A) A MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY BRANCH, WHETHER
DIRECTLY OR THROUGH AN AGENT, AN EMPLOYEE, AN AFFILIATE, OR A
REPRESENTATIVE, MAY NOT COERCE OR ATTEMPT TO COERCE A DEALER TO:

(1) PURCHASE A PRODUCT THE DEALER DID NOT ORDER;

(2) ENTER INTO AN AGREEMENT WITH THE MANUFACTURER OR
DISTRIBUTOR;

(3) TAKE ACTION THAT IS UNFAIR OR UNREASONABLE TO THE
DEALER; OR

(4) FORGO EXERCISING A RIGHT AUTHORIZED BY A DEALER
AGREEMENT OR ANY LAW GOVERNING THE BUSINESS RELATIONSHIP.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 525

(B) A DEALER BEARS THE BURDEN OF PROOF REGARDING THE PROHIBITED
ACTS DESCRIBED IN THIS SECTION.

15–1014.

(A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY ADMINISTRATIVE OR CRIMINAL SANCTIONS
IMPOSED BY THIS SUBTITLE, IF A PERSON SUFFERS FINANCIAL INJURY OR OTHER
DAMAGE AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE BY ANY OTHER PERSON,
WHETHER OR NOT THAT OTHER PERSON HAS BEEN FOUND GUILTY OF A CRIMINAL
VIOLATION, THE INJURED PERSON MAY RECOVER DAMAGES AND REASONABLE
ATTORNEY’S FEES IN ANY COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION.

(B) (1) BEFORE BRINGING A CIVIL ACTION UNDER THIS SECTION, THE
PARTY BRINGING THE ACTION SHALL SERVE A WRITTEN DEMAND FOR MEDIATION
ON THE OFFENDING PARTY.

(2) THE PARTIES TO MEDIATION SHALL PAY THEIR OWN COSTS FOR
ATTORNEY’S FEES AND DIVIDE THE MEDIATOR COST EQUALLY.

(3) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO AN ACTION FOR
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.

(C) A DEALER, MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, FACTORY BRANCH, OR
WARRANTOR MAY APPLY FOR A GRANT OF INJUNCTIVE RELIEF FROM A VIOLATION
OF THIS SUBTITLE OR A REFUSAL TO COMPLY WITH A REQUIREMENT OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

15–1015.

(A) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY SUSPEND OR REVOKE ANY DEALER,
MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, OR FACTORY BRANCH LICENSE ON A FINDING THAT
A PARTY VIOLATED THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY IMPOSE A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 FOR
EACH VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) A DEALER, MANUFACTURER, DISTRIBUTOR, FACTORY BRANCH, OR
WARRANTOR IS ENTITLED TO A HEARING UNDER TITLE 12, SUBTITLE 2 OF THIS
ARTICLE TO CONTEST AN ACTION OR FINE IMPOSED UNDER THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 525 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18