START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 569

Chapter 569

(House Bill 601)

AN ACT concerning

Street Racing and Exhibition Driving – Prohibited Acts, Enforcement, and
Penalties

FOR the purpose of altering certain penalties and points assessments for certain motor
vehicle violations related to participation in a race or speed contest; prohibiting a
person from engaging in exhibition driving on any highway or private property that
is used for driving by the public; establishing certain affirmative defenses to a certain
charge of exhibition driving; and generally relating to prohibited acts and penalties
related to participation in a race or speed contest or engaging in exhibition driving.

BY repealing
Article – Transportation
Section 16–402(a)(22)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Transportation
Section 16–402(a)(23) through (33) and (34) through (43)
to be Section 16–402(a)(22) through (32) and (35) through (44), respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 16–402(a)(33), (34), (45), and (46) and 21–1116.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–1116 and 21–1132
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 16–402(a)(22) of Article – Transportation of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 16–402(a)(23)
through (33) and (34) through (43) of Article – Transportation of the Annotated Code of
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 569 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 16–402(a)(22) through (32) and (35) through (44),
respectively.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Transportation

16–402.

(a) After the conviction of an individual for a violation of Title 2, Subtitle 5, §
2–209, § 3–211, or § 10–110 of the Criminal Law Article, or of the vehicle laws or regulations
of this State or of any local authority, points shall be assessed against the individual as of
the date of violation and as follows:

(33) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (45) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
PARTICIPATING IN A RACE OR SPEED CONTEST ON A HIGHWAY……………....8 POINTS

(34) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (46) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
ENGAGING IN EXHIBITION DRIVING ON A HIGHWAY………………………….…8 POINTS

(45) PARTICIPATING IN A RACE OR SPEED CONTEST ON A HIGHWAY
RESULTING IN SERIOUS BODILY INJURY, AS DEFINED IN § 20–102(C) OF THIS
ARTICLE, TO ANOTHER PERSON………………………………………………….12 POINTS

(46) ENGAGING IN EXHIBITION DRIVING ON A HIGHWAY RESULTING IN
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY, AS DEFINED IN § 20–102(C) OF THIS ARTICLE, TO
ANOTHER PERSON…………………………………………………………………12 POINTS

21–1116.

(a) (1) Except as provided in § 21–1211 of this title, on any highway or on any
private property that is used by the public in general, a person may not drive a vehicle in a
race or speed contest, whether or not on a wager or for a prize or reward.

[(b)] (2) Except as provided in § 21–1211 of this title, a person may not
participate as a timekeeper or flagman in any race or speed contest specified in [subsection
(a) of this section] PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
PERSON CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION IS
SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 60 DAYS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING
$1,000 OR BOTH.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 569

[(c)] (2) A person convicted of a violation of subsection [(a)] (A)(1) of this section
that results in serious bodily injury to another person, as defined in § 20–102(c) of this
article, is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
both.

21–1116.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “EXHIBITION DRIVING” MEANS THE OPERATION OF A
MOTOR VEHICLE IN CLOSE PROXIMITY TO A CROWD OR GATHERING IN A MANNER
THAT INTENTIONALLY RESULTS IN TWO OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING:

(1) THE EXCESSIVE, ABRUPT ACCELERATION OR DECELERATION OF
THE MOTOR VEHICLE;

(2) THE SKIDDING, SQUEALING, BURNING, OR SMOKING OF THE
TIRES OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE;

(3) THE SWERVING OR SWAYING OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE FROM SIDE
TO SIDE WHILE SKIDDING ACCELERATING;

(4) (I) THE ENGINE OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE PRODUCING AN
UNREASONABLY LOUD, RAUCOUS, OR DISTURBING NOISE; OR

(5) (II) THE GRINDING OF THE GEARS OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE OR
THE BACKFIRING OF THE ENGINE OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE;

(6) (5) ANY OF THE WHEELS OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE LOSING
CONTACT WITH THE GROUND; OR

(7) (6) THE TRANSPORTATION OF A PASSENGER ON OR IN AN AREA
OF A MOTOR VEHICLE THAT IS NOT DESIGNED OR INTENDED FOR PASSENGER
TRANSPORT SUCH AS THE HOOD OR ROOF.

(B) ON ANY HIGHWAY OR ON ANY PRIVATE PROPERTY THAT IS USED FOR
DRIVING BY THE PUBLIC IN GENERAL, A PERSON MAY NOT ENGAGE IN EXHIBITION
DRIVING.

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
PERSON CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO
IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 60 DAYS OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 OR
BOTH.

(2) A PERSON CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION THAT
RESULTS IN SERIOUS BODILY INJURY TO ANOTHER PERSON, AS DEFINED IN §

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 569 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

20–102(C) OF THIS ARTICLE, IS SUBJECT TO IMPRISONMENT NOT EXCEEDING 1
YEAR OR A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 OR BOTH.

(D) A COURT MAY CONSIDER IN DEFENSE OF A CHARGE FOR EXHIBITION
DRIVING:

(1) WITH RESPECT TO ACTIVITY DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)(1)
OR (2) OF THIS SECTION, THAT THE INDIVIDUAL DRIVING THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ACTED IN A REASONABLE MANNER FOR SAFETY PURPOSES; OR

(2) WITH RESPECT TO ACTIVITY DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)(7)
(A)(6) OF THIS SECTION, THAT THE INDIVIDUAL DRIVING THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS
PARTICIPATING IN A PROPERLY PERMITTED PARADE AT THE TIME OF THE ALLEGED
VIOLATION.

21–1132.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Exhibition driving WITHIN A SPECIAL EVENT ZONE” means:

(i) The operation of a motor vehicle WITHIN A SPECIAL EVENT
ZONE in a manner that results in:

1. The excessive, abrupt acceleration or deceleration of the
motor vehicle;

2. The skidding, squealing, burning, or smoking of the tires
of the motor vehicle;

3. The swerving or swaying of the motor vehicle from side to
side while skidding;

4. The engine of the motor vehicle producing an
unreasonably loud, raucous, or disturbing noise;

5. The grinding of the gears of the motor vehicle or the
backfiring of the engine of the motor vehicle; or

6. Any of the wheels of the motor vehicle losing contact with
the ground; or

(ii) The transportation of a passenger WITHIN A SPECIAL EVENT
ZONE on or in an area of a motor vehicle that is not designed or intended for passenger
transport such as the hood or roof.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 569

(3) “Special event” means any automotive or motor vehicle event occurring
on or in close proximity to a highway that:

(i) Has been permitted or approved by a unit of local government; or

(ii) Is expected to have 1,000 or more individuals in attendance,
regardless of whether the event has been permitted or approved by a unit of local
government.

(4) (i) “Special event zone” means an area on or along a highway that
is marked by appropriate warning signs or other traffic control devices designating the area
as a special event zone, indicating that a special event is in progress, and stating that a
person who violates this section is subject to arrest.

(ii) “Special event zone” includes a parking structure, a parking lot,
a street, or any other property, private or public, immediately adjacent to the marked area
on or along the marked area.

(b) [This section applies only in Worcester County.

(c)] (1) The State Highway Administration may, on its own initiative or at the
request of a local authority:

(i) Designate an area on a State highway as a special event zone;
and

(ii) Reduce established speed limits in the special event zone after a
determination that the change is necessary to ensure public safety.

(2) A local authority may:

(i) Designate an area on a highway under its jurisdiction as a
special event zone; and

(ii) Reduce established speed limits in the special event zone after a
determination that the change is necessary to ensure public safety.

(3) A speed limit established under this subsection shall become effective
when posted.

[(d)] (C) A person may not engage in exhibition driving within a special event
zone.

[(e)] (D) A person may not commit any of the following violations within a
special event zone:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 569 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Driving a motor vehicle at a speed exceeding the posted speed limit;

(2) Negligent driving under § 21–901.1(b) of this title;

(3) Driving a motor vehicle in a race or speed contest under [§
21–1116(a)] § 21–1116(A)(1) of this subtitle that does not result in serious bodily injury
to another person, as defined in § 20–102(c) of this article;

(4) Participating in a race or speed contest under [§ 21–1116(b)]
§ 21–1116(A)(2) of this subtitle; or

(5) Skidding, spinning of wheels, or causing excessive noise under §
21–1117 of this subtitle.

[(f)] (E) (1) A person convicted of a violation of subsection [(d)] (C) of this
section is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 60 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
both.

(2) A person convicted of a violation of subsection [(e)] (D) of this section is
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.

(F) A COURT MAY CONSIDER IN DEFENSE OF A CHARGE FOR EXHIBITION
DRIVING WITHIN A SPECIAL EVENT ZONE:

(1) WITH RESPECT TO ACTIVITY DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION
(A)(2)(I)1 OR 2 OF THIS SECTION, THAT THE INDIVIDUAL DRIVING THE MOTOR
VEHICLE ACTED IN A REASONABLE MANNER FOR SAFETY PURPOSES; OR

(2) WITH RESPECT TO ACTIVITY DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION
(A)(2)(II) OF THIS SECTION, THAT THE INDIVIDUAL DRIVING THE MOTOR VEHICLE
~~WAS~~ ~~PARTICIPATING~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROPERLY~~ ~~PERMITTED~~ ~~PARADE~~ ~~AT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TIME~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
ALLEGED VIOLATION.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
the section affected.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6