START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 632 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 632 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County - Alcoholic Beverages Licenses - Golf Simulator Facility 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class GSF (golf simulator facility) alcoholic beverages license in 
Harford County and authorizes the Harford County Board of License Commissioners to 
issue a license for use by a golf simulator facility that is (1) open to the public; (2) features 
at least five golf simulator bays; and (3) has accommodations that are predominantly 
dedicated to golf simulator bays and seating for those bays. The license authorizes the 
licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption so long as the licensee 
offers food on site at all times when alcoholic beverages are being sold. The annual license 
fee is $1,500. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  Harford County revenues increase to the extent the board issues Class GSF 
licenses under the bill. Harford County can handle any additional enforcement activity with 
existing resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. To the extent that small business golf 
simulator facilities currently operate in Harford County, a facility that obtains an alcoholic 
beverages license may realize additional revenues from being able to sell beer, wine, and 
liquor on site under the bill. Moreover, by offering a new avenue for golf simulator 
facilities to generate revenues, the bill may incentivize a small business to open such a 
facility in the county. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 632/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An applicant for a Class GSF license must submit a floor plan or layout 
of the proposed licensed premises to the board. The floor plan or layout must illustrate that 
the proposed licensed premises is predominantly dedicated to golf simulator bays and has 
seating dedicated to those bays. 
 
Additionally, the bill specifies that a licensee’s annual gross sales from alcoholic beverages 
must not exceed 35% of the licensee’s annual gross sales. Golf simulator bay rental fees 
and food sales must comprise, respectively, at least 50% and 15% of the licensee’s annual 
gross sales. Before the board may renew a Class GSF alcoholic beverages license, the 
licensee must provide the board with an annual gross sales report showing that the licensee 
has met the specified minimum gross sales percentages for golf simulator bay rental fees 
and food sales and stayed under the specified maximum gross sales percentage for 
alcoholic beverages. 
 
Current Law:  In Harford County, the board is authorized to issue specified alcoholic 
beverages licenses, if certain conditions are met, for use by a range of different venues. 
Examples of such venues include movie theaters, golf course restaurants, public golf 
courses, and performing arts theaters.   
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Harford County advises that at least one small business is interested 
in applying for the Class GSF license. The annual license fee for a Class GSF license is 
$1,500. Accordingly, Harford County revenues increase by $1,500 in fiscal 2025 for each 
new license issued under the bill and $1,500 annually thereafter for each license renewal.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 736 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2