START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 761 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 761 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Montgomery County - School Bus Stops  
MC 6-24 
 
 
This bill prohibits, beginning December 31, 2026, a school bus stop from being located on 
any highway in Montgomery County with five or more undivided traffic lanes unless (1) a 
school crossing guard is posted at the school bus stop to assist students in crossing the 
highway or (2) a traffic control device that maintains a red signal while a student is 
boarding or exiting a school bus is placed at the school bus stop.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County revenues and expenditures may be affected beginning 
in FY 2026, as discussed below.    
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
          
Duty to Stop  
 
If a school vehicle stops on a roadway and is operating alternately flashing red lights, the 
driver of any other vehicle meeting or overtaking the school vehicle must stop at least 
20 feet from the rear of the school vehicle, if approaching from its rear, or at least 20 feet 
from the front of the school vehicle, if approaching the school vehicle from its front. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 761/ Page 2 
The driver of any vehicle meeting or overtaking the school bus may not proceed until the 
school vehicle resumes motion or the alternately flashing red lights are deactivated. The 
requirement does not apply to the driver of a vehicle on a divided highway, if the school 
vehicle is on a different roadway. 
 
A person convicted of a violation of either of these requirements is subject to a fine of up 
to $1,000. The prepayment penalty for either violation is $570, with three points assessed 
against the individual’s driver’s license. 
 
School Bus Monitoring Cameras  
 
A “school bus monitoring camera” is a camera placed on a school bus that is designed to 
capture a recorded image of a driver of a motor vehicle committing a violation. Local 
jurisdictions may use school bus monitoring camera systems if expressly authorized by the 
governing body. If authorized, a law enforcement agency, in consultation with the local 
board of education, may place school bus monitoring cameras on school buses in the 
county. A recorded image indicating a violation must include (1) an image of the motor 
vehicle; (2) an image of at least one of the motor vehicle’s registration plates; (3) the time 
and date of the violation; and (4) to the extent possible, the location of the violation. 
 
Unless the driver receives a citation from a police officer at the time of the violation, the 
owner of the vehicle is subject to a civil penalty if the vehicle is recorded by a school bus 
monitoring camera. (If the District Court finds that the person named in the citation – the 
owner – was not operating the vehicle at the time of the violation or receives evidence 
identifying the driver, the law enforcement agency may issue a citation to the operator of 
the vehicle instead.) The civil penalty may not exceed $500. The District Court must 
prescribe a uniform citation form and a civil penalty that may be paid if the person chooses 
to prepay the civil penalty without appearing in District Court. 
 
A law enforcement agency is authorized to mail a warning notice in place of a citation. 
 
From the fines collected, a political subdivision may recover the costs of implementing and 
administering the school bus monitoring cameras and may spend any remaining balance 
solely for public safety purposes, including pedestrian safety programs. 
   
Local Fiscal Effect:  Montgomery County reports that, during fiscal 2023, approximately 
42% of all school bus camera violations in the county were recorded for vehicles passing 
a stopped school bus in the opposite direction on a highway with four or more lanes. Under 
the bill, some portion of those citations may no longer be issued, as the bill prohibits a 
school bus stop on a highway with five or more undivided traffic lanes (unless a school 
crossing guard is posted or a traffic control device is placed, as specified).  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 761/ Page 3 
Thus, Montgomery County, by midyear in fiscal 2026, may need to either (1) hire 
additional crossing guards; (2) procure additional traffic control devices; or (3) relocate 
school bus stops to other locations in order to comply with the bill. While the exact impact 
on the county cannot be quantified at this time, the Department of Legislative Services 
advises that the costs may be significant, depending on the number of school bus stops in 
the county that meet the criteria established by the bill. In addition, to the extent school bus 
stops are moved to other locations, revenues from school bus monitoring cameras may be 
affected. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3