START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 577

Chapter 577

(House Bill 737)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Slow Moving Vehicles – Right–Hand Lane

FOR the purpose of repealing a certain provision of law that applies the requirement that
slow moving vehicles drive in the right–hand lane or lanes only to certain highways
in certain geographic areas; altering the standards under which the State Highway
Administration is required to inform drivers of the requirement; and generally
relating to slow moving vehicles.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–301(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–301.

(b) (1) On every roadway, except while overtaking and passing another vehicle
going in the same direction or when preparing for a lawful left turn, any vehicle going 10
miles per hour or more below the applicable maximum speed limit or, if any existing
conditions reasonably require a speed below that of the applicable maximum, at less than
the normal speed of traffic under these conditions, shall be driven in the right–hand lane
then available for traffic or as close as practicable to the right–hand curb or edge of the
roadway.

(2) (i) 1. [In this paragraph the following words have the meanings
indicated.

2. “Interstate highway” has the meaning stated in § 8–101(j)
of this article.

3. “Rural area” means an area outside the fixed boundaries
of an urban area as defined under § 8–507 of this article.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 577 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) 1. On an interstate highway located in a rural area, a] A
driver of a vehicle traveling slower than the general speed of traffic, if practicable as
determined by the driver, shall drive in the right–hand lane or lanes.

2. A. This paragraph establishes the policy of the State
and guidance with respect to the rules of the road.

B. A person may not be issued a citation for a violation of this
paragraph.

[(iii)] (II) The Administration shall include the requirement under
subparagraph [(ii)] (I) of this paragraph in the State’s driver education curriculum.

[(iv)] (III) The State Highway Administration shall inform drivers of
the requirement under subparagraph [(ii)] (I) of this paragraph:

1. By AT THE REQUEST OF A LOCAL JURISDICTION OR
ON ITS OWN INITIATIVE, BY placing and maintaining, IN ITS SOLE DISCRETION, signs
at regular intervals on appropriate STATE highways; and

2. Through the dynamic message sign system located
throughout the State, TO THE EXTENT AUTHORIZED BY FEDERAL LAW AND
REGULATIONS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2