START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 331

Chapter 331

(House Bill 709)

AN ACT concerning

Licensed Real Estate Brokers – Branch Offices – Designation of Managers

FOR the purpose of authorizing a licensed real estate broker to designate himself or herself
as the manager of a branch office maintained by the licensed real estate broker; and
generally relating to licensed real estate brokers and managers of branch offices.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 17–518
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

17–518.

(a) Subject to the provisions of this subtitle, a licensed real estate broker may
maintain branch offices in the State.

(b) A licensed real estate broker shall obtain a branch office certificate before the
broker may maintain a branch office in the State.

(c) (1) An applicant for a branch office certificate shall:

(i) submit to the Commission an application on the form that the
Commission provides;

(ii) submit to the Commission written notice of the identity of the
individual appointed as manager of the branch office under subsection (d) of this section;
and

(iii) pay to the Commission an application fee of $5.

(2) The Commission shall issue a branch office certificate to each licensed
real estate broker who meets the requirements of this section.

(d) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the licensed real estate
broker shall designate a manager, WHICH MAY BE THE BROKER, for each branch office of
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 331 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the broker.

(2) [The] IF THE LICENSED REAL ESTATE BROKER DESIGNATES
ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL AS A BRANCH OFFICE MANAGER, THE manager shall be:

(i) a licensed associate real estate broker;

(ii) a licensed real estate salesperson who has at least 3 years’
experience providing real estate brokerage services; or

(iii) a licensed real estate salesperson who:

1. has completed successfully a course in real estate
approved by the Commission for real estate brokers; and

2. has passed the real estate broker’s examination given by
the Commission under § 17–306 of this title.

(3) A licensed real estate salesperson seeking to qualify as a branch office
manager under paragraph (2)(iii) of this subsection shall submit to the Commission, before
taking the real estate broker’s examination, a commitment from the licensed real estate
broker proposing to engage the salesperson as a branch office manager.

(4) The manager shall have the responsibility to supervise the provision of
real estate brokerage services by the associate brokers and sales agents registered to that
office as provided for in § 17–320 of this title.

(e) (1) Unless a branch office certificate is renewed for a 2–year term as
provided in this subsection, the certificate expires on the first April 30 that comes:

(i) after the effective date of the certificate; and

(ii) in an even–numbered year.

(2) Before a branch office certificate expires, a licensed real estate broker
periodically may renew it for an additional 2–year term, if the broker:

(i) submits to the Commission a renewal application on the form
that the Commission provides accompanied by the license renewal application of the
manager of the branch office; and

(ii) pays to the Commission a renewal fee of $5.

(3) The Commission shall renew the branch office certificate of each
licensed real estate broker who meets the requirements of this section.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 331

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3