START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 732 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 732 
(Baltimore City Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore City – Control Over Powers of Police Commissioner 
 
 
This bill repeals the prohibition on an ordinance of Baltimore City or an act of any 
municipal officer from conflicting, impeding, obstructing, hindering, or interfering with 
the powers of the Baltimore City Police Commissioner. The bill is contingent on the 
passage of an amendment to the Charter of Baltimore City that provides for the 
appointment, terms of office, and the powers and duties of the Baltimore City Police 
Commissioner and the powers and duties of the Baltimore City Police Department (BPD) 
and its ratification by the voters of Baltimore City at the 2024 general election. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024, subject to the contingency described above. If such an 
amendment is ratified at the 2024 general election, the bill’s provisions take effect 
January 1, 2025. If such an amendment is not passed and ratified at the 2024 general 
election, the bill’s provisions are null and void. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Baltimore City finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 133 of 2021 established BPD as an agency and instrumentality of 
Baltimore City (rather than the State), contingent on the passage of an amendment to the 
Charter of Baltimore City that provides the transfer of control of BPD to Baltimore City 
and its ratification by the voters of Baltimore City at either the 2022 or the 2024 general 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 732/ Page 2 
election. Baltimore City voters approved the measure during the 2022 general election, and 
pursuant to Chapter 133, the transfer of control of BPD to the city occurred on  
January 1, 2023. For all actions arising out of acts, omissions, or events that occur on or 
after that date, BPD is considered an agency and instrumentality of Baltimore City. 
 
As a result of BPD being established as an agency and instrumentality of Baltimore City, 
the intent of Chapter 133 was that the mayor and the City Council of Baltimore City would 
be authorized to amend the law relating to BPD in order to implement policy changes. 
 
In January 2024, the Mayor of Baltimore City signed into law Ordinance 24-310, a 
proposed charter amendment establishing the objectives, powers, and duties of BPD and 
the powers and duties of the Baltimore City Police Commissioner. The proposed charter 
amendment must be submitted to the voters of Baltimore City in accordance with 
Article XI-A § 5 of the Maryland Constitution. A related ordinance (Ordinance 24-311), 
which was also signed into law in January 2024, establishes provisions relating to BPD and 
the Baltimore City Police Commissioner into the city’s code. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 853 and SB 758 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 894 (Senator Carter) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 10, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 10, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2