START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 720 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 720 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Carroll County – Deputy Clerk or Deputy Sheriff – Oath of Office 
 
 
This emergency bill requires that every deputy clerk or deputy sheriff in Carroll County 
take and sign the oath (or affirmation) of office prescribed by Article I, § 9 of the Maryland 
Constitution.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Carroll County operations or finances. 
      
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Every deputy clerk or deputy sheriff in Carroll County is required to take 
the oath/affirmation prescribed in the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. 
 
Montgomery County and Washington County are the only local jurisdictions that require 
every deputy clerk or deputy sheriff to take and sign the oath/affirmation of office 
prescribed by Article I, § 9 of the Maryland Constitution. 
 
In general, an oath or affirmation under Article I, § 9 of the Maryland Constitution is to 
swear/affirm to support the U.S. Constitution; be faithful and bear true allegiance to the 
State of Maryland and support its Constitution and laws; and, to the best of one’s skill and 
judgment, diligently and faithfully, without partiality or prejudice, execute the respective 
office, according to the Constitution and laws of the State.   
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 720/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1108 (Carroll County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2