START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

Chapter 608

(House Bill 749)

AN ACT concerning

Corporations and Associations – Definitions, Emergencies, and Outstanding
Stock – Revisions

FOR the purpose of altering certain definitions as they relate to certain Maryland business
entities; authorizing a corporation to adopt certain emergency bylaws; authorizing a
corporation to take certain actions during an emergency; limiting the liability of
certain persons for certain corporate acts taken during an emergency; clarifying
when certain stock is outstanding; and generally relating to corporations and
associations.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 1–101(a) and 2–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 1–101(w) and (x), 2–310, and 8–601.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 2–116 through 2–118
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Corporations and Associations

1–101.

(a) In this article, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following
words have the meanings indicated.

(w) “Principal office” means:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 608 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) The place in this State filed or recorded with the Department as the
principal office of a MARYLAND corporation, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, LIMITED
LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP, or [domestic] limited partnership; or

(2) If there is no principal office designated, the main office of the
MARYLAND corporation, LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY, LIMITED LIABILITY
PARTNERSHIP, or [domestic] limited partnership in this State for the transaction of
business.

(x) “Resident agent” means an individual residing in this State or a Maryland
corporation [or], limited liability company, OR LIMITED PARTNERSHIP whose name,
address, and designation as a resident agent are filed or recorded with the Department in
accordance with the provisions of this article.

2–101.

(a) Except as otherwise expressly provided by law, a corporation may be formed
under this title for any lawful purposes.

(b) If the purpose for which a corporation is organized or its form makes it subject
to a special provision of law, the corporation also shall comply with that provision.

2–116.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “EMERGENCY” MEANS A SITUATION IN WHICH A
QUORUM OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS CANNOT READILY BE ASSEMBLED BECAUSE
OF SOME CATASTROPHIC EVENT.

(B) (1) UNLESS THE CHARTER PROVIDES OTHERWISE, THE BYLAWS MAY
CONTAIN PROVISIONS TO BE EFFECTIVE ONLY DURING AN EMERGENCY.

(2) THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS MAY BE ADOPTED ONLY IN
ADVANCE OF AN EMERGENCY.

(3) THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS MAY MAKE ALL PROVISIONS
NECESSARY FOR MANAGING THE CORPORATION DURING AN EMERGENCY,
INCLUDING:

(I) PROCEDURES FOR CALLING A MEETING OF THE BOARD OF
DIRECTORS;

(II) QUORUM REQUIREMENTS FOR A MEETING; AND

(III) DESIGNATION OF ADDITIONAL OR SUBSTITUTE DIRECTORS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

(C) ALL PROVISIONS OF THE BYLAWS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH THE
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS REMAIN EFFECTIVE DURING AN EMERGENCY.

(D) ANY CORPORATE ACT TAKEN IN GOOD FAITH AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS:

(1) BINDS THE CORPORATION; AND

(2) MAY NOT BE USED TO IMPOSE LIABILITY ON A DIRECTOR, AN
OFFICER, AN EMPLOYEE, OR AN AGENT OF THE CORPORATION.

(E) THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS MAY STATE THAT THE STANDARD OF
CONDUCT REQUIRED BY § 2–405.1 OF THIS TITLE SHALL APPLY TO THE CONDUCT OF
A DIRECTOR ACTING PURSUANT TO THE EMERGENCY PROVISIONS.

2–117.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “EMERGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–116
OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) DURING AN EMERGENCY, UNLESS THE BYLAWS CONTAIN EMERGENCY
PROVISIONS PROVIDING OTHERWISE, NOTICE OF A MEETING OF THE BOARD OF
DIRECTORS MAY BE GIVEN:

(1) ONLY TO THOSE DIRECTORS WHOM IT IS PRACTICABLE TO REACH
IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES;

(2) IN ANY PRACTICABLE MANNER GIVEN THE CIRCUMSTANCES; AND

(3) WITH SHORTER NOTICE AS IS REASONABLE IN THE
CIRCUMSTANCES.

(C) ANY CORPORATE ACT TAKEN IN GOOD FAITH UNDER THIS SECTION
DURING AN EMERGENCY:

(1) BINDS THE CORPORATION; AND

(2) MAY NOT BE USED TO IMPOSE LIABILITY ON A DIRECTOR, AN
OFFICER, AN EMPLOYEE, OR AN AGENT OF THE CORPORATION.

2–118.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 608 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “EMERGENCY” MEANS A SITUATION IN WHICH IT IS
IMPRACTICABLE TO CONVENE A MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE MARYLAND GENERAL CORPORATION LAW OR THE BYLAWS OR AS
SPECIFIED IN A NOTICE FOR THE MEETING PREVIOUSLY GIVEN, BECAUSE OF SOME
CATASTROPHIC EVENT.

(B) DURING AN EMERGENCY, UNLESS THE BYLAWS CONTAIN EMERGENCY
PROVISIONS PROVIDING OTHERWISE, THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS MAY:

(1) POSTPONE A MEETING OF STOCKHOLDERS FOR WHICH NOTICE
HAS BEEN GIVEN; OR

(2) AUTHORIZE STOCKHOLDERS TO PARTICIPATE IN A MEETING BY
ANY MEANS OF REMOTE COMMUNICATION AUTHORIZED BY § 2–503(C)(2) OF THIS
TITLE.

(C) THE CORPORATION SHALL GIVE NOTICE TO STOCKHOLDERS OF ANY
ACTION TAKEN UNDER THIS SECTION, INCLUDING ANY NEW DATE, TIME, OR PLACE
OF A MEETING:

(1) IN ANY PRACTICABLE MANNER GIVEN THE CIRCUMSTANCES; AND

(2) WITH SHORTER NOTICE AS IS REASONABLE IN THE
CIRCUMSTANCES.

(D) ANY CORPORATE ACT TAKEN IN GOOD FAITH UNDER THIS SECTION
DURING AN EMERGENCY:

(1) BINDS THE CORPORATION; AND

(2) MAY NOT BE USED TO IMPOSE LIABILITY ON A DIRECTOR, AN
OFFICER, AN EMPLOYEE, OR AN AGENT OF THE CORPORATION.

2–310.

(a) (1) Subject to the provisions of its charter and § 2–311 of this subtitle, if
authorized by its board of directors, a corporation may acquire the corporation’s own shares.

(2) Shares acquired under paragraph (1) of this subsection constitute
authorized but unissued shares.

(3) Shares of a corporation’s own stock acquired by the corporation between
the record date for determining stockholders entitled to notice of or to vote at a meeting of

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 608

stockholders and the time of the meeting may be voted at the meeting by the holder of
record as of the record date and shall be counted in determining the total number of
outstanding shares entitled to be voted at the meeting.

(4) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, AND UNLESS THE CHARTER PROVIDES OTHERWISE, STOCK SHALL
CEASE TO BE OUTSTANDING ON THE DATE OF REDEMPTION OR REPURCHASE IF A
CORPORATION HAS:

1. GIVEN A NOTICE OF REDEMPTION OF STOCK OR
REPURCHASE OF STOCK PURSUANT TO A RIGHT OF REDEMPTION SET FORTH IN THE
CHARTER OR A DULY ADOPTED REPURCHASE PLAN BINDING ON THE STOCKHOLDER;
AND

2. PAID OR SET ASIDE SUFFICIENT FUNDS FOR THE
BENEFIT OF THE HOLDER OF THE STOCK CALLED FOR REDEMPTION OR
REPURCHASE.

(II) THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT AFFECT THE RIGHT OF A
STOCKHOLDER TO RECEIVE PAYMENT OF THE REDEMPTION OR REPURCHASE
PRICE.

(b) If the charter prohibits the issuance of acquired shares, the number of
authorized shares is reduced by the number of shares acquired, effective upon the filing
with the Department of articles supplementary which shall set forth:

(1) The name of the corporation;

(2) The number of outstanding shares of stock of the corporation that have
been acquired by the corporation and that by their terms may not be reissued, and the class
and series of the shares;

(3) The number of authorized shares of the corporation remaining after the
acquisition of outstanding shares, itemized by class and series; and

(4) The fact that no amendment to the charter is effected by the articles
supplementary, their sole purpose being to record the reduction of authorized shares
resulting from the acquisition of shares that by the terms of the existing charter may not
be reissued.

8–601.1.

Sections 2–113, 2–116 THROUGH 2–118, 2–201(c), 2–309(a) and (e), 2–313,
2–502(e), 2–503(b), 2–504(f), and 2–701 through 2–707 of this article and, except as

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 608 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

otherwise provided in § 8–601 of this subtitle or in the declaration of trust, § 2–405.1 of this
article shall apply to real estate investment trusts.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6