START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 782 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 782 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Lighting - Privately Owned Vehicles 
 
 
This bill authorizes specified officers of a volunteer fire company and the fire police of a 
volunteer fire company to equip their privately owned vehicles with red or red and white 
lights or signal devices, in accordance with existing provisions relating to the equipping 
and use of such lights and signal devices on these vehicles. Under the bill, the fire police 
of a volunteer fire company may also choose to equip their privately owned vehicles with 
red and green lights or signal devices. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is authorizing in nature and does not directly affect local 
government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, a person may not drive or move on any highway any vehicle or 
equipment that is equipped with or displays any light or signal device designed to emit an 
oscillating, rotating, blinking, or other type of emission of light, except as authorized under 
the Maryland Vehicle Law. A violation is a misdemeanor subject to a maximum fine of 
$500. The prepayment penalty assessed by the District Court is $60.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 782/ Page 2 
Vehicles of city, county, State, or federal fire departments or duly constituted volunteer 
fire departments or rescue squads, or the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical 
Services System, may be equipped with or display red and/or white lights or signal devices. 
In each volunteer fire company, up to five specified officers may have their privately 
owned vehicles equipped with red lights or signal devices, which may be displayed only 
while traveling to or at the scene of an emergency. (Under the bill, such lights or signal 
devices may be red or red and white.) Specified officers include (1) the fire chief or the 
highest ranking fireline officer; (2) one or more of the assistant chiefs or deputy chiefs, 
whichever rank is second in command; and (3) the emergency medical services 
commander. 
 
In addition, the fire police of each volunteer fire company may have their privately owned 
vehicles equipped with red lights or signal devices designed to emit an oscillating, rotating, 
blinking, or other type of emission of light. (Under the bill, such lights or signal devices 
may be red, red and white, or red and green.) The lights or signal devices may be flashed 
or oscillated or otherwise used only while the vehicle is at the scene of an accident, flood, 
or other emergency to which the volunteer fire company is responding.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1253 and SB 917 of 2023 and HB 1066 of 2022.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2