START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 763 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 763 
(Delegate Attar, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention - Membership 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention 
by (1) removing representatives of specified organizations and (2) adding 1 representative 
from the Office of the Public Defender and 15 individuals who represent (or advocate on 
behalf of) a protected class under the State hate crime laws, as set forth in Title 10, 
Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article, and are appointed by the Attorney General with the 
advice and consent of the Senate. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 773 of 2023 established the Commission on Hate Crime Response 
and Prevention to (1) develop strategies to prevent and respond to hate crime activity and 
(2) evaluate State laws and policies relating to hate crimes. The commission consists of 
22 members appointed by the Attorney General for staggered terms of four years. The 
Attorney General (or designee) is the chair of the commission, which is staffed by the 
Office of the Attorney General. Commission members may not receive compensation but 
are entitled to reimbursement for expenses.  
 
The State’s hate crime statutes are contained in Title 10, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law 
Article. Statute identifies members of a protected class by prohibiting specified actions by 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 763/ Page 2 
a person if motivated in whole or in substantial part by another person’s or group’s race, 
color, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, disability, national 
origin, or homelessness.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2