START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 528

Chapter 528

(House Bill 787)

AN ACT concerning

Allegany County – Allegany Regional Recreational Economic Development
Authority – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the Allegany Regional Recreational Economic
Development Authority in Allegany County to support the development and
construction of regional recreation facilities to benefit residents and the economic
development of Allegany County; and generally relating to the Allegany Regional
Recreational Economic Development Authority.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–1101 through 12–1106 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 11. Allegany
Regional Recreational Economic Development Authority”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

SUBTITLE 11. ALLEGANY REGIONAL RECREATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY.

12–1101.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “AUTHORITY” MEANS THE ALLEGANY REGIONAL
RECREATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY.

12–1102.

THERE IS AN ALLEGANY REGIONAL RECREATIONAL ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY IN ALLEGANY COUNTY.

12–1103.

THE AUTHORITY CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 528 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE PRESIDENT OF THE ALLEGANY COUNTY COMMISSIONERS,
OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE PRESIDENT OF FROSTBURG STATE UNIVERSITY, OR THE
PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE;

(3) THE PRESIDENT OF ALLEGANY COLLEGE, OR THE PRESIDENT’S
DESIGNEE;

(4) THE MAYOR OF CUMBERLAND, OR THE MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(5) THE MAYOR OF FROSTBURG, OR THE MAYOR’S DESIGNEE;

(6) THE PRESIDENT OF THE ALLEGANY COUNTY BOARD OF
EDUCATION, OR THE PRESIDENT’S DESIGNEE; AND

(7) ONE MEMBER WHO IS A RESIDENT OF ALLEGANY COUNTY
DESIGNATED BY THE MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT REPRESENT
ALLEGANY COUNTY.

12–1104.

(A) THE AUTHORITY MAY MANAGE APPROPRIATED FUNDS FROM
ALLEGANY COUNTY, THE MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS OF CUMBERLAND AND
FROSTBURG, AND THE STATE.

(B) THE AUTHORITY MAY RECEIVE DONATED SERVICES FROM
PROFESSIONALS AS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE AUTHORITY MAY SUPERVISE, MANAGE, AND TERMINATE STAFF
AND CONSULTANTS AS NECESSARY.

12–1105.

A MEMBER OF THE AUTHORITY:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
AUTHORITY; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 528

12–1106.

(A) THE AUTHORITY SHALL SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT AND
CONSTRUCTION OF REGIONAL RECREATION FACILITIES TO BENEFIT RESIDENTS
AND THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF ALLEGANY COUNTY, INCLUDING:

(1) ATHLETIC FIELDS;

(2) INDOOR ATHLETIC FACILITIES; AND

(3) OTHER FACILITIES DESIGNED TO CREATE RECREATIONAL
TOURISM.

(B) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 31, 2025, AND EACH OCTOBER 31
THEREAFTER, THE AUTHORITY SHALL REPORT ITS ACTIVITIES TO THE GOVERNOR
AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO
THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS
COMMITTEE, AND THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 5 years and, at the end of June 30, 2029,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3