START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 785 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 785 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Freedom to Read Act 
 
   
This emergency bill establishes a State policy that local school systems operate school 
library media programs consistent with specified standards. Each local school system is 
required to develop and implement a policy and procedures to review objections to 
materials in the school library media program, subject to certain requirements. A county 
board of education is prohibited from taking retaliatory actions against certain school 
library media program personnel for performing their job duties consistent with the 
standards. The bill similarly establishes that it is the policy of the State that each library 
must operate in a manner consistent with the following standards:  (1) library materials, 
services, and resources exist and should be provided for the interest, information, and 
enlightenment of all persons the library serves; (2) a library should not exclude material 
from its catalogue because of the origin, background, or views of a person who created the 
material; and (3) a library should not prohibit or remove material from its catalogue 
because of partisan, ideological, or religious disapproval. The Maryland State Library 
Board must develop policies for the operation of libraries that are consistent with the State 
standards. The bill makes funding for certain libraries contingent on the adoption of a 
written policy consistent with the standards; the Comptroller must withhold funding from 
specified public libraries that do not adopt a written policy consistent with the State 
standards.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) can implement the bill’s 
changes with existing resources. Revenues are likely not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local finances or operations. Local 
libraries (including regional resource centers) and local school systems can adopt the 
required standards with existing resources.      
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 785/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
State Policy for School Library Media Programs 
 
The bill establishes that it is the policy of the State that each local school system operate 
its school library media program consistent with the following standards: 
 
 
the materials, services, and resources provided in a school library media program 
are provided for the interest, information, and instructional support of students and 
school personnel of the schools the program serves; 
 
materials may not be excluded from a school library media program solely because 
of the origin, background, or views of the individual who created the material; and 
 
materials may not be excluded or removed from the catalogue of a school library 
media program because of partisan, ideological, or religious disapproval. 
 
Each local school system must develop and implement a policy and procedures to review 
objections to materials in the school library media program. The policy and procedures 
must: 
 
 
establish a uniform process to submit an objection to materials in a school library 
media program by a student, parent or guardian of a student enrolled in a school in 
the local school system, or school personnel; 
 
require materials under review due to an objection to remain available for use by 
students and school personnel until the review process has concluded; and 
 
establish a reasonable timeline to conduct and conclude the review process in a 
timely manner. 
 
A county board of education may not dismiss, demote, suspend, discipline, reassign, 
transfer, or otherwise retaliate against a librarian, a certified library media specialist, or 
school library media program support staff for performing their job duties consistent with 
the standards described above.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 785/ Page 3 
State Standards for Libraries 
 
The bill establishes that it is the intent of the General Assembly that a library that receives 
funding from the State adopt and follow a written policy for operation of a library that is 
consistent with the State standards for libraries. 
 
A “library” includes: 
 
 
the State Library Resource Center; 
 
a regional resource center; 
 
a correctional facility library; 
 
a county library system and the Enoch Pratt Free Library in Baltimore; 
 
the Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled; 
 
the Maryland Deaf Culture Digital Library; and 
 
a metropolitan cooperative service program. 
 
“Library” does not include a school library media program established by a local school 
system, which are covered under separate provisions of the bill.  
 
Retaliation Against Personnel  
 
The bill prohibits employees of public libraries in the State from being dismissed, demoted, 
suspended, disciplined, reassigned, transferred, or otherwise retaliated against for acting in 
a manner consistent with the State standards for libraries. 
 
Current Law:  The provision of library services in Maryland is essentially a county 
responsibility. Each county has established a public library system that, with the exception 
of Montgomery County, is governed by a local library board. In Montgomery County, the 
public library system is a county agency. The State establishes general guidelines, 
facilitates the sharing of library resources, supports a network of library resource centers, 
and provides funding assistance to local libraries. 
 
The State Library Board, which consists of 12 members, oversees MSLA and exercises 
general discretion and control of library development. The board may adopt rules and 
regulations, establish policies and procedures for a statewide system of public libraries, 
and advise the Governor on library matters. The State Librarian is appointed by the board, 
with the advice and consent of the Senate, as the head of MSLA. The State Librarian 
performs the duties the board assigns and sees that the policies and the decisions of the 
board are carried out by MSLA. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 785/ Page 4 
Although not required to do so by State law, each county, including Baltimore City, has 
established a public library system. State law requires that a county’s library system be 
governed by a board of trustees; however, charter counties may establish a county library 
agency in lieu of a board. Currently, Montgomery County is the only county to have a 
library agency, rather than a board of trustees.  
 
The board of trustees or library agency for each public library system determines local 
library policies, adopts operating rules and regulations, handles local library personnel 
matters, and appoints a director to manage the library system. The boards of trustees and 
library agencies must report annually to the county governing bodies and the State 
Librarian. 
 
As required by State law, a county library provides free library services to residents of the 
county. A library may establish policies governing the use of the library by individuals 
living outside the county. Free library services include the use of all library materials and 
services available for reference and circulation, regardless of format. 
 
The State plays an important role in the coordination of statewide and regional library 
resources. The State Library Resource Center, located at the Central Library of the Enoch 
Pratt Free Library System in Baltimore City, makes available specialized library materials 
and resources to libraries throughout the State. The center is also the central depository for 
all State publications and is the headquarters for the Maryland Interlibrary Loan 
Organization. 
 
The State Library Board has designated three county libraries as regional resource centers. 
Located 
in 
Charlotte 
Hall, 
Hagerstown, 
and 
Salisbury, 
the 
centers 
serve 
Southern Maryland, Western Maryland, and the Eastern Shore regions, respectively. The 
centers provide member libraries with greater access to library materials and resources than 
an individual library can provide on its own. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 738 (Senator King, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland State 
Library Agency; Department of Budget and Management; Baltimore City Public Schools; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 785/ Page 5 
Baltimore 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Anne 
Arundel 
County 
Public 
Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5