START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 776 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 776 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Maryland Technology Development Corporation - Authority 
 
 
This bill explicitly authorizes the Maryland Technology Development Corporation 
(TEDCO), subject to a written agreement, to provide administrative support and services 
to specified business entities and receive compensation for doing so. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly increase expenditures by or revenues for TEDCO; 
the bill is generally clarifying in nature. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  TEDCO is an independent entity established by the Maryland 
General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of technology from universities and 
federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the growth of companies in critical or 
high-growth sectors. In addition to other powers specified in statute, TEDCO may:   
 
 
create, own, control, or be a member of a corporation, limited liability company, 
partnership, or other entity, whether operated for profit or not-for-profit; 
 
fix and collect rates, rentals, fees, royalties, and charges for services and resources 
it provides or makes available; 
 
exercise power usually possessed by a private corporation in performing similar 
functions unless to do so would conflict with State law; and 
 
do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers granted by statute. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 776/ Page 2 
TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a company’s stage of development, 
from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. For further information on 
TEDCO, including a general overview and recent program additions, see the 
Appendix – Maryland Technology Development Corporation. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  TEDCO is currently authorized to fix and collect charges for services 
and resources it makes available. The corporation is also authorized to create, own, control, 
or be a member of a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or other entity, 
whether operated for profit or not-for-profit. The bill explicitly authorizes TEDCO to 
provide administrative and related support and services to those entities and to be 
reimbursed for the associated costs (e.g., marketing, reporting, etc.). TEDCO advises that 
the bill would not enable TEDCO employees to be dually employed or contradict existing 
law. The bill does not directly increase expenditures by or revenues for TEDCO and is 
generally clarifying in nature. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 634 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 776/ Page 3 
Appendix – Maryland Technology  
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The fiscal 2024 budget includes $54.7 million in general funds for TEDCO 
programs. The following programs have been established by legislation since 2021, with 
mandated appropriations also noted.  
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund – supports the development of start-up companies run by 
entrepreneurs from socially or economically disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder 
access to traditional forms of capital and executive networks at the pre-seed stage. 
The Governor must include appropriations in the budget bill in the following 
amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund – provides capital investment in technology-based businesses that  
(1) would qualify for investment under the Builder Fund, as provided in TEDCO 
regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at least one year after the time 
of investment by an individual or individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program – encourages the establishment and 
expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund – allows unappropriated general fund surplus 
to be invested in a “qualified business” – with a goal to increase private equity and 
venture capital in the State – and the interest earnings and investment returns 
realized to the benefit of participants of the several pension systems managed by the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 776/ Page 4 
State Retirement and Pension System. For fiscal 2024, the Governor was required 
to include an appropriation in the budget bill to the fund equal to 10% of the 
unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of $10.0 million from the 
second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, with a corresponding 
decrease in the typical required appropriation. The maximum amount was 
appropriated. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program – allows eligible small businesses to apply for State 
awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal grants, limited to $25,000 for 
Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. TEDCO may make up to  
20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per fiscal year for a total of 
$1.25 million. 
 
 
Equitech Growth Fund and Commission – supports economic competitiveness 
and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the 
creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that 
builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, 
investments, loans, or other financial assistance to public, nonprofit, or private 
entities in the State. Awards must target workforce development and infrastructure. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from the fund. 
 
 
Cyber Maryland Program and Fund – creates a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, 
serves as a hub for State workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and 
generally coordinates cybersecurity and research and innovation in the State, among 
other things. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor may include an appropriation 
in the annual budget bill of $250,000 for the fund; however, the Governor must 
include an appropriation that is sufficient to hire staff for the program. 
 
 
Human-relevant Research Program and Fund – promotes State-funded research 
intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish a grant and 
loan program, as specified, which includes contracting with an independent 
scientific review board to review research proposals and make recommendations to 
TEDCO. The program is funded by fees on entities conducting research on 
nonhuman animals. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4