START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 612

Chapter 612

(House Bill 780)

AN ACT concerning

Competitive Sealed Proposals – ~~Private~~ Security Contracts

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~competitive~~ ~~sealed~~ ~~proposals~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~as~~ ~~the~~ providing that
competitive sealed proposals is the preferred procurement method for certain ~~private~~
security contracts; and generally relating to competitive sealed proposals and
procurement.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 13–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

13–104.

(a) (1) Competitive sealed proposals is the preferred method for:

(1) human, social, cultural, or educational services; AND

(2) SECURITY SERVICES WITH AN EXPECTED VALUE THAT IS GREATER
THAN $1,000,000.

(2) COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS SHALL BE USED FOR A
~~CONTRACT~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PRIVATE~~ ~~SECURITY~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EXPECTED~~ ~~VALUE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~
GREATER THAN $100,000.

(b) (1) Whenever procurement is based on competitive sealed proposals, a
procurement officer shall seek proposals by issuing a request for proposals.

(2) A request for proposals shall include a statement of:

(i) the scope of the procurement contract, including the expected
degree of minority business enterprise participation, as provided in § 14–303(b) of this
article;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 612 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) a summary of the factors used to determine the expected degree
of minority business enterprise participation for the procurement contract, including
subcontracting opportunities identified for the project, any applicable North American
Industry Classification System codes linked to the subcontracting opportunities, and the
number of certified minority business enterprises in those industries;

(iii) the factors, including price, that will be used in evaluating
proposals; and

(iv) the relative importance of each factor.

(c) A unit shall publish a request for proposals in the same manner as required
for an invitation for bids.

(d) (1) After receipt of proposals but before the procurement officer awards the
procurement contract, a unit may conduct discussions with an offeror to:

(i) obtain the best price for the State; and

(ii) ensure full understanding of:

1. the requirements of the State, as set forth in the request
for proposals; and

2. the proposal submitted by the offeror.

(2) If discussions are conducted, the unit:

(i) shall conduct the discussions in accordance with regulations
adopted under this Division II;

(ii) shall provide an opportunity to participate to each responsible
offeror who submits a proposal that, in the judgment of the procurement officer, is
reasonably susceptible of being selected for award;

(iii) shall treat all of those responsible offerors fairly and equally;

(iv) may allow all of those responsible offerors to revise their initial
proposals by submitting best and final offers, if discussions indicate that it would be in the
best interests of the State to do so;

(v) may conduct more than 1 series of discussions and requests for
best and final offers; and

(vi) may not disclose to an offeror any information derived from a
proposal of or discussions with a competing offeror.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 612

(e) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection:

(i) a proposal is irrevocable for the period specified in the request
for proposals; and

(ii) a best and final offer is irrevocable for the period specified in the
request for best and final offers.

(2) A procurement officer may allow an offeror to correct or withdraw a
proposal or best and final offer if correction or withdrawal is:

(i) allowed under regulations adopted under this Division II; and

(ii) approved in writing by the Office of the Attorney General.

(f) After obtaining any approval required by law, the procurement officer shall
award the procurement contract to the responsible offeror who submits the proposal or best
and final offer determined to be the most advantageous to the State considering the
evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals.

(g) A unit shall publish notice of a contract in excess of $50,000 awarded under
this section, or a lower amount set by the Board by regulation in accordance with Title 10,
Subtitle 1 of the State Government Article in eMaryland Marketplace.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ July 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3