START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 743 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 743 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Promoter's Permit 
 
 
This bill authorizes the holder of a promoter’s permit in Frederick County to sell beer, 
wine, and liquor at an event. The permit holder may not hold an alcoholic beverages 
license. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Frederick County finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Frederick County, a for-profit organization must obtain a promoter’s 
permit from the board before the organization may publicize, sell tickets for, organize, 
operate, produce, or stage an event at which alcoholic beverages are sold or served. The 
permit fee is (1) $50, for an event in which the promoter expects fewer than 500 individuals 
will attend; (2) $250, for an event in which the promoter expects between 500 and 
1,000 individuals will attend; (3) $600, for an event in which the promoter expects between 
1,001 and 3,000 will attend; and (4) $1,000, for an event in which the promoter expects 
more than 3,000 individuals will attend. 
 
The board may adopt regulations establishing the requirements for conducting a specified 
event, including health and safety standards to be met by a permit holder. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 743/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 767 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2