START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 773 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 773 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Human Services - Individuals With Disabilities and Service-Disabled Veterans 
Boating Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the Individuals with Disabilities and Service-Disabled Veterans 
Boating Fund to provide sailing, boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, and surfing 
opportunities for “individuals with disabilities” and “service-disabled veterans.” The 
Maryland Department of Disabilities (MDOD) must administer the fund. MDOD may use 
the fund for administrative expenses and to provide a grant of up to $40,000 in a fiscal year 
to a grantee to provide specified boating opportunities for individuals with disabilities or 
service-disabled veterans. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $47,000 in FY 2025 to 
capitalize the fund to cover anticipated administrative costs only; special fund revenues 
and expenditures increase accordingly. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing 
costs. General fund expenditures (and special fund revenues and expenditures) increase by 
an additional indeterminate amount beginning as early as FY 2025 to provide grants to 
nonprofit organizations (not quantified below). 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$47,000 
$52,900 
$55,300 
$57,800 
$60,300 
GF Expenditure 
$47,000 
$52,900 
$55,300 
$57,800 
$60,300 
SF Expenditure 
$47,000 
$52,900 
$55,300 
$57,800 
$60,300 
Net Effect 
($47,000) 
($52,900) 
($55,300) 
($57,800) 
($60,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 773/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Individuals with disabilities” means individuals considered disabled in 
accordance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act, including individuals with 
learning disabilities. “Serviced-disabled veteran” means a veteran with a disability that is 
service-connected as defined in federal law. 
 
The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that consists of money appropriated in the State 
budget to the fund and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of 
the fund. Interest accrues to the general fund. 
 
MDOD may only provide grants to a nonprofit organization in good standing that: 
 
 
is qualified under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; 
 
has been in operation for at least three years, notwithstanding a cessation of 
operations during a national or public health emergency, as specified; and 
 
has engaged individuals with disabilities or service-disabled veterans in sailing, 
boating, kayaking, canoeing, paddleboarding, or surfing activities on State waters 
at least 25 times in each of the past three years. 
 
Current Law:  Under the federal Americans with Disabilities Act, “disability” means, 
with respect to an individual (1) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits 
one or more major life activities of such individual; (2) a record of such an impairment; or 
(3) being regarded has having such an actual or perceived physical or mental impairment 
whether or not the impairment limits or is perceived to limit a major life activity. 
 
Pursuant to 38 U.S.C. § 101(16), “service-connected” means, with respect to disability, 
that such disability was incurred or aggravated, in line of duty in the active military, naval, 
air, or space service. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes MDOD to use the Individuals with Disabilities 
and Service-Disabled Veterans Boating Fund for administrative costs and to provide a 
grant of up to $40,000 in a fiscal year to a nonprofit organization in good standing to 
provide specified boating opportunities for individuals with disabilities or service-disabled 
veterans. 
 
Administrative Costs 
 
Although the number of potential nonprofit organizations eligible to receive a grant under 
the bill is unknown, MDOD advises that additional staff is required to administer the fund. 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by at least $47,018 in fiscal 2025, which 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 773/ Page 3 
accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one part-time grants coordinator to manage the fund and 
administer grants to specified nonprofit organizations. The estimate includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$40,166 
Operating Expenses 
    6,852 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$47,018 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This analysis assumes that 
general funds are provided to the new special fund and expended as special funds to cover 
these costs. 
 
Grants to Nonprofit Organizations 
 
General fund expenditures (and special fund revenues and expenditures) further increase 
by an indeterminate amount beginning as early as fiscal 2025 to provide grants to nonprofit 
organizations. The maximum annual grant per eligible nonprofit organization is $40,000. 
For illustrative purposes only, if five grants are provided, expenditures increase by up to 
an additional $200,000 annually. If 10 grants are provided, expenditures increase by up to 
an additional $400,000 annually. 
 
Special fund revenues to the fund further increase by an indeterminate amount beginning 
as early as fiscal 2025 to the extent the fund receives any other money from any other 
source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Special fund expenditures likely increase 
accordingly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 597 (Senator Guzzone) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Disabilities; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Veterans Affairs; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 773/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4