START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 710 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 710 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation – Household Goods Movers – Special Fund and Fees 
 
 
This bill establishes the Household Goods Movers Registration Fund administered by the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). The purpose of the fund is to cover the actual 
documented and indirect costs of fulfilling MDL’s duties related to the regulation of 
household goods movers and moving services. The Office of Legislative Audits must audit 
the accounts and transactions. Any investment earnings of the fund must be credited to the 
general fund. MDL must annually calculate the direct and indirect costs attributable to 
MDL for regulating household good movers; fees must be established based on those 
calculations. Annual fee increases are limited to 12.5%, as specified. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No net effect on State finances; however, expected general fund revenues, 
expenditures, and staffing are replaced by special fund revenues, expenditures, and 
staffing, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDL may set by regulation reasonable fees for its services to carry out 
requirements related to regulating household goods movers. The fees charged must be 
(1) set as to produce funds to approximate MDL’s costs and (2) based on the calculations 
noted above. MDL must publish a schedule of fees. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 710/ Page 2 
The fees that are established for the registration of Household Goods Movers that are in 
effect on June 30, 2024, must remain in full force and effect until the fees authorized by 
MDL pursuant to the bill are adopted and become effective. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 684 and 685 of 2019 prohibit a person from providing household 
goods moving services with a commercial vehicle in the State unless the person is 
registered with MDL. 
 
To apply for a registration as a household goods mover, an applicant must submit an 
application to MDL and pay an application fee established by MDL. The applicant must 
provide specified identifying information, such as the applicant’s name and physical 
address. Applications must also include proof of insurance and workers’ compensation 
coverage. Registration copies must be retained in each vehicle used to perform household 
goods moving services. Registrations must be renewed annually; the renewal fee is also 
established by MDL. MDL may impose a civil penalty of up to a $5,000 fine for a violation 
of household good moving requirements. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, Chapters 684 and 685 require the registration of 
household good movers; the fiscal and policy notes for Chapters 685 and 685 assumed a 
five-year annual average of approximately $265,600 in general fund expenditures for 
additional staff to implement the registration requirements (with corresponding 
general fund revenues from registration fees). However, MDL has not yet fully 
implemented the registration and fee requirements, so no revenues have been collected and 
no expenditures have been made. Once fully implemented, there is likely no net 
fiscal impact beyond that already assumed in the fiscal and policy notes for Chapters 684 
and 685, except that revenues accrue to the special fund instead of the general fund and 
expenditures for staffing are made from the special fund instead of the general fund. 
 
The exact number of registrants is unknown; however, MDL advises that it anticipates 
about 870 household movers to register with MDL based on federal data. In order to cover 
the expected personnel costs, the fee is expected to be set at approximately $325.00 
annually. To the extent the number of household goods movers that register and pay the 
annual fee varies from the anticipated level, the fee may also vary to cover MDL’s 
administrative costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 710/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 559 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Office of Legislative Audits; 
Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3