START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 796 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 796 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Carroll County - Public Facilities Bond 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Carroll County Commissioners to issue up to $29.8 million in 
general obligation bonds for the acquisition, construction, improvement, or renovation of 
public buildings, facilities, and public works projects. The date of maturity of the bonds 
cannot exceed 30 years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County receives up to $29.8 million in bond proceeds. County debt 
service expenditures increase by an estimated $2.1 million annually over a 20-year period. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Commission counties do not have the legislative power to create debt; 
General Assembly authorization is required before any bonds can be sold. Carroll County 
is one of six counties that still operates under the commission form of government. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since 2014, Carroll County has received authorization by the 
General Assembly to issue up to $306.6 million in general obligation bonds for public 
facilities, as shown in Exhibit 1. Exhibit 2 shows the planned capital projects in 
Carroll County for fiscal 2025. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 796/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Bond Authorizations for Carroll County 
($ in Millions) 
 
Session 
Chapter  
Number 
Authorized  
Amount 
2014 
Ch. 63 
$20.0 
2015 
Ch. 84 
17.0 
2016 
Ch. 254 
31.0 
2017 
Ch. 435 
25.0 
2018 
Ch. 89 
32.7 
2019 
Ch. 184 
28.5  
2020 
Ch. 285 
38.3 
2021 
Ch. 730 
48.5 
2023 
Ch. 81 
65.6 
Total 
 
$306.6  
 
 
Carroll County revenues increase by up to $29.8 million from bond proceeds. Annual debt 
service costs for the bonds total approximately $2.1 million. This estimate is based on a 
3.37% interest rate and a 20-year term of maturity. To the extent that the bond issuance, 
interest rate, or term of maturity deviate from this assumption, debt service expenditures 
would adjust accordingly. 
 
At the end of fiscal 2022, Carroll County had approximately $280.8 million in total 
outstanding debt, which represents approximately 1.3% of the county’s assessable base and 
$1,612 on a per capita basis. The county currently has an AAA credit rating from  
Standard & Poor’s, an AAA credit rating from Moody’s Investors Service, and an 
AAA credit rating from Fitch Ratings. 
 
Information on local debt measures for Maryland counties and Baltimore City can 
be found in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the 2024 report can 
be found on the Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 796/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
Carroll County Bond Authorization Request 
Fiscal 2025 
 
Project Description 
Project Amount 
Public Schools 
HVAC System Replacement – Mount Airy Elementary 
$1,133,000 
HVAC System Replacement – Oklahoma Road Middle 
1,768,000 
Kindergarten and PreK Addition – Cranberry Station Elementary 
1,784,000 
Kindergarten and PreK Addition – Friendship Valley Elementary 
6,942,000 
Kindergarten and PreK Addition – Sandymount Elementary 
3,133,000 
Kindergarten and PreK Addition – Taneytown Elementary 
2,180,000 
Roof Replacement – Oklahoma Road Middle 
3,948,000 
Total Public Schools 
$20,888,000 
Conservation and Open Space 
Agricultural Land – Maryland Agriculture Land Preservation Program 
$1,333,300 
Stormwater Facility Renovation 
300,000 
Watershed Assessment and Improvement (NPDES) 
2,900,000 
Total Conservation and Open Space 
$4,533,300 
Public Works 
Pavement Management Program 
$602,000 
Ramp and Sidewalk Upgrades 
88,198 
Small Drainage Structures 
200,000 
Storm Drain Rehabilitation 
200,000 
Brown Road Over Roaring Run 
5,200 
Gaither Road Over South Branch Patapsco 
92,800 
Hughes Shop Road Over Bear Branch Road 
186,100 
McKinstry’s Mill Road Over Sams Creek 
128,500 
Total Public Works 
$1,502,798 
General Government 
County Building Systemic Renovations 
$1,500,000 
Fire & EMS – Regional Water Supply 
152,000 
Generator Replacements 
175,000 
Maintenance Center Fuel Tank Replacement 
1,000,000 
Total General Government 
$2,827,000 
Grand Total 
$29,751,098 
 
EMS:  Emergency medical services 
HVAC:  heating, ventilation, and air conditioning 
NPDES:  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  
 
Source:  Carroll County Government 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 796/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 693 (Carroll County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4