START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 757 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 757 
(Delegate R. Lewis, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Physicians - Supervised Medical Graduates and Cardiovascular 
Invasive Specialists (Bridge to Medical Residency Act) 
 
 
This emergency bill authorizes a “supervised medical graduate” (an individual who has a 
degree of doctor of medicine or doctor of osteopathy from an institution that meets 
specified standards and has passed parts one and two of the United States Medical 
Licensing Examination) to perform delegated duties in accordance with regulations 
adopted by the State Board of Physicians (MBP) under “direct supervision” (oversight 
exercised by a delegating physician who is (1) personally treating the patient; (2) in the 
same medical office as the patient and the specified graduate; and (3) immediately available 
to provide assistance and guidance – but not required to be in the presence of the patient 
and specified graduate – while a delegated duty is being completed). An individual may 
not practice as a supervised medical graduate for more than two years. The bill also repeals 
the September 30, 2024, termination date of Chapter 445 of 2019, which authorized a 
licensed physician to delegate duties to a registered cardiovascular invasive specialist 
(CIS). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBP can adopt regulations using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 757/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Board of Physicians 
 
The mission of MBP is to assure quality health care in Maryland through the efficient 
licensure and effective discipline of health providers under its jurisdiction by protecting 
and educating clients/customers and stakeholders and enforcing the Maryland Medical 
Practice Act. The board has regulatory authority over physicians, physician assistants, 
radiographers, radiation therapists, nuclear medicine technologists, radiologist assistants, 
respiratory care practitioners, polysomnographic technologists, athletic trainers, 
perfusionists, naturopathic doctors, and genetic counselors. 
 
Cardiovascular Invasive Specialists 
 
Chapter 445 authorizes a licensed physician to delegate duties to a “registered 
cardiovascular invasive specialist” assisting in a fluoroscopy under specified conditions. 
“Registered cardiovascular invasive specialist” means an individual who is credentialed by 
Cardiovascular Credentialing International or another credentialing body approved by 
MBP to assist in cardiac catheterization procedures under the direct, in-person supervision 
of a licensed physician.  
 
A CIS may assist a physician in the physician’s performance of a fluoroscopy if (1) the 
delegated duties are limited to a cardiac catheterization procedure performed in a hospital 
cardiac catheterization laboratory; (2) the physician is physically present and personally 
directs each act performed by the registered CIS; (3) the registered CIS has completed the 
training and education and has the experience required by MBP regulations; and (4) the 
hospital in which the cardiac catheterization laboratory is located has verified and 
documented that the registered CIS has completed the specified training and education and 
has the required experience required by MBP regulations. 
 
It is the responsibility of the hospital, and the physician who is supervising the procedure, 
to ensure that specified requirements are met for each procedure. MBP may impose a civil 
penalty of up to $5,000 for each instance of a hospital’s failure to comply with the specified 
requirements. 
 
The Maryland Health Care Commission was required to conduct a review of hospital 
cardiac care catheterization laboratories in the State and issue a report by October 1, 2023. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care providers may benefit from the bill’s 
authorization for a medical graduate to perform delegated duties under the direct 
supervision of a physician. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 757/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 507 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3