START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 768 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 768 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Judges' Retirement System - Special Death Benefit 
 
 
This bill establishes a line-of-duty death benefit that is payable to the surviving spouse or 
dependents of a member of the Judges’ Retirement System (JRS) who is killed without 
willful negligence by the member and with death arising out of or in the course of the actual 
performance of duty. It also establishes a similar retroactive benefit for the surviving 
spouse of a JRS member killed in the line of duty prior to the bill’s effective date. A 
surviving child or dependent parent of a JRS member killed in the line of duty may enroll 
and participate in the State health insurance plan. The bill establishes that most surviving 
spouses or dependent children of State employees killed in the line of duty are entitled to 
the maximum State health insurance subsidy provided to State retirees. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that the bill applies in a limited number of cases, there is 
no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates or State health care 
costs. The State Retirement Agency is aware of one individual to whom the retroactive 
benefit may apply. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 768/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Line-of-duty Death Benefit 
 
The line-of-duty death benefit consists of (1) the member’s accumulated contributions and 
(2) an allowance equal to two-thirds of the salary of a JRS member holding the same 
judicial position as the member who was killed in the line of duty. The benefit is paid 
first to the surviving spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, to any surviving children 
who are younger than age 26 or disabled, as specified. If there are no surviving children, 
the benefit is paid to a dependent parent. 
 
Before any line-of-duty death benefit is paid, all eligible individuals may waive payment 
of the benefit and instead receive the death benefit paid under current law. The line-of-duty 
benefit cannot be paid if the death benefit under current law is paid. 
 
Retroactive Benefit 
 
The retroactive benefit is payable to the surviving spouse of a JRS member who is killed 
before the bill’s effective date (1) without willful negligence by the member and (2) with 
death arising out of or in the course of the actual performance of duties. By 
December 31, 2024, a surviving spouse may request that the Board of Trustees of the State 
Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) award the line-of-duty death benefit established 
by the bill. 
 
The benefit must include a lump-sum payment of the benefit that would have been paid 
from the member’s death through the date that the board awards the line-of-duty death 
benefit, with interest. However, it must be reduced by the amount of any death benefits 
paid under current law, with interest.  
 
Health Insurance Benefits 
 
The surviving child or dependent parent of a member of JRS who died while employed 
with the State may enroll and participate in the health insurance options established under 
the State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program (the State Plan), as 
long as the child or parent is receiving a survivor benefit allowance.  
 
Surviving spouses and dependent children of former State employees killed in the line of 
duty are entitled to the maximum allowable State health insurance subsidy for a State 
retiree if: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 768/ Page 3 
 
the employee killed in the line of duty was a member of the Law Enforcement 
Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS), State Police Retirement System (SPRS), 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS), Employees’ Combined System 
(ECS), Teachers’ Combined System (TCS), or JRS; 
 
the surviving spouse or dependent children are receiving a regular allowance under 
State pension law; and  
 
the surviving spouse or dependent children enroll in the State Plan. 
  
Current Law:  When an active JRS member dies, the SRPS board must pay the surviving 
spouse 50% of the retirement allowance that would be payable if the member were alive 
and eligible to receive a retirement allowance. If there is no surviving spouse or children 
who are younger than age 26 or disabled, the SRPS board must pay to the member’s 
designated beneficiary a lump-sum death benefit consisting of (1) the member’s 
accumulated contributions and (2) an amount equal to the member’s annual salary at the 
time of death. If there is more than one designated beneficiary, the lump-sum payment is 
divided equally among them. 
 
State pension law includes special line-of-duty death benefits for surviving spouses of 
members of ECS, TCS, CORS, LEOPS, and SPRS; the benefits are essentially identical to 
the line-of-duty death benefits paid under the bill. 
 
The surviving spouse of a State employee who died while employed by the State may enroll 
and participate in the State Plan as long as the spouse is receiving a survivor benefit 
allowance or is the sole primary beneficiary and is receiving a periodic distribution of 
benefits under the Optional Retirement Plan. Similarly, the surviving children or dependent 
parents of members of ECS, TCS, CORS, LEOPS, and SPRS who die while employed by 
the State may also enroll and participate in the State Plan if they are receiving a survivor 
benefit allowance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 604 (Senator Corderman, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 768/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4