START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 565

Chapter 565

(House Bill 710)

AN ACT concerning

Business Regulation – Household Goods Movers – Special Fund and Fees

FOR the purpose of establishing the Household Goods Movers Registration Fund as a
special, nonlapsing fund in the Maryland Department of Labor; requiring that
certain investment earnings be credited to the General Fund; requiring the Secretary
of Labor to annually calculate certain costs; authorizing the Department to set by
regulation certain fees based on certain calculations; prohibiting certain fees from
increasing by more than a certain amount each year; requiring that certain fees in
effect on a certain date shall remain in effect until certain other fees are adopted and
become effective; and generally relating to the Household Goods Movers Registration
Fund.

BY adding to
Article – Business Regulation
Section 2–106.15, 2–106.16, and 8.5–105.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 8.5–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 8.5–103 and 8.5–105
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

2–106.15.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE HOUSEHOLD GOODS MOVERS
REGISTRATION FUND.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 565 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) (1) THERE IS A HOUSEHOLD GOODS MOVERS REGISTRATION FUND
IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PAY ALL FEES COLLECTED UNDER
TITLE 8.5 OF THIS ARTICLE TO THE COMPTROLLER.

(2) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE FEES TO THE FUND.

(D) THE FUND SHALL BE USED TO COVER THE ACTUAL DOCUMENTED
DIRECT AND INDIRECT COSTS OF FULFILLING THE STATUTORY AND REGULATORY
DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT UNDER TITLE 8.5 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(E) THE SECRETARY OR A DESIGNEE OF THE SECRETARY SHALL
ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(F) THE LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR SHALL AUDIT THE ACCOUNTS AND
TRANSACTIONS OF THE FUND AS PROVIDED IN § 2–1220 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(G) ANY INVESTMENT EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO THE
GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

2–106.16.

(A) THE SECRETARY SHALL ANNUALLY CALCULATE THE DIRECT AND
INDIRECT COSTS ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE DEPARTMENT UNDER TITLE 8.5 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH FEES BASED ON THE
CALCULATIONS PROVIDED BY THE SECRETARY UNDER THIS SECTION.

(C) EACH FEE ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER TITLE 8.5 OF
THIS ARTICLE MAY NOT BE INCREASED ANNUALLY BY MORE THAN 12.5% OF THE
EXISTING AND CORRESPONDING FEES OF THE DEPARTMENT UNDER TITLE 8.5 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

8.5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 565

(b) “Household goods movers” has the meaning stated in § 14–3101 of the
Commercial Law Article.

(c) “Household goods moving services” has the meaning stated in § 14–3101 of the
Commercial Law Article.

8.5–103.

To apply for registration as a household goods mover, an applicant shall:

(1) submit to the Department an application on the form provided by the
Department; and

(2) pay the Department an application fee [established] SET by the
Department.

8.5–105.

(a) A household goods mover shall pay an annual registration fee [established]
SET by the Department.

(b) On approval of a new or renewal application, the Department shall assign a
unique registration number and issue an annual registration to the applicant.

(c) A household goods mover shall retain a copy of its annual registration in each
vehicle used to perform household goods moving services.

8.5–105.1.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT MAY SET BY REGULATION REASONABLE FEES
FOR ITS SERVICES TO CARRY OUT THIS TITLE.

(2) THE FEES CHARGED SHALL BE:

(I) SET SO AS TO PRODUCE FUNDS TO APPROXIMATE THE COST
OF MAINTAINING THE DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS TITLE; AND

(II) BASED ON THE CALCULATIONS PERFORMED BY THE
SECRETARY UNDER § 2–106.16 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PUBLISH A SCHEDULE OF FEES SET BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PAY ALL FEES COLLECTED UNDER THIS
TITLE TO THE COMPTROLLER.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 565 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE FEES TO THE
HOUSEHOLD GOODS MOVERS REGISTRATION FUND ESTABLISHED IN § 2–106.15 OF
THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the fees set forth in Title 8.5
of the Business Regulation Article, in effect on June 30, 2024, shall remain in full force and
effect until the fees authorized by the Maryland Department of Labor under this Act are
adopted and become effective.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4