START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 755 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 755 
(Delegate Bhandari) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Social Work Examiners - Board Membership and Certified Social 
Worker Licenses 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the State Board of Social Work Examiners (BSWE) by 
authorizing the board to include at least one member who is either a licensed certified social 
worker (LCSW) or a licensed master social worker (LMSW) who is approved for 
independent practice. The bill also makes clarifying changes and removes obsolete 
references to certified social worker licenses. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by BSWE to 
practice social work in the State. In Maryland, there are four social work license categories, 
distinguished by specific education and/or training requirements, including:  licensed 
bachelor social worker (LBSW), LMSW, LCSW, and licensed certified social 
worker-clinical (LCSW-C). The board no longer issues new LCSW licenses but does renew 
those licenses issued prior to December 31, 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 755/ Page 2 
Under current law, the Governor must appoint all members of the board, with the advice 
of the Secretary of Health and the advice and consent of the Senate. The Governor must 
appoint all social work members from a list of nominees submitted by specified 
stakeholders. The board comprises 12 members, including 1 LBSW, 1 LMSW, 1 LCSW, 
4 LCSWs-C, 1 licensed social worker employed by the Department of Human Services, 
1 licensed social worker who is primarily engaged in social work education, and 
2 consumer members. The bill clarifies that the board must include at least 1 LCSW or 
1 LMSW who is approved for independent practice. 
 
The bill specifies that if a licensee of the specified license category is not appointed to the 
board within three months of a vacancy, a licensee of any license category must be 
appointed immediately if that licensee is otherwise qualified to be a member of the board. 
 
Obsolete Provisions 
 
Chapters 781 and 782 of 2021 required an LCSW to be licensed by BSWE on or before 
December 31, 2023, to practice certified social work in the State. An LCSW must have a 
master’s degree in social work from an accredited social work program and provide 
documentation of having completed two years of specified supervised experience. 
 
Under current law, to obtain a certified social worker license, an out-of-state applicant must 
(1) be licensed to practice social work in another state under an equivalent category or 
licensure; (2) have passed an examination as a condition of licensure in that state; (3) have 
performed specified compensated social work practice per year for five out of the ten years 
preceding application; and (4) otherwise meet licensure requirements. Subject to criminal 
history record information, the board must reissue a license to an individual who passes 
the respective examination required for initial licensure or holds an active license to 
practice social work in another state under another category of licensure that is equivalent 
to a certified social worker. 
 
The bill removes several obsolete provisions related to certified social worker licenses, 
specifically, requirements for an out-of-state applicant and a licensee on inactive status. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 106 (Senator Kelly) - Finance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 755/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Human Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3