START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 521

Chapter 521

(House Bill 782)

AN ACT concerning

Vehicle Laws – Lighting – Privately Owned Vehicles

FOR the purpose of authorizing certain members of a volunteer fire company to equip their
privately owned vehicles with red and green or red and white lights or signal devices;
and generally relating to vehicle lighting and volunteer fire companies.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 22–218(a), (b), and (c)(1), (2), (4), and (9)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 22–218(c)(3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

22–218.

(a) Every emergency vehicle, in addition to any other equipment and distinctive
markings required by this subtitle, shall be equipped with a siren, exhaust whistle, or bell
capable of giving an audible signal.

(b) (1) Every emergency vehicle, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required by the Maryland Vehicle Law, shall be equipped with signal
lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall be capable of displaying to the front and
to the rear a flashing red light or lights. These lights shall have sufficient intensity to be
visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight.

(2) Every school vehicle meeting the requirements established by the
Administrator shall be equipped with alternately flashing warning lights in accordance
with the standards adopted under § 22–228 of this subtitle.

(c) (1) A person may not drive or move on any highway any vehicle or
equipment that is equipped with or displays any light or signal device designed to emit an
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 521 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

oscillating, rotating, blinking, or other type of emission of light, unless designated and
authorized by the Administrator as indicated in paragraphs (2) through (13) of this
subsection. The provisions of this section do not prohibit the display and use of any lighting
device that may be permitted or required elsewhere in the Maryland Vehicle Law.

(2) Vehicles of the police department and other city, county, State, or
federal law enforcement agencies may be equipped with and display red, white, or blue
lights or signal devices.

(3) (i) Vehicles of city, county, State, or federal fire departments or duly
constituted volunteer fire departments or rescue squads, or the Maryland Institute for
Emergency Medical Services System, may be equipped with or display red and/or white
lights or signal devices.

(ii) In each volunteer fire company, no more than five of the following
officers may have their privately owned vehicles equipped with red OR RED AND WHITE
lights or signal devices which may be displayed only while on route to or at the scene of an
emergency:

1. The fire chief or the highest ranking fireline officer;

2. One or more of the assistant chiefs or deputy chiefs,
whichever rank is second in command; and

3. The emergency medical services commander.

(iii) 1. The fire police of each volunteer fire company may have
their privately owned vehicles equipped with red, RED AND GREEN, OR RED AND WHITE
lights or signal devices designed to emit an oscillating, rotating, blinking, or other type of
emission of light.

2. The lights or signal devices may be flashed or oscillated or
otherwise used only while the vehicle is at the scene of an accident, flood, or other
emergency to which the volunteer fire company is responding.

(4) Ambulances may be equipped with or display red, white, or red and
white lights or signal devices.

(9) (i) Except as provided in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of this
paragraph, the blue, red, or white lights or signal devices may be flashed or oscillated or
otherwise used only while on route to or at the scene of an emergency, and their use does
not relieve an emergency vehicle from otherwise giving an audible warning as required
elsewhere in the Maryland Vehicle Law.

(ii) The driver of an emergency vehicle may use flashing lights
within 100 feet of the entrance ramp of a fire or rescue station while parking or backing the

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 521

emergency vehicle.

(iii) The driver of an emergency vehicle of a fire department or rescue
squad shall, at the discretion of the officer in charge, flash or oscillate or otherwise use red
and white lights or signal devices while stopped, standing, or parked on the roadway at the
scene of an emergency.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3