START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 737 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 737 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Slow Moving Vehicles - Right-Hand Lane 
 
 
This bill requires a driver traveling slower than the general speed of traffic on any roadway 
(rather than just an interstate highway located in a rural area under existing statute) to 
drive in the right-hand lane or lanes, if the driver determines it is practicable to do so. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by at least $250,000 
(up to a maximum of $750,000) in FY 2025 only, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  On every roadway, any vehicle going at least 10 miles per hour below the 
applicable maximum speed limit or at less than the normal speed of traffic under existing 
conditions (if any existing conditions reasonably require a speed below that of the 
applicable maximum) generally must be driven in the right-hand lane then available for 
traffic or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
 
A driver traveling slower than the general speed of traffic on an interstate highway located 
in a rural area must drive in the right-hand lane or lanes, if the driver determines it is 
practicable to do so. An “interstate highway” means a State highway that is part of the 
national interstate system; a “rural area” means an area outside the fixed boundaries of an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 737/ Page 2 
urban area (a bounded area that includes and is adjacent to a municipality or other urban 
place with a population of at least 5,000). 
 
The Motor Vehicle Administration must include this requirement in the State’s driver 
education curriculum. The State Highway Administration (SHA) must inform drivers of 
the requirement (1) by placing and maintaining signs at regular intervals on appropriate 
State highways (at the request of a local jurisdiction or on its own initiative and in SHA’s 
sole discretion) and (2) through the State’s dynamic message sign system, to the extent 
authorized by federal law and regulations. Drivers may not be issued citations for violating 
the requirement. 
 
State Expenditures:  SHA has the discretion to determine the placement and scope of 
signage installed in accordance with the bill. Thus, the precise impact on TTF expenditures 
depends on the scale at which SHA chooses to install signage informing drivers of the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
Based on a preliminary analysis, SHA estimates that it would install a minimum of 
500 signs, and likely no more than 1,500 signs, on highways statewide. SHA advises that 
it cannot provide a more precise estimate until it completes a comprehensive review of the 
State’s road network. 
 
SHA estimates that sign installation costs will be $500 per sign. Accordingly, 
TTF expenditures increase by at least $250,000, but likely not more than $750,000, in 
fiscal 2025 only. For purposes of this analysis, the Department of Legislative Services 
assumes that SHA completes the installation of all signage in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 957 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of 
State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 737/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3