START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 728 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 728 
(Delegate Cullison, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Qualified Resident Enrollment Program (Access to Care Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE), in consultation with the 
Insurance Commissioner and as approved by the MHBE Board, to submit a federal 
State Innovation Waiver application by July 1, 2025. The waiver application must seek to 
establish a Qualified Resident Enrollment Program and, if available, seek federal 
pass-through funding resulting from the implementation of the program. If the waiver is 
approved, MHBE, in consultation with the Insurance Commissioner and as approved by 
the MHBE Board, must establish and implement the program. By January 1, 2026, MHBE 
must adopt regulations to carry out the program.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHBE can apply for the waiver and absorb initial start-up costs for the 
program using existing budgeted resources. To the extent that State subsidies are approved 
for the program by the General Assembly at a future time, expenditures increase by an 
indeterminate amount. This analysis does not assume receipt of federal pass-through 
funding, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Qualified resident” means an individual, including a minor, regardless 
of immigration status, who at the time of enrollment (1) is seeking to enroll in a qualified 
plan offered to individuals through the exchange; (2) resides in the State; (3) is not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 728/ Page 2 
incarcerated, other than incarceration pending disposition of charges; and (4) is not eligible 
for the federal advanced premium tax credit (APTC), Medicaid or the Maryland Children’s 
Health Program, Medicare, or employer-sponsored minimum essential coverage. 
 
Implementation of the program must be contingent on approval of the waiver from the 
U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services and the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury.  
 
Within six months before a fiscal year in which MHBE implements the program, MHBE 
must submit a report to the General Assembly on its plan to implement the program, 
including (1) the amount and source of the funding; (2) the parameters of the program; 
(3) the number of individuals anticipated to participate in the program; (4) the amount of 
premiums anticipated to be paid by participants under the program; and (5) if the 
General Assembly authorizes funding to subsidize premiums under the program, the 
parameters of the subsidies.  
 
The program must allow qualified residents to purchase qualified plans on the individual 
exchange. The program must facilitate the enrollment of qualified residents in qualified 
plans that, as necessary, meet the requirements of the federal waiver. 
 
By December 31, 2025, the Insurance Commissioner may waive any notification or other 
requirements that apply to a carrier under the Insurance Article in calendar 2025 due to the 
implementation of an approved waiver. 
 
Current Law:  MHBE was created during the 2011 session to provide a marketplace for 
individuals and small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage. Through the 
Maryland Health Connection, Maryland residents can shop for health insurance plans, 
compare rates, and determine their eligibility for federal APTCs, cost-sharing reduction 
plans, and public assistance programs such as Medicaid.  
 
Under federal regulations, only U.S. citizens or lawfully present noncitizens are eligible to 
enroll in a qualified health plan (QHP) through the exchange and receive APTCs. 
Individuals ineligible due to immigration status may purchase full-priced QHPs off the 
exchange with identical premiums. Federal subsidies are not available for this population. 
 
Chapter 384 of 2023 required MHBE and the Maryland Department of Health to develop 
a report comparing options for offering affordable health and dental coverage to State 
residents ineligible for existing affordable coverage options due to immigration status. The 
report, 
submitted 
in 
December 
2023, 
notes 
that 
there 
are 
approximately 
112,400 undocumented and uninsured individuals in Maryland who are ineligible for 
Medicaid and QHPs due to immigration status.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 728/ Page 3 
The report provides estimated take-up rates and costs of various Medicaid and QHP benefit 
packages over a five-year implementation period. Based on midpoint estimated take-up 
rates, a QHP benefit package for noncitizens who are income-eligible for Medicaid is 
estimated to cover 14,213 individuals at an average per member per month (PMPM) cost 
of $714, and an annual average cost of $122.1 million. A QHP benefit package for 
noncitizens who are not income-eligible for Medicaid is estimated to cover 
12,815 individuals at an average PMPM cost of $651, and an annual average cost of 
$100.3 million.   
 
These estimated PMPM costs include State-funded cost-sharing reductions for individuals 
with household income up to 250% of the federal poverty level (equivalent to the federal 
cost-sharing reductions available to lawfully present individuals), State-funded premium 
subsidies for all income groups (equivalent to federal APTCs available to lawfully present 
individuals), and reinsurance costs for all age groups. In addition, the estimated PMPM 
cost for those income-eligible for Medicaid assumes that the State fully subsidizes the 
premium for the lowest-cost stand-alone dental plan. PMPM costs also include 
administrative costs of approximately $1.1 million annually. 
 
On December 9, 2022, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury approved Washington’s application for a State Innovation 
Waiver. Washington requested a waiver to expand access to QHPs, stand-alone qualified 
dental plans, and a state affordability program (Cascade Care Savings) to Washington 
residents regardless of immigration status. The waiver is effective January 1, 2024, through 
December 31, 2028.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Assuming a waiver is granted, the program may be operational as 
early as calendar 2026. Under the bill, within six months before a fiscal year in which 
MHBE implements the program, it must submit a specified report to the General Assembly 
on its plan to implement the program. Thus, actual expenditures for the program depend 
on program parameters, whether MHBE is authorized to provide subsidies, and available 
funding. 
 
The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services made a preliminary determination 
that Washington State will not receive federal pass-through funding as the state’s waiver 
is not projected to alter individual market premiums and, thus, does not yield federal APTC 
savings. MHBE advises that it is, therefore, unlikely that Maryland would receive such 
funds under a similar waiver. Accordingly, this analysis does not anticipate receipt of 
federal pass-through funds under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill is intended to facilitate the enrollment of qualified 
residents in qualified plans by allowing them to purchase a plan through Maryland Health 
Connection. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 728/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 365 and HB 588 of 2023 and SB 728 and HB 1035 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 705 (Senators Hayes and Lam) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - February 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4