START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 702 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 702 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Wage and Hour Law - Minor League Baseball Players - Exemption 
 
 
This bill exempts a minor league baseball player who is compensated in accordance with 
the terms of a collective bargaining agreement that expressly states the wages and working 
conditions of employees from the Maryland Wage and Hour Law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State operations or finances. The 
Maryland Department of Labor does not recall receiving any Maryland Wage and Hour 
Law complaints from minor league baseball players. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal 
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), which specifies minimum wage and overtime 
requirements for employers and employees in the State. For a general overview of 
Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, please see the Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour 
Law. 
 
Under federal law, FLSA exempts any employee employed to play baseball who is 
compensated pursuant to a contract that provides for a weekly salary for services performed 
during the league’s championship season (but not spring training or the off season) at a rate 
that is not less than a weekly salary equal to the federal minimum wage for a workweek of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 702/ Page 2 
40 hours, irrespective of the number of hours the employee devotes to baseball related 
activities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 466 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 12, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 702/ Page 3 
Appendix – Maryland Wage and Hour Law 
 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law is the State complement to the federal Fair Labor 
Standards Act, which specifies minimum wage and overtime requirements for employers 
and employees in the State. State law specifies that an employee must be paid the greater 
of the federal minimum wage (which is currently $7.25 per hour) or $15.00 per hour. 
However, an employer may pay 85% of the State minimum wage rate to employees 
younger than age 18. 
 
The Maryland Wage and Hour Law and minimum wage requirements do not apply to 
certain categories of employees, including those defined as administrative, executive, or 
professional; certain seasonal employees; part-time employees younger than age 16; 
salesmen and those who work on commission; an employer’s immediate family; drive-in 
theater employees; employees training in a special education program in a public school; 
employees of an establishment that sells food and drink for on-premises consumption and 
has an annual gross income of $400,000 or less; employees employed by an employer who 
is engaged in canning, freezing, packing, or first processing of perishable or seasonal fresh 
fruits, vegetables, poultry, or seafood; certain farm workers; and covered employees under 
the Secure Maryland Wage Act. 
 
Generally, the employer of a tipped employee is allowed a tip credit that can be applied 
against the direct wages paid by the employer. The employee can be paid tipping wages so 
long as the wages plus the tips received equal at least the minimum wage, the employee 
retains all tips, and the employee customarily receives more than $30.00 a month in tips. 
The tip credit is equal to the State minimum wage, less $3.63. Thus, the wage paid by 
employers to tipped employees is $3.63, as long as their wages plus tips equal the minimum 
wage. 
 
Under Maryland’s Wage and Hour Law, an employer is required to pay an overtime wage 
of at least 1.5 times the usual hourly wage for each hour over 40 hours that an employee 
works during one work week. This requirement does not apply to an employer that is 
subject to federal rail laws; a nonprofit concert promoter, legitimate theater, music festival, 
music pavilion, or theatrical show; or specified amusement or recreational establishments. 
It also does not apply to an employee for whom the U.S. Secretary of Transportation sets 
qualifications and maximum hours of service under federal law; a mechanic, parts person, 
or salesperson, under certain conditions; a driver employed by a taxicab operator; or 
specified air carrier employees under certain conditions. Also, specific exemptions apply 
for farm work, bowling establishments, and infirmaries. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 702/ Page 4 
If an employer pays less than the wages required, the employee may bring an action against 
the employer to recover (1) the difference between the wage paid to the employee and the 
wage required; (2) an additional amount equal to the difference as liquidated damages; and 
(3) legal fees. The court must award these differences in wages, damages, and counsel fees 
if the court determines that an employee is entitled to recovery. However, if an employer 
shows to the satisfaction of the court that the employer acted in good faith and reasonably 
believed that the wages paid to the employee were not less than the required wages, then 
the court must award liquidated damages of an amount less than the difference in wages or 
no liquidated damages. 
 
A person who violates the Maryland Wage and Hour Law is guilty of a misdemeanor and 
on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4