START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1017

Chapter 1017

(House Bill 742)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Stadium License

FOR the purpose of authorizing the holder of a stadium license in Frederick County to sell
liquor for on–premises consumption in addition to beer and wine; altering the annual
license fee for a stadium license in the county; and generally relating to alcoholic
beverages licenses in Frederick County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–1013
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.

20–1013.

(a) There is a stadium license.

(b) The Board may issue the license to the owner of a professional baseball team
franchise, regardless of whether the franchise is a partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company.

(c) The license authorizes the license holder, at the stadium in which the baseball
team plays its home games, to sell beer [and], wine, AND LIQUOR:

(1) in plastic or paper containers on the licensed premises;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1017 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) for on–premises consumption; and

(3) to an individual present at an event held in the stadium.

(d) The license holder may sell alcoholic beverages from the time the stadium
opens for the event until the event ends.

(e) The license holder may not allow an individual to:

(1) carry any alcoholic beverage onto the licensed premises; or

(2) carry any alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises.

(f) The annual license fee is [$2,000] $2,500.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2