START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 764 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 764 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Lottery Fund - Bus Rapid Transit Fund Distribution and Prince George's 
County Blue Line Corridor Facility Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires $27.0 million of State lottery funds to be transferred annually beginning 
after June 30, 2024, into the Bus Rapid Transit Fund (BRTF) instead of an amount of up to 
$27.0 million based on specified deposits for Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) debt 
service. Bus rapid transit system grants depend on amounts deposited into BRTF instead 
of being triggered by lottery revenues deposited for MSA debt service. After June 30, 2024, 
$27.0 million must be transferred to the Prince George’s County Blue Line Corridor (BLC) 
Facility Fund annually, instead of an amount of up to $27.0 million annually in 
two installments after June 30, 2023. MSA must pay from the BLC Facility Fund any 
expenses that are incurred or approved by MSA relating to BLC facilities. MSA must 
submit a report to the House Appropriations Committee and the Senate Budget and 
Taxation Committee by December 15, 2024, on (1) all public and private development 
activities currently under construction or in the development process in BLC for the next 
30 years and (2) input from specified representatives on BLC’s future. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund revenues decrease by $8.8 million in 
FY 2025, and nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for the BLC Facility Fund increase 
correspondingly, as discussed below. MSA can implement the bill with existing resources. 
This bill modifies mandated distributions beginning in FY 2025.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($8.8) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
NonBud Rev. 
$0 
$8.8 
$0 
$0 
$0 
NonBud Exp. 
$0 
$8.8 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($8.8) 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 764/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County can engage with MSA for MSA’s report required 
under the bill with existing resources. Revenues are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Bus Rapid Transit System Grants  
 
BRTF is a special, nonlapsing fund, administered by the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT), to provide grants to eligible bus rapid transit system grantees. 
The fund is generally funded with lottery revenues. “Bus rapid transit system” means a bus 
line that operates on at least some portion of roadway dedicated to buses and offers 
off-board fare collection if a fare is charged. If deposits or payments are made as specified 
from the State Lottery Fund, an amount equaling those deposits or payments, but not 
exceeding $27.0 million, must be paid into BRTF for bus rapid transit system grants from 
the State Lottery Fund. MDOT must use these funds to award a grant to an “eligible 
grantee” – defined as a county or municipality that has a bus rapid transit system that 
operates in the county or municipality and has no ongoing or completed facility, as 
specified.  
 
If there is more than one eligible grantee, MDOT must distribute the funds in a specified 
manner. Eligible uses of the funds include:  
 
 
financing and refinancing of the costs related to the construction, acquisition, 
improvement, equipping, rehabilitation, and expansion of bus rapid transit system 
projects;  
 
payment of debt service on bonds issued to finance bus rapid transit system projects; 
 
payment of all reasonable expenses and charges related to bond issuance and 
borrowing; and  
 
payment of costs relating to the management and operation of bus rapid transit 
system projects. 
 
If an eligible grantee uses these funds for the payment of debt service on bonds issued to 
finance bus rapid transit system projects, the eligible grantee must issue bonds in 
accordance with an ordinance or resolution, which may specify all matters relating to the 
advertisement, sale, issuance, delivery, and payment of the bonds. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 764/ Page 3 
MDOT must distribute grants to eligible grantees in a timely manner and may not impose 
any additional conditions on an eligible grantee on receipt of a grant.      
 
Prince George’s County Blue Line Corridor Facility Fund  
 
The BLC Facility Fund is a continuing, nonlapsing fund administered by MSA to enable 
MSA to (1) use the fund as a revolving fund for implementation as it relates to a BLC 
facility and (2) pay any expenses incurred by MSA that are related to that BLC facility. To 
the extent considered appropriate by MSA, the receipts of the fund must be pledged to and 
used to pay the following relating to a BLC facility:  
 
 
debt service on MSA bonds;  
 
all reasonable charges and expenses related to MSA’s borrowing; and  
 
the management of MSA’s obligations.  
 
Beginning in fiscal 2024, up to $27.0 million must be paid annually in two installments to 
the BLC Facility Fund from the State Lottery Fund until the bonds that have been issued 
to finance BLC facilities are no longer outstanding and unpaid. 
 
State Lottery Fund  
 
Each month, after payments to lottery winners and agents and to the State lottery for 
operating expenses, the Comptroller must make payments from the State Lottery Fund for 
various purposes. Several of the distributions relating to the bill are:  
 
 
up to $14.2 million per fiscal year from fiscal 2024 through 2026 and up to 
$3.36 million per fiscal year from fiscal 2027 through 2039 to the Maryland 
Stadium Facilities Fund; 
 
up to $34.9 million per fiscal year from fiscal 2024 through 2026 and up to 
$45.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to the Camden Yards Football 
Sports Facility Supplemental Financing Fund; 
 
up to $40.9 million per fiscal year from fiscal 2024 through 2026, up to 
$41.64 million per fiscal year from fiscal 2027 through 2039, and up to 
$45.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2040 to the Camden Yards Baseball 
Sports Facility Supplemental Financing Fund;  
 
contingent on the above funds being provided, up to $27.0 million per fiscal year to 
MDOT/BRTF for the bus rapid transit system grant program; and 
 
up to $27.0 million paid annually in two installments to the BLC Facility Fund 
beginning in fiscal 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 764/ Page 4 
After specified statutory distributions are made from the State Lottery Fund, the remainder 
is deposited into the State’s general fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Under current law, BRTF is projected to receive $27.0 million 
annually for the foreseeable future based on deposits for MSA debt service so requiring 
$27.0 million to be transferred into BRTF under the bill codifies the expected distribution. 
 
Under current law, the BLC Facility Fund is projected to receive $18.2 million in 
fiscal 2025 and $27.0 million annually thereafter. Thus, requiring $27.0 million in 
fiscal 2025 to be transferred into the BLC Facility Fund accelerates receipt of nonbudgeted 
revenues for the BLC Facility Fund, with the corresponding effect of reducing general fund 
revenues by $8.8 million in fiscal 2025. Nonbudgeted expenditures for the BLC Facility 
Fund are assumed to increase correspondingly as funds are used to make debt service 
payments, although the timing of these payments is dependent on the actual debt service 
schedule. There is no effect in the out-years, as requiring $27.0 million to be transferred 
into the BLC Facility Fund codifies the expected distribution beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
Despite the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date, this analysis assumes distributions for 
fiscal 2024 under current law are unaffected. For example, $1,096,303 has already been 
transferred to the BLC Facility Fund in fiscal 2024. The bill modifies the timing for all 
distributions to the BLC Facility Fund to be after June 30, 2024.  
 
MSA can handle the bill’s reporting requirement with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1116 (Senator Zucker) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control 
Agency; Maryland Stadium Authority; Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 764/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5