START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 753 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 753 
(Delegate Young) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Maryland Technology Development Corporation - 
Application and Reporting Requirements 
 
  
This bill requires the Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) to 
include an option for an applicant to provide specified demographic information in its 
investment application. TEDCO may not take any adverse action against an applicant who 
declines to provide the information, and the application must include a statement that the 
information is voluntary but encouraged. Beginning October 1, 2024, and annually 
thereafter, TEDCO must report to the Governor, the Maryland Economic Development 
Commission, and the General Assembly specified information related to the corporation’s 
investments and, if available, provide related de-identified and disaggregated demographic 
information. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for TEDCO increase by $50,000 to $75,000 in 
FY 2025 for information technology costs. For purposes of this estimate, the midpoint is 
shown below. TEDCO staff can handle the bill’s operational requirements, as discussed 
below. TEDCO program finances are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
62,500 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($62,500) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 753/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  TEDCO must include in the application for investment from the 
corporation required under current law: 
 
 
an option for an applicant to provide the applicant’s race, ethnicity, age, gender, 
disability status, veteran status, and the geographic area of the State where the 
applicant’s primary place of business is located; and 
 
a statement advising the applicant that provision of the information is voluntary but 
that encourages applicants to provide the information. 
 
The new annual report required by October 1 of each year must include: 
 
 
the number of applications TEDCO received; 
 
the amount of investment funding that was available at the beginning and the end of 
the fiscal year; 
 
the amount of investment funding that was requested; 
 
the number of applicants TEDCO invested in; and 
 
the amount of investment funding TEDCO awarded. 
 
The information must specify which applications and investments were from social impact 
funds, seed funds, and the Maryland Venture Fund. Additionally, if available, the report 
must provide information that has been de-identified and disaggregated on applicants and 
qualified business founders by race, ethnicity, age, gender, disability status, veteran status, 
and geographic location as well as the degree to which applicants and founders identify 
with more than one demographic category. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, TEDCO may make grants to or provide equity investment 
financing for technology-based businesses, if: 
 
 
the investments are made to a qualified business, as that term is further defined; 
 
the investments are made on review and approval of a written application that 
(1) contains sufficient information to verify that the qualified business has its 
principal business operations in the State or will have a substantial economic impact 
on the State and (2) contains a certification of the veracity of the information by an 
authorized signatory of the qualified business; and  
 
at least the number of members that constitutes a quorum of any fund or authority 
has been appointed under the requirements for that fund or authority. 
 
TEDCO has two ongoing general reporting requirements:  an annual report to the 
Governor, the Maryland Economic Development Commission, and the General Assembly 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 753/ Page 3 
due each October 1; and a biannual report to the same recipients, plus the Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee. The reports must include specified information related to the 
entities receiving funding from TEDCO programs. 
 
For further information on TEDCO, including a general overview and recent program 
additions, see the Appendix – Maryland Technology Development Corporation. 
 
State Expenditures:  TEDCO advises that it currently collects the required demographic 
information for some, but not all, of its programs. As such, TEDCO estimates one-time 
information technology costs of $50,000 to $75,000 in fiscal 2025 to adjust remaining 
application forms for data collection. Existing TEDCO program staff, plus an anticipated 
dedicated information technology staff expected to be hired independent of the bill, can 
handle the bill’s operational requirements, which include outreach, data validation, and 
reporting. TEDCO advises that the necessary staff time represents approximately $50,000 
in compensation costs in fiscal 2025, although that amount is expected to decrease over 
time as program applicants and TEDCO adjust to the bill’s requirements. The bill also 
prohibits TEDCO from taking any adverse action against an applicant who declines to 
provide the information. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for TEDCO increase by $50,000 to $75,000 in 
fiscal 2025 only, TEDCO staff can handle the bill’s operational requirements, and TEDCO 
program finances are not affected. 
 
Additional Comments:  The above estimates assume that the bill applies to TEDCO’s 
investment programs and not its grant programs, consistent with the bill’s ongoing 
references to investment applications and investment funding data. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 358 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 753/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 753/ Page 5 
Appendix – Maryland Technology  
Development Corporation 
 
 
The Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO) is an independent entity 
established by the Maryland General Assembly in 1998 to enhance the transfer of 
technology from universities and federal laboratories to the private sector and foster the 
growth of companies in critical or high-growth sectors. TEDCO investments must meet 
statutory eligibility criteria that generally require a business to have and subsequently 
maintain a presence in the State. TEDCO programs typically assist companies based on a 
company’s stage of development, from early stage and technology transfer to growth stage. 
 
TEDCO’s purview and funding has expanded in recent years as legacy programs were 
transferred from the Department of Commerce and new programs were established directly 
within TEDCO. The fiscal 2024 budget includes $54.7 million in general funds for TEDCO 
programs. The following programs have been established by legislation since 2021, with 
mandated appropriations also noted.  
 
 
Pre-Seed Builder Fund – supports the development of start-up companies run by 
entrepreneurs from socially or economically disadvantaged backgrounds that hinder 
access to traditional forms of capital and executive networks at the pre-seed stage. 
The Governor must include appropriations in the budget bill in the following 
amounts:  $5.0 million in fiscal 2023; $6.2 million in fiscal 2024; and $7.5 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Inclusion Fund – provides capital investment in technology-based businesses that  
(1) would qualify for investment under the Builder Fund, as provided in TEDCO 
regulations; (2) are at least 30% owned by individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage; and (3) are controlled and managed for at least one year after the time 
of investment by an individual or individuals who demonstrate economic 
disadvantage. 
 
 
Maryland Makerspace Initiative Program – encourages the establishment and 
expansion of makerspaces throughout the State. The Governor must include an 
appropriation in the annual budget bill of at least $1.0 million in fiscal 2024 through 
2028 for the fund. The program terminates September 30, 2028. 
 
 
Maryland Equity Investment Fund – allows unappropriated general fund surplus 
to be invested in a “qualified business” – with a goal to increase private equity and 
venture capital in the State – and the interest earnings and investment returns 
realized to the benefit of participants of the several pension systems managed by the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 753/ Page 6 
State Retirement and Pension System. For fiscal 2024, the Governor was required 
to include an appropriation in the budget bill to the fund equal to 10% of the 
unappropriated general fund surplus in excess of $10.0 million from the 
second prior fiscal year, up to a maximum of $10.0 million, with a corresponding 
decrease in the typical required appropriation. The maximum amount was 
appropriated. 
 
 
Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer Incentive 
(SBIR/STTR) Program – allows eligible small businesses to apply for State 
awards or investments of 25% of SBIR/STTR federal grants, limited to $25,000 for 
Phase I funding or $75,000 for Phase II funding. TEDCO may make up to  
20 Phase I distributions and 10 Phase II distributions per fiscal year for a total of 
$1.25 million. 
 
 
Equitech Growth Fund and Commission – supports economic competitiveness 
and inclusive growth of emerging and advanced industries in the State through the 
creation of supporting infrastructure assets, resources, and a diverse workforce that 
builds the strengths of the State’s economy. TEDCO must award grants, 
investments, loans, or other financial assistance to public, nonprofit, or private 
entities in the State. Awards must target workforce development and infrastructure. 
From fiscal 2025 through 2033, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $5.0 million for awards from the fund. 
 
 
Cyber Maryland Program and Fund – creates a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, 
serves as a hub for State workforce development programs in cybersecurity, and 
generally coordinates cybersecurity and research and innovation in the State, among 
other things. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor may include an appropriation 
in the annual budget bill of $250,000 for the fund; however, the Governor must 
include an appropriation that is sufficient to hire staff for the program. 
 
 
Human-relevant Research Program and Fund – promotes State-funded research 
intended to develop human-relevant alternatives to using nonhuman animals in 
testing and research through grants and loans. TEDCO must establish a grant and 
loan program, as specified, which includes contracting with an independent 
scientific review board to review research proposals and make recommendations to 
TEDCO. The program is funded by fees on entities conducting research on 
nonhuman animals. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6