START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 780 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 780 
(Delegate Embry, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Competitive Sealed Proposals - Security Contracts 
 
 
This bill establishes that the competitive sealed proposal procurement method is the 
preferred method to solicit security services if the contract is expected to have a value 
greater than $1,000,000. The bill takes effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a material effect on State operations or 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State procurement law identifies multiple procurement methods available 
to State procurement officials depending on the nature and circumstances of the 
procurement. The two most common methods are competitive sealed bids and competitive 
sealed proposals. In general, procurement officials have the discretion to use whichever 
method best suits the nature and circumstances of the procurement. However, the 
competitive sealed proposal method is identified as the preferred (but not required) method 
for the procurement of human, social, cultural, or educational services and for real property 
leases. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 780/ Page 2 
The basis for award under competitive sealed bids is (1) the lowest bid price; (2) the lowest 
evaluated bid price; or (3) under specified circumstances, the bid most favorable to the 
State. 
 
For competitive sealed proposals, procurement officials establish (1) the factors, including 
price, that are the basis for the contract award and (2) the relative importance of each factor. 
They must then communicate those factors in the solicitation and award the contract to the 
offeror whose proposal or best and final offer is determined to be the most advantageous 
to the State based on the identified factors. This method, therefore, allows State agencies 
to award contracts based on factors other than lowest price if so specified in the solicitation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2