START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 700 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 700 
(Delegates D. Jones and Fair) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Election Judges - Revisions 
 
 
This bill defines “returning election judge,” for the purpose of the existing additional 
compensation provided to returning election judges, to mean an election judge who has 
served a term of office for the immediately preceding statewide election. The bill requires 
that a county employee who serves as an election judge during the hours that the employee 
is scheduled to work receive administrative leave and election judge compensation. The 
bill alters a requirement that the State Board of Elections (SBE) develop and provide to the 
local boards of elections a specified election judge recruitment marketing campaign so that, 
instead, SBE must develop and implement the marketing campaign and local boards may 
supplement the campaign. The bill also requires SBE to adopt regulations to standardize 
and minimize specified forms or documentation required of election judges. The bill takes 
effect January 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures decrease annually, beginning in FY 2026. Under 
one set of assumptions (discussed below), general fund expenditures decrease by 
approximately $190,100 annually, beginning in FY 2026. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures increase by $25,000 in FY 2025 and 
decrease annually beginning in FY 2026. Under one set of assumptions (discussed below), 
local government expenditures decrease, collectively, by approximately $190,100 
annually, beginning in FY 2026. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 700/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Compensation 
 
 
Returning Election Judge 
 
The bill establishes that only election judges who have served a term of office for the 
immediately preceding statewide election (defined under the bill as “returning election 
judges”) receive at least $100 more per day in compensation than other election judges. 
Under current law, any election judge who has previously served as an election judge 
receives the extra compensation. 
 
 
County Employee Service as an Election Judge 
 
The bill requires that a county employee who serves as an election judge during hours that 
the employee is otherwise scheduled to work for the county receive (1) one hour of 
administrative leave for each hour of service as an election judge, up to a total of 
eight hours for each day of service and (2) the applicable election judge compensation. 
 
Recruitment Marketing Campaign 
 
The bill alters a requirement (established under Chapter 157 of 2023) that SBE develop 
and provide to the local boards of elections a specified marketing campaign to recruit 
individuals to serve as election judges in polling places in the State. The bill alters the 
requirement so that SBE must develop and implement the marketing campaign to recruit 
individuals to serve as election judges in polling places in the State. The bill also authorizes 
a local board to supplement the marketing campaign implemented by SBE. 
 
Standardized and Minimized Forms or Documentation 
 
The bill requires SBE to adopt regulations to standardize and minimize forms or 
documentation required to (1) apply to serve as an election judge; (2) serve as an election 
judge; or (3) receive compensation for service as an election judge. A local board of 
elections or county government may not require additional forms or documentation for 
election judges or prospective election judges in excess of the forms or documentation 
required in the SBE regulations. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 700/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Election Judge Minimum Compensation 
 
Chapter 157 established minimum compensation levels for election judges. For each 
election judge who has not previously served as an election judge, the compensation must 
be at least $250 per day for each Election Day and each early voting day actually served. 
For each election judge who has previously served as an election judge, the compensation 
for each Election Day and each early voting day actually served must be at least $100 more 
per day than the compensation provided to an election judge who has not previously served 
as an election judge. SBE must reimburse each local board of elections for $50 of the extra 
compensation that is paid to each returning election judge (who has previously served as 
an election judge). Each election judge must be paid at least $50 for each course of 
instruction the election judge completes. 
 
SBE regulations define “previously served” to mean an election judge who (1) was 
previously appointed as an election judge under State law; (2) completed a term of office; 
and (3) served in the capacity of an election judge during the term of office in a statewide 
primary, general, or special election. “Term of office” means the time from appointment 
to the office of election judge through the Tuesday that is 13 weeks before the next 
statewide primary election. 
 
State Employee Service as an Election Judge 
 
A State employee who serves as an election judge during hours that the employee is 
otherwise scheduled to work for the State (1) may use one hour of administrative leave for 
each hour of service as an election judge, up to a total of eight hours for each day of service, 
and (2) must receive the applicable election judge compensation. 
 
Recruitment Marketing Campaign 
 
Chapter 157 requires SBE to develop and provide to the local boards of elections a 
marketing campaign to recruit individuals to serve as election judges in polling places in 
the State. The marketing campaign must (1) disseminate information on the importance of 
election judges; (2) disseminate information on how to apply to be an election judge, 
eligibility requirements, and compensation; and (3) target diverse voter populations, 
including multilingual individuals. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 700/ Page 4 
Local Board Guidelines for Election Judge Qualification and Appointment 
 
A local board of elections may adopt guidelines consistent with applicable State law for 
the determination of the qualifications of persons considered for appointment and for the 
process of appointment as election judges. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Definition of “Returning Election Judge” 
 
General fund expenditures decrease annually, beginning in fiscal 2026, due to the bill’s 
definition of “returning election judge” reducing the number of election judges who receive 
additional compensation during the 2026 primary election (accounting for the bill’s  
January 1, 2025 effective date) and future elections. 
 
The extent of the decrease cannot be reliably estimated at this time. Sufficient data is not 
available to estimate how many election judges will receive the additional compensation 
under current law and under the bill; however, for illustrative purposes, if it is assumed 
that 75% of election judges receive the additional compensation under current law and only 
65% receive the additional compensation under the bill, general fund expenditures decrease 
by approximately $190,100 annually beginning in fiscal 2026, reflecting a reduction in the 
State’s costs to reimburse the local boards of elections for $50 of the minimum 
$100 additional compensation provided to returning election judges. 
 
Alteration of Marketing Campaign Requirement 
 
This analysis assumes that the bill’s alteration of the marketing campaign requirement does 
not materially affect State (or local) finances because the alteration conforms to the 
assumption made in the fiscal and policy note for House Bill 1200 (Chapter 157) of 2023 
(which established the marketing campaign requirement) that SBE develops and 
implements the campaign on behalf of the local boards. The cost of the campaign has 
already been accounted for in the fiscal and policy note for House Bill 1200 – an estimated 
cost of $1.25 million to 1.35 million in the first fiscal year of implementation (split 50/50 
between SBE and the local boards) and similar costs in subsequent fiscal years. The 
alteration made by this bill should have no additional fiscal impact beyond what has already 
been accounted for in the fiscal and policy note for House Bill 1200. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures increase by $25,000 in fiscal 2025 
and decrease annually beginning in fiscal 2026, due to (1) one-time programming costs 
($25,000) in fiscal 2025 to modify the election judge module of the statewide voter 
registration system to identify “returning election judges,” as defined by the bill, to receive 
additional compensation and (2) the bill’s definition of “returning election judge” reducing 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 700/ Page 5 
the number of election judges who receive additional compensation during the 
2026 primary election (held in fiscal 2026) and future elections. 
 
As stated above under the State Fiscal Effect, the extent of the decrease in costs (in 
fiscal 2026 and future years) for additional election judge compensation cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time; however, for illustrative purposes, under the assumptions stated 
above, local government expenditures decrease by approximately $190,100 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2026, reflecting a reduction in the local boards’ $50 share of the 
minimum $100 additional compensation provided to returning election judges. 
 
As discussed under the State Fiscal Effect, the bill’s alteration of the marketing campaign 
requirement is assumed to not materially affect local finances because the alteration 
conforms to the assumption made in the fiscal and policy note for House Bill 1200 that 
SBE develops and implements the campaign on behalf of the local boards. The bill’s 
authorization for a local board to supplement the marketing campaign is also assumed to 
not materially affect local finances since a local board can undertake election judge 
recruitment efforts even in the absence of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Charles, Garrett, and Howard counties; Maryland 
State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5