START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 786 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 786 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations – Limited License to Practice Dentistry – Services for Adults 
 
 
This bill authorizes the State Board of Dental Examiners (BDE) to waive specified 
education requirements for an applicant for a limited license to practice adult, in addition 
to pediatric, dentistry. The board may grant a waiver if, in addition to other requirements 
under current law, the dental director of the federally qualified health center (FQHC) or 
Maryland qualified health center (MQHC) for which an applicant has contractually agreed 
to provide at least two years of dental services requests the waiver from BDE and states 
that circumstances exist to justify granting the waiver. The bill also establishes a pathway 
for practitioners of adult dentistry who receive a waiver under the bill to receive a general 
dentistry license in the State. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not likely affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Any impact on local health departments (LHDs) can be absorbed within 
existing budgeted resources. LHDs may benefit from a larger pool of limited licensees to 
help fill vacancies for adult dental programs. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Under current law, a limited license is issued to graduates 
of dental school outside of the United States or Canada and authorizes the licensee to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 786/ Page 2 
practice dentistry, including as an intern or resident, only for and on patients of a specific 
institution or public health program named on the license. 
 
Waiver Process for Limited License 
 
Under current law, BDE may waive the education requirements for an applicant for a 
limited license to practice dentistry who does not hold a dental education degree or 
equivalent from an institution recognized by the board, if the applicant:   
 
 
holds a dental education degree or equivalent from a school, college, or faculty of 
dentistry other than one located in the United States or Canada; 
 
has successfully completed at least a two-year pediatric dentistry residency program 
at a dental school or hospital authorized by any state and recognized by BDE; 
 
either is a pediatric dental fellow, or has successfully completed a pediatric dental 
fellowship at the University of Maryland Dental School; 
 
is contractually obligated to provide pediatric dental services for at least two years 
in an FQHC or MQHC only to specified patients; 
 
limits practice to the public health dental clinic, FQHC, or MQHC for which the 
applicant has contractually agreed to provide pediatric dental services; 
 
is found to be of good moral character and professionally competent; and  
 
meets any other requirements that BDE may reasonably require. 
 
The health officer of the public health program for which the applicant has contractually 
agreed to provide at least two years of pediatric dental services, and the Dean of the 
University of Maryland Dental School must request the waiver from BDE and state 
circumstances that exist to justify granting the waiver. The bill removes the requirement 
for the Dean of the University of Maryland School of Dentistry (rather than the University 
of Maryland Dental School) request the waiver from BDE. 
 
Under the bill, the waiver process for a limited license is expanded by removing the term 
pediatric and allowing applicants providing either pediatric or adult dentistry to qualify. 
The bill also authorizes an applicant to complete a dental fellowship at the University of 
Maryland School of Dentistry (rather than the University of Maryland Dental School) or 
another dental school recognized by BDE. 
 
Path to General License for Limited Licensees Granted a Waiver 
 
Under current law, BDE may issue a general license to a limited licensee who was granted 
a waiver, if the limited licensee:   
 
 
successfully completes at least a two-year contractual obligation to provide 
pediatric dental care; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 786/ Page 3 
 
submits an application for a general license to practice dentistry; 
 
passes the (1) American Board of Dental Examiners, Inc. examination; (2) Maryland 
Dental Jurisprudence Examination; and (3) National Board Examinations; 
 
demonstrates oral English competency, as specified; and  
 
is found to be of good moral character.  
 
Under the bill, this pathway to a general license for individuals with a limited license issued 
via waiver is expanded to allow both pediatric and adult dentists to qualify. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 799 (Senators McKay and Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; University 
System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3