START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 738 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 738 
(Delegate Wims, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Business Regulation - Licensed Home Improvement Contractors - Liability 
Insurance 
 
 
This bill increases (from $50,000 to $500,000) the amount of general liability insurance 
that a licensed home improvement contractor (or an applicant for a home improvement 
contractor license) must maintain.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Maryland Home Improvement 
Commission (MHIC) finances or operations.      
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MHIC in the Maryland Department of Labor licenses and regulates home 
improvement contractors and salespersons, subject to specified requirements for licensure 
and ongoing licensee behavior. MHIC also administers a guaranty fund for the purpose of 
reimbursing homeowners for actual losses due to the errors and omissions of licensed 
contractors and their subcontractors, salespersons, and employees. 
 
Chapter 429 of 2023 raised, from $250,000 to $1,000,000, the minimum level at which the 
MHIC must keep the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund. The Act also increased, from 
$100,000 to $250,000, the maximum possible amount that may be awarded by MHIC from 
the Home Improvement Guaranty Fund to all claimants for acts or omissions of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 738/ Page 2 
one contractor unless, after MHIC has paid out the $250,000, the contractor reimburses 
$250,000 to the fund.         
 
Additional Comments:  MHIC advises that, in practice, contractors’ insurance policies 
are generally written for $500,000 or $1,000,000. According to MHIC, $50,000 policies 
are not available. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 806 (Senators Zucker and Feldman) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2