START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 709 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 709 
(Delegates Rogers and Schmidt) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Licensed Real Estate Brokers - Branch Offices - Designation of Managers 
 
 
This bill authorizes a licensed real estate broker to designate himself or herself as the 
manager of a branch office maintained by the licensed real estate broker. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Real Estate Commission can implement the bill’s changes 
with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A licensed real estate broker may maintain branch offices in the State after 
obtaining a branch office certificate. An applicant must submit an application on the 
required form, submit written notice of the identity of the individual appointed as manager 
of the branch office, and pay the required $5 application fee. 
 
The licensed real estate broker must designate a manager for each branch office of the 
broker. The manager must be: 
 
 
a licensed real estate broker; 
 
a licensed real estate salesperson who has at least three years of experience 
providing real estate brokerage services; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 709/ Page 2 
 
a licensed real estate salesperson who (1) has successfully completed an approved 
course in real estate for real estate brokers and (2) has passed the real estate broker’s 
examination given by the commission. 
 
The manager must supervise the provision of real estate brokerage services by the associate 
brokers and sales agents registered to that office, as specified. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may reduce costs associated with opening and/or 
maintaining a branch office by eliminating the need to hire a separate office manager. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 462 (Senator Watson) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2