START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1019

Chapter 1019

(House Bill 743)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Alcoholic Beverages – Promoter’s ~~License~~ Permit

FOR the purpose of altering the promoter’s permit in Frederick County to be a promoter’s
(on–sale) beer, wine, and liquor ~~license~~ permit; authorizing the Board of License
Commissioners for Frederick County to issue the ~~license~~ permit to a certain
for–profit organization under certain circumstances; authorizing a ~~license~~ permit
holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at an event; and generally relating to alcoholic
beverages in Frederick County.

~~BY~~ ~~renumbering~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Alcoholic~~ ~~Beverages~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~
~~Section~~ ~~20–1103~~
~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~Section~~ ~~20–1011.1~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2016~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 20–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section ~~20–1011.1~~ 20–1103
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)
~~(As~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That ~~Section(s)~~ ~~20–1103~~ ~~of~~ ~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Alcoholic~~ ~~Beverages~~ ~~and~~ ~~Cannabis~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Annotated~~
~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~be~~ ~~renumbered~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~Section(s)~~ ~~20–1011.1.~~

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

20–102.

This title applies only in Frederick County.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1019 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~20–1011.1.~~ 20–1103.

(a) There is a promoter’s [permit] (ON–SALE) BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
~~LICENSE.~~

(b) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, [A for–profit
organization shall obtain the permit from the] THE THE Board [before the organization]
may [publicize, sell tickets for, organize, operate, produce, or stage] ISSUE THE LICENSE
PERMIT FOR USE BY A FOR–PROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT PUBLICIZES, SELLS
TICKETS FOR, ORGANIZES, OPERATES, PRODUCES, OR STAGES an event [at which]
WHERE alcoholic beverages are sold or served.

(2) THE PERMIT HOLDER MAY NOT HOLD AN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
LICENSE UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

(c) THE LICENSE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE PERMIT HOLDER TO
SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR AT AN EVENT.

(D) The Board may adopt regulations establishing the requirements for
conducting an event described in subsection (b) of this section, including health and safety
standards to be met by a [permit] LICENSE holder.

[(d)] (E) The [permit] LICENSE fee is:

(1) $50, if the promoter expects that fewer than 500 individuals will attend;

(2) $250, if the promoter expects that from 500 to 1,000 individuals will
attend;

(3) $600, if the promoter expects that from 1,001 to 3,000 individuals will
attend; and

(4) $1,000, if the promoter expects that more than 3,000 individuals will
attend.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2