START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 930

Chapter 930

(House Bill 755)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Social Work Examiners – Board Membership and Certified Social
Worker Licenses

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the State Board of Social Work Examiners;
repealing obsolete references to certified social worker licenses; and generally
relating to the State Board of Social Work Examiners.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–101(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–202(a), 19–302.1, and 19–309(d)(6)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

19–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the State Board of Social Work Examiners.

19–202.

(a) (1) The Board consists of 12 members.

(2) Of the 12 Board members:

(i) 10 shall be licensed social workers of whom:

1. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, 1 is a licensed
bachelor social worker;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 930 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, 1 is a licensed
master social worker at the time of appointment;

3. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, at least 1 is [a]:

A. A licensed certified social worker; OR

B. A LICENSED MASTER SOCIAL WORKER WHO IS
APPROVED FOR INDEPENDENT PRACTICE;

4. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, at least 4 are
licensed certified social workers–clinical;

5. 1 is a licensed social worker employed by the Department
of Human Services; and

6. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, 1 is a licensed
social worker who is:

A. Primarily engaged in social worker education at a social
work program accredited by the Council on Social Work Education; and

B. Nominated from a list of names submitted by the deans
and directors of the Maryland Social Work Education Programs; and

(ii) 2 shall be consumer members.

(3) If a [licensed bachelor social worker, a licensed master social worker, a
licensed certified social worker, a licensed certified social worker–clinical, or a licensed
social worker] LICENSEE OF THE SPECIFIED LICENSE CATEGORY is not appointed to the
Board under paragraph (2)(i) of this subsection within 3 months of a vacancy, a licensee of
any license category shall be appointed immediately if that licensee is qualified to be a
member of the Board under subsections (b) and (d) of this section.

(4) The Governor shall appoint all members of the Board with the advice
of the Secretary and the advice and consent of the Senate.

(5) The Governor shall appoint all social work members of the Board from
a list of nominees containing names submitted by:

(i) Professional social work associations in the State;

(ii) Any person who provides a statement of nomination signed by at
least 15 social workers licensed in the State;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 930

(iii) The secretaries of public agencies of the State where social
workers are employed; or

(iv) The corporate executive officers or executive directors of private
organizations where social workers are employed.

19–302.1.

To obtain a [certified social worker license or a] certified social worker–clinical
license, an out–of–state applicant shall:

(1) Meet the requirements of § 19–302(a) of this subtitle;

(2) Be licensed or registered to practice social work in another state under
a category of licensure that is equivalent to a [certified social worker license or a] certified
social worker–clinical license;

(3) Have passed an examination in that state as a condition of licensure;
and

(4) Have performed at least 1,000 hours of compensated social work
practice per year for 5 years out of the 10 years preceding application to the Board.

19–309.

(d) Subject to subsection (e) of this section, the Board shall reissue a license to an
individual who:

(6) (i) Passes the respective examination required for initial licensure;
or

(ii) 1. Holds an active license to practice social work in another
state under a category of licensure that is equivalent to a licensed bachelor social worker,
licensed master social worker, [certified social worker,] or certified social worker–clinical;
and

2. Has passed an examination in that state as a condition of
licensure.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3