START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1021

Chapter 1021

(House Bill 762)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County – Alcoholic Beverages – Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor
License – Off–Premises Consumption

MC 9–24

FOR the purpose of authorizing the holder of a certain Class B beer, wine, and liquor license
in Montgomery County to sell beer and wine in certain sealed containers for
off–premises consumption, subject to certain requirements; authorizing the Board of
License Commissioners for Montgomery County to adopt certain regulations; and
generally relating to alcoholic beverages in Montgomery County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 25–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 25–902
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

25–102.

This title applies only in Montgomery County.

25–902.

(a) There is a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license.

(b) The Board may issue the license to the owner or operator of a restaurant or
hotel if:

(1) before the issuance of the license, the owner or operator attests in a
sworn statement that gross receipts from food sales in the restaurant or hotel will be at
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1021 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

least equal to 40% of the gross receipts from the sale of food and alcoholic beverages; and

(2) before each renewal of the license, the owner or operator attests in a
sworn statement that the gross receipts from food sales in the restaurant or hotel for the
12 months immediately before the application for renewal have been at least equal to 40%
of the gross receipts from the sale of food and alcoholic beverages.

(c) The license authorizes the license holder to sell [beer, wine, and liquor at
retail] at the place described in the license:

(1) BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR AT RETAIL for on–premises consumption;
AND

(2) BEER AND WINE IN CONTAINERS SEALED WITH THE
MANUFACTURER’S ORIGINAL SEAL FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION ONLY TO A
PERSON WHO HAS PURCHASED PREPARED FOOD FROM THE LICENSED PREMISES.

(D) (1) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY NOT DISPLAY OR PROVIDE SHELVING
FOR BEER OR WINE FOR OFF–PREMISES SALES IN AREAS OF THE ESTABLISHMENT
THAT ARE ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC.

(2) OFF–SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES RECEIPTS COLLECTED
UNDER THE LICENSE SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE CALCULATION OF GROSS
RECEIPTS FROM THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

(3) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL BEER AND WINE FOR
OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION ONLY WHEN THE LICENSED PREMISES IS OPEN FOR
BUSINESS AS A HOTEL OR RESTAURANT.

(E) (1) THE BOARD MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION, INCLUDING REGULATIONS THAT LIMIT THE QUANTITY OF BEER AND WINE
THAT MAY BE SOLD TO A PERSON FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION IN A SINGLE
TRANSACTION.

[(d)] (2) The Board shall adopt regulations to provide for audits to determine
the ratio of gross receipts from the sale of food to gross receipts from the sale of beer, wine,
and liquor.

[(e)] (F) (1) The Board may revoke a license if the license holder fails to
maintain the ratio of gross receipts from the sale of food to gross receipts from the sale of
alcoholic beverages required under this section:

(i) during the initial license year, for 3 consecutive months; or

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1021

(ii) after the initial license year, for each license or calendar year.

(2) The Board may require a license holder to provide supporting data as
the Board considers necessary to establish that the license holder has met the requirements
of this section relating to the ratio of gross receipts from the sale of food to gross receipts
from the sale of alcoholic beverages.

[(f)] (G) The annual license fee is $2,500.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3