START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 759 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 759 
(Delegate Alston) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses - Professional Liability Insurance 
Coverage - Notification Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires each advanced practice registered nurse (APRN) practicing as an APRN 
in the State to notify a patient in writing if (1) the APRN does not maintain professional 
liability insurance coverage or (2) their professional liability insurance coverage has lapsed 
for any period of time and has not been renewed. Each APRN practicing in the State as an 
APRN who does not maintain professional liability insurance coverage must post such 
information in a conspicuous location in their place of practice. The State Board of Nursing 
(MBON) must develop appropriate language for the required written notification. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBON can develop appropriate language for the required written 
notification using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Written notice must be (1) provided at the first visit by the patient during 
any period in which the APRN does not maintain professional liability insurance, unless 
the visit is for the purpose of receiving incidental medical care that will be rendered free of 
charge, and as part of each informed consent obtained before any procedure or operation 
discussed or offered for the patient’s consideration is performed; (2) signed by the patient 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 759/ Page 2 
at the time of the patient’s visit or at the time the informed consent is signed; and 
(3) retained by the APRN as part of patient records. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Advanced Practice Registered Nurse 
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed or certified by MBON to practice nursing in the 
State. In Maryland, an individual must be licensed as a registered nurse and certified as an 
APRN by MBON to practice as a nurse practitioner, nurse anesthetist, nurse midwife, or 
clinical nurse specialist. 
 
“Practice registered nursing” means the performance of acts requiring substantial 
specialized knowledge, judgment, and skill based on the biological, physiological, 
behavioral, or sociological sciences as the basis for assessment, nursing diagnosis, 
planning, implementation, and evaluation of the practice of nursing to maintain health, 
prevent illness, or care for or rehabilitate the ill, injured, or infirm. “Practice advanced 
practice registered nursing” means to practice registered nursing within the scope of 
practice in the area of specialty for which the individual holds certification from a 
nationally recognized certifying body recognized by MBON. 
 
Medical Professional Liability Insurance 
 
Medical professional liability insurance (also known as medical malpractice insurance) 
provides coverage against damages due to medical injury arising out of the performance of 
professional services rendered or which should have been rendered by a health care 
professional. 
 
Chapter 770 of 2017, among other things, required licensed physicians to (1) provide 
written notification regarding professional liability insurance to patients; (2) maintain a 
signed written notification in the patient’s records; and (3) conspicuously post information 
regarding professional liability insurance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 996 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 759/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland State 
Treasurer’s Office; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Care Alternative 
Dispute Resolution Office; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3