START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 39

Chapter 39

(House Bill 760)

AN ACT concerning

~~County~~ ~~Boards~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ ~~–~~ ~~Annual~~ ~~Financial~~ ~~Audits~~ ~~–~~ ~~Alterations~~
Office of Legislative Audits – Local School Systems – Report

FOR the purpose of requiring ~~county~~ ~~boards~~ ~~of~~ ~~education~~ ~~to~~ ~~address~~ ~~certain~~ ~~repeat~~ ~~findings~~
~~and~~ ~~recommendations~~ ~~contained~~ ~~in~~ ~~certain~~ ~~annual~~ ~~financial~~ ~~audits~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~audits,~~
~~including~~ ~~audits~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Legislative~~ ~~Audits;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~annual~~
~~financial~~ ~~audits~~ ~~of~~ ~~county~~ ~~boards~~ ~~of~~ ~~education~~ each local school system, on or before
a certain date, to submit a report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee on
the status of implementation of corrective actions to address repeat findings and
recommendations identified by the Office of Legislative Audits in the most recent
audit; requiring each local school system to publish the report on its website; and
generally relating to audits of each local school system.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 5–109
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 2–1220(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

5–109.

(a) ~~(1)~~ Each county board shall provide for an annual audit of its financial
transactions and accounts.

~~(2)~~ ~~At~~ ~~the~~ ~~request~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department,~~ ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~an~~ ~~audit~~
~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~5–203~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title.~~

(b) (1) The audit shall be made by a certified public accountant or a
partnership of certified public accountants who are:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 39 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) Licensed by the State Board of Public Accountancy; and

(ii) Approved by the State Superintendent.

(2) The audit shall be made in accordance with the standards and
regulations adopted by the State Board.

(3) THE AUDIT SHALL ADDRESS ANY REPEAT FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM ANY AUDITOR, INCLUDING THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE
~~AUDITS.~~

(c) (1) The results of the audit, including the letter of recommendation
submitted by the auditor, are a matter of public record.

(2) The results shall be reported within 3 months after the close of the fiscal
year for the county board on the form and in the manner required by the State Board to:

(i) The State Superintendent;

(ii) The county fiscal authority;

(iii) The Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the General
Assembly;

(iv) The Senate Budget and Taxation Committee;

(v) The Senate Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs
Committee;

(vi) The House Appropriations Committee; and

(vii) The House Committee on Ways and Means.

(d) In addition to the audit required by this section, the county commissioners or
county council may conduct an audit using auditors employed by the county.

Article – State Government

2–1220.

(e) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, at least once
every 6 years, the Office of Legislative Audits shall conduct an audit of each local school
system to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the financial management practices
of the local school system.

(2) The audits may be performed concurrently or separately.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 39

(3) The Office of Legislative Audits shall provide information regarding the
audit process to the local school system before the audit is conducted.

(4) (i) Subject to the limitation under subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, beginning in fiscal year 2017, a local school system shall be exempt from the
audit requirement under paragraph (1) of this subsection if the county governing body, the
county board of education, and the county delegation to the Maryland General Assembly
consisting of the county senators and delegates each submits a letter to the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee requesting an exemption on or before November 1 of fiscal year
2017, or on or before November 1 of the last year of a 6–year audit cycle under paragraph
(1) of this subsection, as determined by the Office of Legislative Audits.

(ii) A local school system may not be exempt for two consecutive
6–year audit cycles.

(5) (I) ON OR BEFORE NOVEMBER 1 OF THE THIRD YEAR OF A
6–YEAR AUDIT CYCLE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, EACH LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE JOINT AUDIT AND EVALUATION
COMMITTEE ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF CORRECTIVE ACTIONS TO
ADDRESS REPEAT FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS IDENTIFIED BY THE OFFICE
OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS IN THE MOST RECENT AUDIT CONDUCTED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SHALL PUBLISH THE REPORT
REQUIRED UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH ON ITS WEBSITE.

(III) BEFORE PUBLISHING THE REPORT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, ANY CYBERSECURITY FINDINGS SHALL
BE REDACTED IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH AUDITING BEST PRACTICES.

(6) Notwithstanding paragraph (4) of this subsection, the Joint Audit and
Evaluation Committee may direct the Office of Legislative Audits to conduct an audit of a
local school system at any time.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3