START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 530

Chapter 530

(House Bill 738)

AN ACT concerning

Business Regulation – Licensed Home Improvement Contractors – Liability
Insurance

FOR the purpose of increasing the dollar amount of general liability insurance that an
applicant for a home improvement contractor license or a licensed home
improvement contractor must maintain; and generally relating to liability insurance
for licensed home improvement contractors.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 8–301(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Regulation
Section 8–302.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Regulation

8–301.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, a person must have a contractor
license whenever the person acts as a contractor in the State.

8–302.1.

(a) An applicant for a contractor license shall maintain general liability insurance
in the amount of at least [$50,000] $500,000.

(b) A licensed contractor shall maintain general liability insurance in the amount
of at least [$50,000] $500,000.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 530 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2