START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 742 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 742 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Stadium License 
 
   
This bill authorizes the license holder of a stadium license in Frederick County to sell 
liquor, in addition to beer and wine, for consumption on the licensed premises. The bill 
increases the annual license fee for a stadium license from $2,000 to $2,500. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues increase by $500 annually beginning as early as 
FY 2024 to reflect the stadium license annual fee increase. Frederick County can handle 
any additional enforcement activity using existing budgeted resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Frederick County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to 
issue a stadium license to the owner of a professional baseball team franchise. The license 
authorizes the license holder, at the stadium in which the baseball team plays its 
home games, to sell beer and wine (1) in plastic or paper containers on the licensed 
premises; (2) for on-premises consumption; and (3) to an individual present at an event 
held in the stadium. The license holder may sell alcoholic beverages from the time the 
stadium opens for the event until the event ends. The license holder is prohibited from 
allowing an individual to (1) carry any alcoholic beverage onto the licensed premises; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 742/ Page 2 
(2) carry any alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. The annual license fee is 
$2,000.  
 
Additional Comments:  Frederick County is home to Nymeo Field at Harry Grove 
Stadium.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 770 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2