START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 633

Chapter 633

(House Bill 753)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Maryland Technology Development Corporation –
Application and Reporting Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring an application for investment by the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation to include an option for an applicant to provide certain
demographic information of the applicant; prohibiting the Corporation from taking
any adverse action against an applicant who declines to provide certain demographic
information; requiring the Corporation to submit a certain report to the Governor,
the Maryland Economic Development Commission, and the General Assembly on or
before a certain date concerning certain applicant and investment activities and, in
a certain manner, certain demographic information of applicants and founders if
available; and generally relating to application and reporting requirements for the
Maryland Technology Development Corporation.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–401(a) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–409(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–415(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 633 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) “Corporation” means the Maryland Technology Development Corporation.

10–409.

(a) (1) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the Corporation may
make grants to or provide equity investment financing for technology–based businesses, if:

[(1)] (I) the investments are made to a qualified business;

[(2)] (II) the investments are made on review and approval of a written
application that:

[(i)] 1. contains sufficient information to verify that the qualified
business has its principal business operations in the State or will have a substantial
economic impact on the State; and

[(ii)] 2. contains a certification of the veracity of the information
by an authorized signatory of the qualified business; and

[(3)] (III) at least the number of members that constitutes a quorum of any
fund or authority has been appointed under the requirements for that fund or authority.

(2) THE CORPORATION SHALL INCLUDE IN THE APPLICATION FOR
INVESTMENT DESCRIBED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) AN OPTION FOR AN APPLICANT TO PROVIDE THE
APPLICANT’S RACE, ETHNICITY, AGE, GENDER, DISABILITY STATUS, AND VETERAN
STATUS AND THE GEOGRAPHIC AREA OF THE STATE WHERE THE APPLICANT’S
PRIMARY PLACE OF BUSINESS IS LOCATED; AND

(II) A STATEMENT ADVISING THE APPLICANT THAT PROVISION
OF THE INFORMATION DESCRIBED UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IS
VOLUNTARY BUT ENCOURAGING APPLICANTS TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION.

(3) THE CORPORATION MAY NOT TAKE ANY ADVERSE ACTION
AGAINST AN APPLICANT WHO DECLINES TO PROVIDE THE INFORMATION DESCRIBED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

10–415.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE CORPORATION SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE
MARYLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 633

2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE
FOLLOWING INFORMATION FROM THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR:

(I) THE NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS THE CORPORATION
RECEIVED;

(II) THE AMOUNT OF INVESTMENT FUNDING THAT WAS
AVAILABLE AT THE BEGINNING OF THE FISCAL YEAR;

(III) THE AMOUNT OF INVESTMENT FUNDING THAT WAS
AVAILABLE AT THE END OF THE FISCAL YEAR;

(IV) THE AMOUNT OF INVESTMENT FUNDING THAT WAS
REQUESTED;

(V) THE NUMBER OF APPLICANTS THE CORPORATION
INVESTED IN; AND

(VI) THE AMOUNT OF INVESTMENT FUNDING THE COMMISSION
AWARDED.

(2) THE INFORMATION REPORTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) SPECIFY WHICH APPLICATIONS AND INVESTMENTS WERE
FROM SOCIAL IMPACT FUNDS, SEED FUNDS, AND THE MARYLAND VENTURE FUND;
AND

(II) IF AVAILABLE, PROVIDE INFORMATION THAT HAS BEEN
DE–IDENTIFIED AND DISAGGREGATED ON APPLICANTS AND QUALIFIED BUSINESS
FOUNDERS BY RACE, ETHNICITY, AGE, GENDER, DISABILITY STATUS, VETERAN
STATUS, AND GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION AND THE DEGREE TO WHICH APPLICANTS AND
FOUNDERS IDENTIFY WITH MORE THAN ONE DEMOGRAPHIC CATEGORY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3