START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 787 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 787 
(Delegate Buckel, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Allegany County - Allegany Regional Recreational Economic Development 
Authority - Established 
 
   
This bill establishes the Allegany Regional Recreational Economic Development 
Authority in Allegany County. The authority must support the development and 
construction of regional recreation facilities to benefit residents and the economic 
development of the county, including indoor and outdoor athletic fields and other facilities 
designed to create recreational tourism. The authority may (1) manage appropriated funds 
from Allegany County, Cumberland and Frostburg, and the State; (2) receive donated 
services from professionals; and (3) supervise, manage, and terminate staff and consultants 
as necessary. The authority consists primarily of State and local government officials, or 
their designees. Authority members may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses. By October 31, 2025, and each October 31 thereafter, the 
authority must report its activities to the Governor and specified committees of the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2029. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No direct effect. It is assumed that members of the authority can likely 
provide staff and expense reimbursements with existing resources. Although the bill allows 
the authority to manage funds appropriated by the State, it does not require any such funds 
to be appropriated. Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Participating local authority members can likely provide staff for the 
authority with existing resources. If not, local expenditures may increase minimally. 
Although the bill allows the authority to manage funds appropriated by Allegany County, 
Cumberland, and Frostburg, it does not require any such funds to be appropriated. No direct 
effect on local revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 787/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 80 and 81 of 2021 established the West North Avenue 
Development Authority to support a revitalization plan in a target area and buffer zone in 
Baltimore City. Chapters 466 and 467 of 2023 established the Prince George’s Gateway 
Development Authority in Prince George’s County to support the development and 
approval of a comprehensive neighborhood revitalization plan in the “target area” in the 
county. Both development authorities were provided with similar powers to receive 
revenues from the State and/or the county and to direct the revenues for certain purposes. 
 
Additional Comments:  The authority may use any funds it receives from 
Allegany County, Cumberland, Frostburg, and/or the State to support the development and 
construction of regional recreation facilities. Any such expenditures are contingent on 
funding that is not required by the bill. Therefore, this analysis does not reflect any fiscal 
effects, such as State and/or local appropriations, increased debt service payments, or 
property tax revenues, that may result. However, there may be a future expectation of State 
and/or local funding, which may be significant. For example, Frostburg State University 
advises that the bill may ultimately lead to the authority managing the university’s 
remaining planning and design funds for a regional sports complex. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1134 (Senator McKay) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany County; City of Frostburg; University System of 
Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2