START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 939

Chapter 939

(House Bill 763)

AN ACT concerning

Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention – ~~Membership~~ ~~–~~
~~Alterations~~ Membership ~~and~~ ~~Sunset~~

FOR the purpose of ~~removing~~ ~~the~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Council~~ ~~on~~ ~~American–Islamic~~
~~Relations~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Office~~ ~~from~~ altering the membership of the Commission on Hate
Crime Response and Prevention; ~~adding~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Muslim~~ ~~community~~ ~~to~~
~~be~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission;~~ ~~terminating~~ ~~the~~
~~Commission~~ ~~after~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ and generally relating to the membership of the
Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 6–802
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

6–802.

(a) There is a Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention in the Office
of the Attorney General.

(b) The Commission consists of the following members, appointed by the Attorney
General:

(1) one representative of the Anti–Defamation League 15 INDIVIDUALS
WHO REPRESENT OR ADVOCATE ON BEHALF OF INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE MEMBERS OF
A PROTECTED CLASS UNDER THE STATE HATE CRIME LAWS AS SET FORTH IN TITLE
10, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE APPOINTED BY THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Asian~~ ~~American~~ ~~and~~ ~~Pacific~~ ~~Islander~~
~~community;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Women’s~~ ~~Law~~ ~~Center;~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 939 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(4)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Baltimore~~ ~~Jewish~~ ~~Council;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Coalition~~ ~~Opposed~~ ~~to~~ ~~Violence~~ ~~and~~ ~~Extremism;~~

(6) [one representative of the Council on American–Islamic Relations
Maryland Office] TWO REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY;

~~(7)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~Free~~ ~~State~~ ~~Justice;~~

~~(8)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Jewish~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Relations~~ ~~Council;~~

~~(9)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Immigration~~ ~~Outreach~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Center;~~

~~(10)~~ one representative of the Maryland Association of Human
Relations/Human Rights Agencies;

(11) (3) one representative of the Maryland Chiefs of Police Association;

(12) (4) one representative of the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights;

(13) (5) one representative of the Maryland Coordination and Analysis
Center;

(14) (6) one representative of the Maryland Center for School Safety;

(15) (7) one representative of the Maryland Sheriffs’ Association;

(16) (8) one representative of the Maryland State’s Attorneys’
Association;

~~(17)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~National~~ ~~Alliance~~ ~~on~~ ~~Mental~~ ~~Illness;~~

~~(18)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~National~~ ~~Association~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Advancement~~ ~~of~~
~~Colored~~ ~~People;~~

~~(19)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Pride~~ ~~Center~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland;~~

~~(20)~~ ~~one~~ ~~representative~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Sikh~~ ~~Coalition;~~ ~~and~~

(9) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF THE PUBLIC
DEFENDER; AND

(21) (10) two members of the general public.

(c) (1) The term of an appointed member of the Commission is 4 years.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 939

(2) (I) The EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE THE terms of the appointed members are staggered as required by the
terms provided for members of the Commission on June 1, 2023 2024.

(II) THE TERMS OF THE MEMBERS APPOINTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B)(1) AND (9) OF THIS SECTION ARE STAGGERED AS REQUIRED BY THE
TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION ON OCTOBER 1, 2024.

(3) At the end of a term, an appointed member continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.

(4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(d) (1) The Attorney General, or the Attorney General’s designee, is the chair
of the Commission.

(2) The Office of the Attorney General shall provide staff for the
Commission.

(e) In fiscal year 2025 and in each fiscal year thereafter, the Governor shall
include funds in the State budget to implement this section, including funds to:

(1) employ a full–time assistant Attorney General to staff the Commission;
and

(2) operate and maintain the office.

(f) (1) A majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.

(2) The Commission may adopt rules governing the administration and
proceedings of the Commission.

(g) A member of the Commission:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Commission; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(h) The Commission shall:

(1) develop strategies to prevent and respond to hate crime activity; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 939 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) evaluate State laws and policies relating to hate crimes.

(i) (1) On or before December 1 each year, beginning in 2024, the Commission
shall report to the State Department of Education on policy recommendations to address
hate crimes that occur in schools.

(2) On or before December 1 each year, beginning in 2024, the Commission
shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, on legislative recommendations to address hate crimes in the State.

(J) THIS SECTION, AND ALL REGULATIONS AND POLICIES ADOPTED UNDER
THIS SECTION, SHALL TERMINATE AND BE OF NO EFFECT AFTER JUNE 30, 2027.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the initial
members appointed to the Commission on Hate Crime Response and Prevention under §
~~6–802(b)(6)~~ ~~6–802(b)(1)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(9)~~ 6–802(b) of the State Government Article, as enacted by
Section 1 of this Act, shall expire as follows:

~~(1)~~ ~~one~~ ~~member~~ ~~in~~ ~~2025;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~one~~ ~~member~~ ~~in~~ ~~2028.~~

(1) ~~five~~ six members in 2025;

(2) ~~five~~ six members in 2026; ~~and~~

(3) six members in 2027; and

(4) seven members in 2028.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the members
serving on the Commission on Hate Crimes Response and Prevention appointed under §
6–802(b) of the State Government Article as it existed on May 30, 2024, shall expire on June
1, 2024.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4