START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 756 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 756 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
General Provisions - State Flag - Casket of an Eligible Decedent 
 
 
This bill requires the Secretary of State, on request, to furnish a State flag to drape the 
casket of an eligible decedent, as defined under the bill. The Secretary of State must adopt 
regulations establishing a process to submit a request for a State flag to drape on the casket 
of an eligible decedent and verify that a request is being made on behalf of an eligible 
decedent. After the burial of an eligible decedent, the State flag must be (1) claimed by and 
provided to the eligible decedent’s next of kin, or (2) provided to a close friend or an 
associate, if it is not claimed by the eligible decedent’s next of kin. The bill specifies that 
only one State flag may be provided for the death of an eligible decedent. The Secretary of 
State may not procure any State flag as required under the bill unless it is wholly produced 
in the United States; however, the Secretary of State may waive this requirement if it cannot 
be met reasonably. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $14,000 in FY 2025. 
General fund expenditures further increase annually by an indeterminate but likely 
minimal amount, beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
14,000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($14,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
\ 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 756/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Eligible decedent” means (1) an employee of the State or any political 
subdivision who died as a result of a specified injury; (2) specified current or former 
constitutional officers; (3) a current or former member of the General Assembly; (4) a 
current or former Governor the State; (5) a judge; (6) an individual who currently holds or 
formerly held any position generally relating to heads of units of State government; or 
(7) any other individual whom the Governor designates through an executive order.  
 
“Wholly produced in the United States” means a flag that contains only (1) materials and 
components that are grown, manufactured, or created entirely in the United States; 
(2) processing components, including spinning, weaving, dyeing, and finishing, that are 
performed entirely in the United States; and (3) materials that have been manufactured and 
assembled entirely in the United States. 
 
Current Law:  As established under the Public Safety Article, the Secretary of State must 
issue a State flag to the family of a firefighter, policeman, member of the military, sworn 
member of the office of State Fire Marshal, or professional or volunteer emergency medical 
services provider who is killed in the performance of duty. Except when the deceased is a 
member of the military, the flag must be presented to the family of the deceased by the 
State Senator of the legislative district in which the deceased resided or served. However, 
when the deceased is a member of the military, the flag must be presented to the family of 
the deceased by the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
 
Executive Order 01.01.1990.30 establishes the protocols for the use of the State Flag, 
including for when the State flag may be used during periods of mourning. Among other 
things, the State flag may be used to cover the coffin of a State police officer killed in the 
line of duty, or any other State official or public servant who devoted a substantial part of 
their career to public service in the State. When the State flag is used to cover a casket, it 
should be placed so that the first quarter is at the head and over the left shoulder. The State 
flag should not be lowered into the grave or allowed to touch the ground. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Secretary of State advises that its current inventory consists of 
flags that are made of nylon, which may not be appropriate for draping over a casket 
because they may slide off. Therefore, general fund expenditures for the Secretary of 
State’s office increase by $14,000 in fiscal 2025. This estimate reflects the cost of the 
Secretary of State purchasing 100 cotton State flags at a cost of approximately 
$140 per flag to establish an inventory of flags to provide to the families of eligible 
decedents. General fund expenditures further increase annually by an indeterminate but 
likely minimal amount, beginning in fiscal 2025, for postage (to mail the flags to eligible 
decedents) and for the Secretary of State to replenish the inventory of State flags. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 756/ Page 3 
The Secretary of State can create the necessary regulations with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 573 (Senator Corderman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 13, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3