START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 715 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 715 
(Delegate Griffith, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Fishing and Hunting Licenses and Trout Stamps - Complimentary Licenses and 
Stamp Exemption - Veterans Determined to Be Unemployable 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to issue a lifetime 
complimentary angler’s license, a lifetime complimentary Chesapeake Bay and coastal 
sport fishing license, and/or a lifetime complimentary hunting license to (1) a Maryland 
resident who certifies that the resident is an American veteran who the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA) determines is unemployable or (2) an out-of-state person who 
certifies that the person is an American veteran who the VA determines is unemployable 
and whose state of residence extends similar privileges to American veterans, of this State, 
who the VA determines are unemployable. In addition, a trout stamp is not required of a 
holder of a lifetime complimentary angler’s license issued under the bill. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues likely decrease annually beginning in FY 2025 as a 
result of issuing lifetime complimentary licenses under the bill. The extent of any decrease 
cannot be reliably estimated; however, for illustrative purposes, special fund revenues 
decrease by $7,500 to $17,500 for every 500 licenses (angler’s, Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing, or hunter’s) that are no longer purchased for a fee by Maryland 
residents as a result of the bill. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 715/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Lifetime Complimentary Licenses 
 
DNR is authorized to issue a lifetime complimentary angler’s license, a lifetime 
complimentary Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license, and/or a lifetime 
complimentary hunting license to (1) a Maryland resident who certifies that the resident is 
a former prisoner of war or a 100% service-connected disabled American veteran or (2) an 
out-of-state person who certifies that the person is a former prisoner of war or a 
100% service-connected disabled American veteran whose state of residence extends 
similar privileges to former prisoners of war or 100% service-connected disabled American 
veterans of this State. A trout stamp is not required of a holder of a lifetime complimentary 
angler’s license for former prisoners of war or 100% service-connected disabled American 
veterans. 
 
Recreational Fishing and Hunting Licenses 
 
Subject to certain exceptions:   
 
 
any person age 16 or older must secure an angler’s license to fish in the nontidal 
waters of the State;  
 
a person may not fish or possess trout in an area established by DNR as an area 
where a trout stamp is required, unless the person first obtains a trout stamp in 
addition to an angler’s license; 
 
a person may not fish for finfish in the Chesapeake Bay or in its tributaries up to 
tidal boundaries or in State waters of the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic coastal 
bays and their tributaries without first obtaining a Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport 
fishing license or a specified registration; and 
 
a person may not hunt or attempt to hunt during open season and in any permitted 
manner any game birds and mammals in the State without first having procured 
either a resident or nonresident hunter’s license. 
 
The fees for annual resident angler’s, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing, and 
hunter’s licenses are $20.50, $15.00, and $35.00, respectively. The fee for a trout stamp is 
$5.00 for residents. Lower fees apply for short-term and certain other licenses, and higher 
fees apply for annual nonresident licenses and for trout stamps for nonresidents. The 
annual nonresident fees for angler’s, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing, and 
hunter’s licenses, and trout stamps, are $30.50 (or a fee equal to the fee charged a Maryland 
resident by the nonresident’s home state for a similar license, whichever is greater), $22.50, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 715/ Page 3 
$160.00, and $10.00, respectively. There is no fee for a lifetime complimentary angler’s 
license, a lifetime complimentary Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license, or a 
lifetime complimentary hunting license, and, as mentioned above, a trout stamp is not 
required of a holder of a lifetime complimentary angler’s license. 
 
Fee revenues received from angler’s licenses (and trout stamps), Chesapeake Bay and 
coastal sport fishing licenses, and hunter’s licenses are deposited in the Fisheries 
Management and Protection Fund, the Fisheries Research and Development Fund, and the 
Wildlife Management and Protection Fund, respectively. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues likely decrease annually beginning in fiscal 2025 
as a result of issuing lifetime complimentary licenses to Maryland residents and 
out-of-state persons that are American veterans who the VA determines are unemployable. 
The extent of any such decrease, however, cannot be reliably estimated, since information 
is not available on the number of American veterans who the VA determines are 
unemployable that currently purchase angler’s, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing, 
or hunter’s licenses, or will in the future, in the absence of the bill.  
 
However, DNR indicates that there are approximately 4,000 American veterans in the State 
who are classified as individually unemployable, based on information obtained from the 
VA through the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs. The VA’s website indicates 
that a person may be eligible for individual unemployability if they cannot hold down a 
steady job that supports them financially, because of their service-connected disability, and 
either (1) have at least one service-connected disability rated at 60% or more disabling or 
(2) have two or more service-connected disabilities, with at least one rated at 40% or more 
disabling and a combined rating of 70% or more. 
 
For illustrative purposes, special fund revenues decrease by $7,500 to $17,500 for every 
500 licenses (angler’s, Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing, or hunter’s) that are no 
longer purchased for a fee by Maryland residents because they have instead been issued a 
lifetime complimentary license under the bill. This illustrative estimate does not account 
for the possibility of out-of-state persons no longer purchasing a license for a fee as a result 
of the bill; however, the issuance of lifetime complimentary licenses to out-of-state persons 
under the bill is conditioned on the person’s state of residence extending similar privileges 
to Maryland residents and DNR is not aware of any other states that do so. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 715/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 533 (Senator Gallion) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Veterans Affairs; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4