START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 741 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 741 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Northwest Baltimore County Sports Tourism Facility - Feasibility Study 
 
  
This bill requires the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) to study and make 
recommendations on the feasibility of establishing and operating a sports tourism facility 
at Reisterstown Regional Park in northwest Baltimore County, subject to specified 
requirements. In conducting the study, MSA must consult with specified State and local 
entities. By December 31, 2025, MSA must submit a final report of its findings, 
conclusions, and recommendations to the Senate Finance Committee, the House Economic 
Matters Committee, and the House Health and Government Operations Committee. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates January 31, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MSA increase by $300,000 in FY 2025 and 
by $100,000 in FY 2026 to conduct the feasibility study, as discussed below. The 
Department of Commerce and the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) can consult 
with MSA as needed with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
300,000 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($300,000) 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore County can consult with MSA as needed with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 741/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study, MSA must:  
 
 
identify available and potential federal, State, and local funding sources for the 
project; 
 
identify the infrastructure needs, capital costs, and operating costs associated 
with(1) construction of the land located at a specified address on Mitchell Drive, in 
Reisterstown; (2) enhancement and development of the existing indoor ice hockey 
rink, indoor soccer fields, and outdoor playing fields; (3) planning and construction 
of potential parks, open spaces, facilities, greenways, trails, and other amenities; and 
(4) recreational programs at the new and enhanced facilities; 
 
examine the economic impact on the local and regional economy, as specified, 
including potential employment opportunities, enhanced tax revenues, and the 
effect on local property values; and 
 
consult with Commerce, MTA, the Baltimore County Department of Economic and 
Workforce Development, the Baltimore County Revenue Authority, and the 
Maryland Sports Commission (“Maryland Sports” in statute, an office in MSA). 
 
Current Law:  MSA was established in 1986 as an independent unit in the 
Executive Branch to be responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance of 
facilities for use by professional baseball and/or football teams. In 1992, legislation was 
enacted, which assigned to the authority the responsibility for expansion of the 
Baltimore City Convention Center. MSA’s responsibility was further extended in 1995 
when legislation was enacted to have MSA participate in and manage construction of the 
Ocean City Convention Center. Legislation in 1996 authorized MSA to participate with 
Montgomery County in the construction of a conference center, and in 2000, MSA was 
authorized to participate in construction of the Hippodrome Performing Arts Center in 
Baltimore. Since then, MSA has been authorized to construct a variety of other projects 
and facilities. MSA may, in fact, manage any type of construction project for local 
governments and State agencies upon request and approval by the General Assembly. 
 
“Sports tourism facility” is not defined in State law. Title 10, Subtitle 6 of the Economic 
Development Article, which establishes MSA and contains related provisions, defines a 
“sports facility” and a “sports entertainment facility” for purposes of various MSA projects. 
The terms are mutually exclusive.  
 
State Expenditures:  This estimate assumes general funds are provided for MSA to 
conduct the feasibility study. MSA estimates total costs of $400,000 to do so, which are in 
addition to an operational effect for MSA staff. Of that amount, $340,000 is for the study’s 
infrastructure needs/site cost components and $60,000 is for the study’s economic 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 741/ Page 3 
components. MSA must submit a report on its findings, conclusions, and recommendations 
by December 31, 2025; total costs are assumed to be allocated between fiscal 2025 and 
2026. Accordingly, general fund expenditures for MSA increase by $300,000 in fiscal 2025 
and by $100,000 in fiscal 2026. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 804 (Senator Brooks) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Stadium Authority; Department of Commerce; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Baltimore County; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3