START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 760 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 760 
(Delegates Palakovich Carr and Hornberger) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Office of Legislative Audits - Local School Systems - Report 
 
 
This bill requires each local school system to submit a report to the Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee on the status of the implementation of corrective actions to address 
repeat findings and recommendations identified by the Office of Legislative Audits (OLA) 
in the most recent six-year audit. This report is due by November 1 of the third year of a 
six-year audit cycle. Each local school system must publish the report on its website with 
any cybersecurity findings redacted in a manner consistent with auditing best practices. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is directed at local school systems. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures may increase by a minimal amount to address repeat 
audit findings. Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each local board of education must provide for an annual audit of its 
financial transactions and accounts. The audit must be made by a certified public 
accountant or partnership of certified public accountants who are licensed by the State 
Board of Public Accountancy and approved by the State Superintendent of Schools. The 
results of the audit, including the letter of recommendation of the auditor, are a matter of 
public record. Results must be reported within three months after the close of the fiscal year 
of the local board on the form and in the manner required by the State Board to the State 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 760/ Page 2 
Superintendent of Schools, the county fiscal authority, the Joint Audit and Evaluation 
Committee of the General Assembly, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the 
Senate Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee, the House Appropriations 
Committee, and the House Ways and Means Committee. 
 
Office of Legislative Audits 
 
OLA must conduct an audit of each local school system to evaluate the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the financial management practices of each local school system at least once 
every six years. These audits may be performed concurrently or separately, and OLA must 
provide information regarding the audit process to local school systems in advance of 
conducting the audit. Local school systems may be exempt from an audit at the request of 
that county’s delegation as specified in statute. Independent of the audits required every 
six years, the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee may direct OLA to conduct an audit 
of a local school system at any time. 
 
Generally, OLA conducts its local school system audits to evaluate whether a local school 
system’s procedures and controls are effective in accounting for and safeguarding its assets 
and to evaluate whether its policies provide for the efficient use of financial resources. In 
completing its audits, OLA reviews applicable State laws and regulations, reviews local 
policies and procedures, interviews personnel at local school systems, inspects documents 
and records, tests transactions and, to the extent practicable, directly observes local school 
system operations. 
 
Maryland Office of the Inspector General for Education 
 
The Inspector General (IG) is responsible for examining local boards of education, local 
school systems, and public schools; nonpublic schools that receive State funds; the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE), and the Interagency Commission on 
School Construction. The IG may employ specified staff and receive and investigate 
complaints or information concerning:   
 
 
fraud, waste, and abuse involving the use of public funds and property; 
 
violations of the civil rights of students and employees; 
 
whether policies and procedures governing the prevention and reporting of child 
abuse and neglect comply with federal and State law; and 
 
compliance with other federal and State law. 
 
With the exception of certain protected, confidential, and privileged documents, the IG 
must have access to records, data, reports, contracts, correspondence, and other documents 
of the entities it may investigate. The office may serve a subpoena in the same manner as 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 760/ Page 3 
does a circuit court. The office must annually report on its goals and priorities, activities, 
the number and nature of incidents it reports to specified State and federal entities, and 
findings and recommendations related to (1) instances of fraud, waste, and abuse; (2) civil 
rights violations; and (3) specified policy matters. 
 
Performance Audit 
 
MSDE, at the request of a county government and in the absence of an agreement between 
a county government and local school board, must contract for a performance audit of a 
local school system. A performance audit covers an assessment of a school system’s 
practices to determine whether the school system or a school program is operating 
economically and efficiently and whether corrective actions for improving its performance 
are appropriate. MSDE must make reasonable efforts to ensure that a performance audit is 
completed, and the results of the audit are made available to the local board in time to be 
considered by the local board in preparation of its budget for the next fiscal year. 
 
The costs of the performance audit must be shared equally between the county governing 
body and the local board of education. 
 
A performance audit conducted on this condition (1) must be conducted in accordance with 
generally accepted government auditing standards and (2) may not include an assessment 
or evaluation of a local board’s efforts to meet the standards of the Maryland School 
Performance Program. However, a local governing body and local school board may make 
an agreement to perform or contract for a performance audit of school board functions, 
including an agreement involving the scope of the performance audit or the responsibility 
of the funding of the performance audit. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local school expenditures may increase by a minimal amount to the 
extent a local school system must address repeat audit findings. The exact level of 
additional expenditures depends on the scope of the repeat audit findings being addressed 
and the existing capacity of local school systems and their hired auditors to address those 
findings. Local school systems can redact cybersecurity findings in a manner consistent 
with auditing best practices from such reports using existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 760/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services - Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4