START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 762 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 762 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor 
License - Off-Premises Consumption  
MC 9-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes, in Montgomery County, the holder of a Class B beer, wine, and liquor 
(BWL) license to sell at the place described in the license (1) beer, wine, and liquor at retail 
for on-premises consumption, and (2) beer and wine in containers sealed with the 
manufacturer’s original seal for off-premises consumption only to a person who has 
purchased prepared food from the licensed premises. The bill authorizes the 
Montgomery County Board of License Commissioners to adopt regulations to carry out 
the bill’s provisions, including regulations that limit the quantity of beer and wine that may 
be sold to a person for off-premises consumption in a single transaction. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Montgomery County 
operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The holder of a Class B BWL license may not display or provide shelving 
for beer or wine for off-premises sales in areas of the establishment that are accessible to 
the public. Off-sale alcoholic beverages receipts collected under the license must be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 762/ Page 2 
included in the calculation of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The 
license holder may sell beer and wine for off-premises consumption only when the licensed 
premises is open for business as a hotel or restaurant. 
 
Current Law:  The Class B BWL license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, 
and liquor at retail at the place described in the license. The annual license fee is $2,500. 
 
The board is authorized to issue a Class B BWL license to the owner or operator of a 
restaurant or hotel if (1) before the issuance of the license, the owner or operator attests in 
a sworn statement that gross receipts from food sales in the restaurant or hotel will be at 
least equal to 40% of the gross receipts of the sale of food and alcoholic beverages, and 
(2) before each renewal of the license, the owner or operator attests in a sworn statement 
that the specified gross receipts for the 12 months immediately before the application for 
renewal will meet the specified percentage of sale. 
 
The board must adopt regulations to provide for audits to determine the ratio of gross 
receipts from the sale of food to the gross receipts from the sale of beer, wine, and liquor. 
The board may revoke a license if the license holder fails to maintain the specified ratio of 
gross receipts (1) during the initial license year, for three consecutive months, or (2) after 
the initial license year, for each license or calendar year. The board may require a license 
holder to provide supporting data as the board requires necessary to establish that the 
license holder has met specified requirements. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any restaurant or hotel that holds a Class B BWL license may 
experience additional sales of beer and wine for off-premises consumption under the bill. 
 
Additional Comment:  The Department of Legislative Services advises that the bill as 
drafted does not specify if the prepared food, which is to accompany beer and wine in 
sealed containers, must be prepared for on-premises consumption or if the food can be 
prepared for take-out and consumed off-premises. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 762/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3