START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 749 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 749 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Corporations and Associations – Definitions, Emergencies, and Outstanding 
Stock – Revisions 
 
 
This bill generally (1) authorizes a corporation to adopt emergency bylaws and establishes 
related provisions applicable to an “emergency” (as defined in the bill); (2) clarifies 
statutory provisions related to a corporation’s acquisition of its own stock; and (3) alters 
specified definitions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Emergency Provisions – Authorization and Board of Directors 
 
The bill authorizes, unless the charter provides otherwise, the bylaws of a corporation to 
contain provisions to be effective only during an emergency. As applicable to the following 
provisions, “emergency” means a situation in which a quorum of the board of directors 
cannot readily be assembled because of some catastrophic event. The emergency 
provisions may be adopted only in advance of an emergency. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 749/ Page 2 
The emergency provisions may make all provisions necessary for managing the 
corporation during an emergency, including (1) procedures for calling a meeting of the 
board of directors; (2) quorum requirements for a meeting; and (3) designation of additional 
or substitute directors. All provisions of the bylaws not inconsistent with the emergency 
provisions remain effective during an emergency. The emergency provisions may state that 
the standard of conduct otherwise required under statute must apply to the conduct of a 
director acting pursuant to the emergency provisions. 
 
Unless the bylaws contain emergency provisions specifying otherwise, notice of a meeting 
of the board of directors may be given (1) only to those directors whom it is practicable to 
reach in the circumstances; (2) in any practicable manner given in the circumstances; and 
(3) with shorter notice as is reasonable in the circumstances. 
 
Any corporate act taken in good faith, as specified, binds the corporation and may not be 
used to impose liability on a director, an officer, an employee, or an agent of the 
corporation. 
 
Emergency Provisions – Meeting of Stockholders 
 
The definition of “emergency” applicable to the following provisions is a situation in which 
it is impracticable to convene a meeting of stockholders in accordance with the Maryland 
General Corporation Law or the bylaws or as specified in a notice for the meeting 
previously given, because of some catastrophic event. 
 
During an emergency, unless the bylaws contain emergency provisions providing 
otherwise, the board of directors may (1) postpone a meeting of stockholders for which 
notice has been given or (2) authorize stockholders to participate in a meeting by any means 
of remote communication authorized, as specified. The corporation must give notice to 
stockholders of any action taken, including any new date, time, or place of a meeting, as 
specified. Any corporate act taken in good faith during an emergency binds the corporation 
and may not be used to impose liability on a director, an officer, an employee, or an agent 
of the corporation. 
 
Applicability to Real Estate Investment Trusts 
 
The bill applies the aforementioned provisions regarding emergencies to real estate 
investment trusts. 
 
Acquisition of Corporation’s Stock 
 
The bill establishes that unless the charter specifies otherwise, stock must cease to be 
outstanding on the date of redemption or repurchase if a corporation has: 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 749/ Page 3 
 
given a notice of redemption of stock or repurchase of stock pursuant to a right of 
redemption specified in the charter or a duly adopted repurchase plan binding on the 
stockholder; and 
 
paid or set aside sufficient funds for the benefit of the holder of the stock called for 
redemption or repurchase. 
 
However, the provisions do not affect the right of a stockholder to receive payment of the 
redemption or repurchase price. 
 
Definitions 
 
The bill alters the definition of “principal office” to mean the place in Maryland filed or 
recorded with the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) as the principal 
office of a Maryland corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, 
or limited partnership (or the main office of the entity, if there is no designated principal 
office). 
 
The bill also alters the definition of a “resident agent” to include a limited partnership 
whose name, address, and designation as a resident agent are filed or recorded with SDAT, 
as specified. 
 
Current Law:  The Corporations and Associations Article generally sets forth numerous 
requirements applicable to a corporation’s formation, organization, and operations. 
 
For example, generally, unless the bylaws of the corporation provide otherwise, a regular 
or special meeting of the board of directors may be held at any place in or out of the State 
or by means of remote communication. Notice of each meeting of the board of directors 
must be given as provided in the bylaws. 
 
Furthermore, each corporation must hold an annual meeting of its stockholders to elect 
directors and transact any other business within its powers. Generally, the meeting must be 
held at the time or in the manner provided in the bylaws. No less than 90 days before each 
stockholders’ meeting (and no more than 90 days before), the secretary of the corporation 
must give, or cause to be given, notice in writing or by electronic transmission of the 
meeting to (1) each stockholder entitled to vote at the meeting and (2) each other 
stockholder entitled to notice of the meeting. 
 
Subject to the provisions of its charter and specified restrictions on making distributions, 
if authorized by its board of directors, a corporation may acquire the corporation’s own 
shares, which constitute authorized but unissued shares. Shares of a corporation’s own 
stock acquired by the corporation are subject to specified provisions in determining the 
total number of outstanding shares that may be purchased. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 749/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  By authorizing the board of directors to adopt emergency bylaws 
and related provisions, the bill may benefit a corporation's management and operation 
during a catastrophic event. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill implements recommendations of the Maryland State Bar 
Association, whose Committee on Corporation Law regularly reviews the Corporations 
and Associations Article in an attempt to clarify unclear provisions and eliminate outdated 
language. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 400 (Senators West and Waldstreicher) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4