START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 814 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 814 
(The Speaker and Delegate Clippinger) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Juvenile Law - Reform 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes to the juvenile justice process in the State and related 
administrative provisions, including (1) altering the jurisdiction of the juvenile court; 
(2) altering procedures relating to juvenile intake, complaints, detention, and probation; 
(3) requiring the forwarding of complaints and the filing of Child in Need of Supervision 
(CINS) petitions for specified motor vehicle thefts; (4) repealing provisions relating to the 
State Advisory Board for Juvenile Services; (5) altering provisions relating to the 
Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best Practices; and (6) altering 
reporting requirements for the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit (JJMU), the Governor’s 
Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP), and the Department of Juvenile Services 
(DJS). The bill also codifies GOCPP, the Governor’s Office for Children (GOC), and a 
Children’s Cabinet, to be administered by GOC. Additionally, the bill prohibits registered 
juvenile sex offenders from entering onto places for education, as specified. In general, 
provisions in the bill directly altering the juvenile justice process and the juvenile sex 
offender registrant provisions take effect November 1, 2024; the remaining provisions 
take effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DJS increase by at least $4.4 million in 
FY 2025; additional significant personnel and capital costs (not shown below) may be 
incurred, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for the Office of the Public 
Defender (OPD) increase by as much as $1.9 million in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
General fund expenditures for GOCPP increase by $200,300 in FY 2025. Future year 
expenditures are annualized, adjusted for inflation, and reflect ongoing operating costs. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
6.6 
9.1 
9.4 
9.7 
10.0 
Net Effect 
($6.6) 
($9.1) 
($9.4) 
($9.7) 
($10.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 814/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill may affect operations and expenditures for State’s Attorneys’ 
offices, as discussed below. The circuit courts can implement the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  
 
I. 
Policies and Procedures for Children in the Juvenile Justice System 
(Effective November 1, 2024) 
 
Juvenile Court Jurisdiction  
 
Under current law, in general, the juvenile court has jurisdiction over children who are 
alleged to be delinquent, in need of supervision, or who have received a citation for 
specified violations. However, except under limited circumstances involving a child who 
is at least age 10 and alleged to have committed a “crime of violence,” as defined in 
§ 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article, the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over a 
child younger than age 13 for purposes of a delinquency proceeding and such a child may 
not be charged with a crime. In addition, the juvenile court does not have jurisdiction over 
(1) a child at least age 14 alleged to have committed an act which, if committed by an adult, 
would be a crime punishable by life imprisonment; (2) a child at least age 16 alleged to 
have violated specified traffic or boating laws; (3) a child at least age 16 alleged to have 
committed specified crimes (violent crimes, firearms crimes, etc.); or (4) a child who 
previously has been convicted as an adult of a felony and is subsequently alleged to have 
committed an act that would be a felony if committed by an adult. These cases are tried in 
adult criminal court. The juvenile court also has jurisdiction over peace order proceedings 
in which the respondent is a child. 
 
The bill expands the juvenile court’s jurisdiction to include a child who is at least age 10 
and is alleged to have committed an act that would, if committed by an adult, be (1) a crime 
involving handguns under § 4-203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun) or 
§ 4-204 (use of a handgun or antique firearm in the commission of a crime) of the Criminal 
Law Article; (2) a crime involving firearms under § 5-133 (possession of a regulated 
firearm), § 5-134 (sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm), § 5-138 (sale, transfer, or 
disposal of a stolen regulated firearm), § 5-142 (removal or alteration of an identification 
mark or number on a firearm), § 5-203 (possession of a short-barreled rifle or short-barreled 
shotgun), or § 5-703 (untraceable firearms/violating serial number requirements for 
firearms) of the Public Safety Article; (3) aggravated cruelty to animals under § 10-606 of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 814/ Page 3 
the Criminal Law Article; or (4) a sexual offense in the third degree under § 3-307 of the 
Criminal Law Article. 
 
Intake in Juvenile Cases 
 
Currently, intake occurs when a complaint is filed by a police officer or other person or 
agency having knowledge of facts that may cause a child to be subject to the jurisdiction 
of the juvenile court. Within 25 days after a complaint is filed, a DJS intake officer is 
required to make an inquiry to determine whether the juvenile court has jurisdiction and 
whether judicial action is in the best interests of the public or the child. The intake officer 
may make any of the following decisions:  (1) deny authorization to file a petition or a 
peace order request or both in the juvenile court; (2) propose an informal adjustment of the 
matter; or (3) authorize the filing of a petition or a peace order request or both in the 
juvenile court. The bill alters the length of time DJS has to make an inquiry from 25 days 
to 15 business days. However, if a law enforcement officer requests an intake officer to 
detain a child prior to a hearing and the intake officer does not authorize detention of the 
child, the intake officer must make an inquiry within 2 business days. 
 
Under current law, as part of their inquiry, a DJS intake officer does not need to interview 
the child who is the subject of the complaint when the complaint alleges a violation of 
§ 4-203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun) or § 4-204 (use of a handgun or 
antique firearm in the commission of a crime) of the Criminal Law Article. The bill expands 
this provision. Under the bill, intake officers are also not required to interview a child 
during an inquiry if the complaint alleges a violation of § 5-133 (possession of a regulated 
firearm), § 5-134 (sale, rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm), § 5-138 (sale, transfer, or 
disposal of a stolen regulated firearm), § 5-142 (removal or alteration of an identification 
mark or number on a firearm), § 5-203 (possession of a short-barreled rifle or short-barreled 
shotgun), or § 5-703 (untraceable firearms/violating serial number requirements for 
firearms) of the Public Safety Article. 
 
Under current law, if based upon the complaint and the inquiry, the intake officer concludes 
that the court has no jurisdiction, or that neither an informal adjustment nor judicial action 
is appropriate, the intake officer may deny authorization to file a petition or a peace order 
request or both. If the intake officer denies authorization to file a petition or a peace order 
request or both, the intake officer must inform the victim, the arresting police officer, and 
person or agency that filed the complaint or caused it to be filed of the decision, the reasons 
for it, and their right of review. The bill requires that this notice be by electronic means. 
 
Forwarding Complaints to the State’s Attorney for Consideration for Prosecution  
 
Currently, if a complaint alleges the commission of an act that would be a felony if 
committed by an adult or alleges a violation of § 4-203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 814/ Page 4 
a handgun) or § 4-204 (use of a handgun or antique firearm in the commission of a crime) 
of the Criminal Law Article and the intake officer denies authorization to file a petition or 
proposes an informal adjustment, the intake officer must immediately forward the 
complaint and a copy of the entire intake case file, as specified, to the State’s Attorney. 
 
Under the bill, a complaint alleging a violation of any of the following statutes is also 
subject to this requirement:  § 5-133 (possession of a regulated firearm), § 5-134 (sale, 
rental, or transfer of a regulated firearm), § 5-138 (sale, transfer, or disposal of a stolen 
regulated firearm), § 5-142 (removal or alteration of an identification mark or number on 
a firearm), § 5-203 (possession of a short-barreled rifle or short-barreled shotgun), or 
§ 5-703 (untraceable firearms/violating serial number requirements for firearms) of the 
Public Safety Article. 
 
Under current law, an intake officer is not required to forward the complaint and copy of 
the file to the State’s Attorney if the complaint alleges the commission of an act that would 
be a felony if committed by an adult and (1) the intake officer proposes the matter for 
informal adjustment; (2) the act did not involve the intentional causing of, or attempt to 
cause, the death of or physical injury to another; and (3) the act would not be a crime of 
violence, as defined under § 14-101 of the Criminal Article, if committed by an adult. The 
bill eliminates this statutory exception. 
 
Furthermore, under the bill, DJS intake officers are required to immediately forward the 
complaint and copy of the file to the State’s Attorney if the complaint alleges the child 
committed a delinquent act while under the supervision of DJS and the intake officer denies 
authorization to file a petition or proposes informal adjustment. 
 
Preliminary Review of Forwarded Complaints by State’s Attorneys 
 
Under current law, upon receipt of a forwarded complaint, the State’s Attorney must make 
a preliminary review as to whether the court has jurisdiction and whether judicial action is 
in the best interests of the public or the child. After the preliminary review, and within 
30 days of the State’s Attorney’s receipt of the complaint (unless the court extends the 
time), the State’s Attorney must file a petition or a peace order request or both; refer the 
complaint to DJS for informal disposition; or dismiss the complaint. The bill specifies that 
an intake officer is not prohibited from proceeding with an informal adjustment during the 
State’s Attorney’s preliminary review. 
 
Informal Adjustments 
 
Under current law, an intake officer may propose an informal adjustment if, based on the 
complaint and the inquiry, the officer concludes that a juvenile court has jurisdiction but 
that an informal adjustment, rather than judicial action, is in the best interests of the public 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 814/ Page 5 
and the child. The intake officer must propose an informal adjustment by informing the 
victim, the child, and the child’s parent or guardian of the nature of the complaint, the 
objectives of the adjustment process, and the conditions and procedures under which it will 
be conducted. The intake officer may not proceed with an informal adjustment unless the 
child and the child’s parent or guardian consent to the informal adjustment procedure. 
However, an intake officer may proceed with an informal adjustment without informing 
the victim if the intake officer has made reasonable efforts to contact the victim. During an 
informal adjustment process, the child is subject to such supervision as the intake officer 
deems appropriate. The process may not exceed 90 days unless the time is extended by the 
court or the intake officer determines that additional time is necessary for the child to 
complete a program that is part of the informal adjustment process. If, at any time before 
the completion of an agreed upon informal adjustment, the intake officer believes that it 
cannot be completed successfully, the intake officer must either authorize the filing of a 
petition and/or a peace order request or deny authorization to file a petition and/or a peace 
order request. 
 
The bill requires that if the intake officer denies authorization to file a petition and/or peace 
order request, the intake officer must immediately forward the complaint and entire intake 
case file to the State’s Attorney. 
 
Child in Need of Supervision Petitions – Motor Vehicle Theft 
 
The bill requires that if a law enforcement officer alleges that a child younger than age 13 
committed an act that would constitute motor vehicle theft under § 7-105 of the Criminal 
Law Article, the officer must forward the complaint to DJS to file a petition alleging that 
the child is in need of supervision. 
 
The bill also requires an intake officer to authorize the filing of a CINS petition upon 
receiving a complaint alleging that a child younger than age 13 committed an act that would 
constitute motor vehicle theft under § 7-105 of the Criminal Law Article. 
 
Child in Custody 
 
Under current law, if a law enforcement officer takes a child into custody, the officer must 
immediately notify, or cause to be notified, the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian in a 
manner reasonably calculated to give actual notice of the action. The notice must include 
the child’s location, provide the reason for the child being taken into custody, and instruct 
the parent, guardian, or custodian on how to make immediate in-person contact with the 
child. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 814/ Page 6 
The bill further requires that, if a child is taken into custody by a law enforcement officer 
pursuant to the law of arrest, the officer must:   
 
 
complete and forward a written complaint or citation to DJS for processing, in 
accordance with existing statutory requirements; 
 
if the child was referred to an at-risk youth prevention and diversion program, as 
defined in § 8-601 of the Human Services Article, complete and forward a written 
report to DJS indicating that the child was diverted to (1) a law enforcement diversion 
program, including a diversion program operated by a local State’s Attorney; (2) a 
diversion program operated by another agency or organization; (3) a local care team; 
or (4) another community-based service provider; or 
 
complete and forward a written report to DJS indicating that no further action was 
taken. 
 
Authorized Detention Prior to a Hearing  
 
Under current law, a child who is taken into custody may be placed in detention or 
community detention prior to a hearing if such action is required to protect the child or 
others or the child is likely to leave the jurisdiction of the court. Generally, a child whose 
most serious offense would be a misdemeanor if committed by an adult cannot be placed 
in detention before a hearing unless (1) the act involved a handgun and would violate the 
Criminal Law Article or Public Safety Article if committed by an adult or (2) the child has 
been adjudicated delinquent at least twice within the preceding 12 months. 
 
The bill repeals the reference to handgun offenses and substitutes the following specified 
gun offenses:  § 4-203 or § 4-204 of the Criminal Law Article or § 5-133, § 5-134, § 5-138, 
§ 5-142, § 5-203, or § 5-703 of the Public Safety Article. The bill also repeals the exception 
for a child who was adjudicated delinquent at least twice in the preceding 12 months and 
substitutes the exception for a child who was adjudicated at least twice in the preceding 
two years. Additionally, the bill allows the juvenile court to order detention before a 
hearing when a child is alleged to have committed, while under DJS supervision, an act 
that would result in a penalty of imprisonment of more than two years and would not 
constitute second-degree assault under § 3-203 of the Criminal Law Article if committed 
by an adult. Unless the child has violated the terms of community detention and it is 
necessary for the protection of the child or others, the bill prohibits a child younger than 
age 13 from being placed in pre-hearing detention if the child is accused of an act that 
would constitute one of the aforementioned gun offenses and the child has not previously 
been adjudicated delinquent for any of those gun offenses. 
 
Under current law, if a child remains in detention prior to a hearing, within 14 days of the 
child’s initial detention, DJS must appear at a hearing before the court with the child to 
explain the reasons for the child’s continued detention; DJS must appear at subsequent 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 814/ Page 7 
hearings with the child every 14 days thereafter. The bill allows the waiver of one such 
hearing on the consent of the court, the State’s Attorney, and counsel for the child. 
 
Community Detention – Electronic Monitoring Violations 
 
Under current law, a court has various options when making a disposition on a petition, 
including placing the child on probation or under supervision in the child’s own home or 
in the custody of or under the guardianship of a relative or other fit person, upon terms that 
the court deems appropriate, including community detention. Community detention 
includes electronic monitoring. 
 
Under the bill, if a child placed in community detention under an electronic monitoring 
agreement violates the agreement, DJS must, within 24 hours after the violation, notify the 
juvenile court, the office of the State’s Attorney, and the child’s defense attorney. 
 
Juvenile Probation  
 
Time Limits on Juvenile Probation:  Under current law, when the most serious offense a 
child commits is an offense that would be a misdemeanor if committed by an adult, the 
court may place the child on probation for up to six months. The court may extend this 
period by up to three months if, after a hearing, the court determines that there is good 
cause to extend the probation and the purpose of extension is to ensure the child completes 
a treatment or rehabilitative program or service. The overall term of probation, including 
extensions, may not exceed one year. 
 
Currently, except for a crime of violence under § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article, if a 
child commits an offense that would be a felony if committed by an adult, the court may 
place the child on probation for up to one year. The court may extend this period by up to 
three months if, after a hearing, the court determines that there is good cause to extend the 
probation and the purpose of extension is to ensure the child completes a treatment or 
rehabilitative program or service. The total period of probation may not exceed two years. 
However, the court may extend the total period of probation beyond two years if, after a 
hearing, the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that there is good cause for the 
extension and extending the probation is in the best interest of the child. However, if such 
an extension is granted, the total period of probation, including all extensions, may not 
exceed three years. 
 
The bill extends time limits on juvenile probation. For offenses that would be a 
misdemeanor, the maximum initial probation period increases from six months to one year, 
and the total probation term, including extensions, increases from a one-year maximum to 
a two-year maximum. For offenses that would be a felony, the maximum initial probation 
period increases from one year to two years and the total probation term, including 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 814/ Page 8 
extensions, increases from two years to three years. However, if after a hearing, the court 
finds by clear and convincing evidence that there is good cause to extend the probation and 
an extension is in the best interest of the child, the total period of probation increases from 
three years to four years, inclusive of all extensions. 
 
The bill specifies that “good cause” includes a child having two or more unexcused 
absences from a program that the child is ordered to attend as a condition of probation, 
unless the child has substantially completed the treatment program. 
 
Existing statute allows a court to reset a child’s probation for specified violations. Under 
current law, if a child is found to have committed a violation of probation, except for a 
technical violation, a court may, after a hearing, place the child on a new term of probation 
for a period that is consistent with the period of probation (discussed above) that may be 
imposed for the delinquent act for which the child was originally placed on probation. As 
with the provisions discussed above, this provision does not apply to an offense that would 
be a felony crime of violence under § 14-101 of the Criminal Law Article if committed by 
an adult. Existing statute also prohibits a child from being placed in a facility used for 
detention for a technical violation. 
 
Under current law, a “technical violation” means a violation of probation that does not 
involve an arrest or summons issued by a commissioner on a statement of charges filed by 
a law enforcement officer; a violation of a criminal prohibition, or an act that would be a 
violation of a criminal prohibition if committed by an adult, other than a minor traffic 
offense; a violation of a no-contact or stay-away order; or absconding. 
 
Progress Reports:  The bill requires that if a child is placed on probation and has two or 
more unexcused absences from a program the child was ordered to attend as a condition of 
probation, the court must be provided with a progress report. 
 
Treatment Service Plans  
 
Under current law, a “treatment service plan” means a plan recommended at a disposition 
hearing or a disposition review hearing by DJS to the court proposing specific assistance, 
guidance, treatment, or rehabilitation of a child. In making a treatment service plan (the 
plan), a juvenile counselor must meet with the child who is subject to the plan and the 
child’s parent, guardian, or legal custodian to discuss the plan. At a minimum, the plan 
must include (1) the recommended level of supervision for the child; (2) specific goals for 
the child and family to meet, along with timelines for meeting those goals; (3) a statement 
of any condition that the child’s parent, guardian, or legal custodian must change in order 
to alleviate any risks to the child; (4) a statement of the services to be provided to the child 
and the child’s family; and (5) any other information that may be necessary to make a 
disposition consistent with the child’s best interests and the protection of the public interest.  
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 814/ Page 9 
Currently, if the court adopts a treatment service plan, DJS must ensure that 
implementation of the plan occurs within 25 days after the date of disposition. If a plan 
requires specified supervision, mentoring, mediation, monitoring, or placement, 
implementation of the plan is considered to have occurred when the supervision, 
mentoring, mediation, monitoring, or placement occurs. The bill specifies that 
implementation of the plan only occurs when the supervision, mentoring, mediation, 
monitoring, or placement occurs. 
 
Under current law, DJS must certify in writing to the court within 25 days after the date of 
disposition whether implementation of the plan has occurred. The bill requires DJS to 
provide certification to the court in writing within 25 days after the date of disposition 
whether implementation of the plan has occurred, explain attempts made to ensure 
implementation of the plan in the certification, and forward a copy of the certification to 
the Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best Practices, so that the 
commission may evaluate patterns of failed implementation.  
 
Confidential Juvenile Records  
 
Under current law, a court record pertaining to a child is confidential and its contents may 
not be divulged, by subpoena or otherwise, except by order of the court upon a showing of 
good cause, or as specified in §§ 7-303 and 22-309 of the Education Article. This provision 
does not prohibit access to and confidential use of a court record by the State Advisory 
Board for Juvenile Services if the board is performing its statutory duties. The bill reassigns 
access to these records from the board to the Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and 
Emerging and Best Practices for the purpose of performing its statutory duties. 
 
II. 
Juvenile Sex Offender Registrants on School Property (Effective 
November 1, 2024) 
 
Under current law, with specified exceptions, a sex offender registrant is generally 
prohibited from knowingly entering onto real property that is used for public or nonpublic 
elementary or secondary education or on which is located certain child care homes or a 
licensed child care institution, as specified by law. A sex offender registrant who is a 
student may receive an education in accordance with State law in (1) a location other than 
a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school, including by participating in the 
Home and Hospital Teaching Program for Students or by participating in or attending a 
specific program approved by a county board of education; (2) a Regional Institute for 
Children and Adolescents; or (3) a certain nonpublic educational program as specified by 
law. Each county board must develop and adopt a policy that enables a sex offender 
registrant who is a student to receive an education under these provisions. The State Board 
of Education must develop and adopt guidelines to assist county boards in the development 
of these policies. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 814/ Page 10 
Under current law, a person who enters into a contract with a county board of education or 
a nonpublic school is prohibited from knowingly employing an individual to work at a 
school if the individual is a sex offender registrant. A person who violates the prohibitions 
described above is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 
five years and/or a $5,000 maximum fine. 
 
The bill applies the provisions described above to juvenile sex offender registrants. Under 
current law, a “juvenile registrant” means a person who is required to be included in the 
registry of juvenile sex offenders that is maintained by DJS separately from the sex 
offender registry. A person must be included in the juvenile sex offender registry if (1) the 
person has been adjudicated delinquent for an act that, if committed by an adult, would 
constitute rape in the first degree, rape in the second degree, or sexual offense in the 
third degree (or the statutes corresponding to sexual offense in the first and second degrees, 
as those statutes existed before October 1, 2017) and (2) the person was a minor who was 
at least 14 years at the time the delinquent act was committed.  
 
III. 
State Board of Victim Services (Effective November 1, 2024) 
 
Under current law, the State Board of Victim Services, which is housed within GOCPP, is 
required to develop pamphlets on specified topics. The bill expands the board’s 
pamphlet-related duties by requiring the board to develop a pamphlet on how victims and 
their representatives can file a complaint to DJS alleging that a child is in need of 
supervision. 
 
IV. 
Administrative Responsibilities and Reporting Requirements for the 
Department of Juvenile Services (Effective June 1, 2024) 
 
State Comprehensive Juvenile Services 3-Year Plan  
 
Current law requires the Secretary of DJS to develop a State Comprehensive Juvenile 
Services 3-Year Plan. The plan must (1) include an inventory of all in-day treatment 
programs and residential care programs and an accounting of the residence of all clients; 
(2) include an inventory of nonresidential treatment programs; (3) specify the needs of the 
various areas of services for clients, including alcohol and drug abuse rehabilitation 
services; (4) specify the needs of clients, including predelinquent diversion services 
programs; (5) establish priorities for the different services needed; (6) set standards for the 
quality of residential services and outreach services; (7) include a program dedicated to 
reducing recidivism rates of clients; (8) include programs dedicated to diverting children 
from the juvenile justice system; and (9) include any other matters that the Secretary 
considers appropriate. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 814/ Page 11 
The bill expands the required contents of the plan to include (1) programs developed for 
youth at the highest risk of becoming victims or perpetrators of gun violence; (2) programs 
developed specifically for individuals ages 10 through 14 who are at the highest risk of 
becoming victims or perpetrators of gun violence; and (3) programs developed for youth 
involved in motor vehicle theft. 
 
Expanded Department of Juvenile Services Reporting Requirements 
 
Chapter 42 of 2022 required DJS to report to the General Assembly on several topics 
related to its procedures, operations, and programming. The bill extends the deadline for 
this report by two years to April 15, 2025. The bill also expands the required content of the 
report to include the number of cases resolved at intake and the number of cases referred 
for informal adjustment within the prior fiscal year. 
 
V. 
Governor’s Office for Children and the Children’s Cabinet (Effective 
June 1, 2024) 
 
GOC was established by an executive order in 2005 to provide a coordinated, 
comprehensive interagency approach to the development of a continuum of care that is 
family- and child-oriented and emphasizes prevention, early intervention, and 
community-based services for all children and families, with special attention to at-risk 
populations. GOC activities include staffing the Children’s Cabinet, administering the 
Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund (CCIF), providing technical assistance to local 
management boards (LMBs), promoting child and family policy, and measuring results for 
child well-being.  
 
In December 2018, GOC was moved under the Governor’s Office of Crime Control and 
Prevention, which was later renamed the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, 
and Victim Services (GOCPYVS); funding for personnel and operational expenses were 
absorbed into that office in fiscal 2020. In January 2024, Executive Order 01.01.2024.05 
separated GOC from GOCPYVS and renamed GOCPYVS as GOCPP.  
 
According to the executive order, GOC is led by a Special Secretary and is a coordinating 
office that has the following duties:  supporting the work of the Children’s Cabinet; 
advancing the well-being of the State’s children and families by promoting values, polices, 
and practices; partnering with LMBs and overseeing the use of the CCIF; and assisting the 
Children’s Cabinet in distributing grants.  
 
The Children’s Cabinet was originally created by the Governor in 1987 as the Subcabinet 
for Children and Youth. It went through various iterations until it was reconstituted by the 
Governor in Executive Order 01.01.2024.05. The Children’s Cabinet is chaired by the 
Special Secretary of the Governor’s Office for Children and includes the secretaries of 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 814/ Page 12 
various State agencies. The Children’s Cabinet is required to prepare and annually update 
a three-year plan for the priorities and strategies for delivering services; a report is due by 
December 1, 2024.  
 
The bill codifies GOC as a separate unit within the Executive Department. Similar to the 
stated purpose of GOC in the executive order, the bill specifies that the purpose of the 
office is to provide a coordinated, comprehensive, interagency approach to promoting the 
well-being of children and families through a network of supports, programs, and services 
that are family and child-oriented and reducing the number of children living in poverty. 
The bill further codifies a Children’s Cabinet administered by GOC. The stated purpose of 
the Children’s Cabinet is to promote the vision of the State for a stable, safe, and healthy 
environment for children and families. The head of GOC must serve as the chairperson of 
the cabinet and is responsible for the administration and operation of the Children’s Cabinet. 
The Governor is authorized to provide for the structure, duties, and responsibilities of GOC 
and the Children’s Cabinet by executive order. 
 
VI. 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (Effective 
June 1, 2024) 
 
Codification of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy  
 
The bill codifies GOCPP as a separate unit within the Executive Department. The Governor 
is authorized to provide for the structure, duties, and responsibilities of GOCPP by 
executive order. 
 
Reporting Requirements for the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy  
 
At-risk Youth Prevention and Diversion Programs:  Under current law, GOCPP must 
report to the General Assembly by December 31 each year on the implementation and 
effectiveness of at-risk youth prevention and diversion programs. The bill further requires 
GOCPP to report to DJS by December 31 each year on the number of children referred to 
an at-risk youth prevention and diversion program in the previous year; the age, gender, 
and race of the referred children; and the number of children currently enrolled in such a 
program. 
 
Juvenile Arrests:  The bill requires that on or before December 31, 2024, and on or before 
December 31 each year thereafter, GOCPP must report to the General Assembly on the 
number of children arrested and the number of times the arrest resulted in a complaint with 
DJS for the calendar year. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 814/ Page 13 
VII. Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best Practices 
(Effective June 1, 2024) 
 
Under current law, the State Advisory Board for Juvenile Services (the board), which is 
within DJS, is comprised of certain members and is tasked with several responsibilities, 
including reporting and advising the Secretary of DJS on multiple juvenile programs in the 
State; recommending policies and programs to improve juvenile services in the State; 
participating in interpreting the objectives of DJS for the public; participating in planning 
the development and use of available resources to meet the needs of DJS; and examining 
and reviewing fatalities involving children under DJS supervision for the purpose of 
advising the Secretary of DJS on policies and programs to prevent fatalities, as specified. 
 
The bill repeals the board and for the most part, transfers membership and responsibilities 
of the board to the Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best 
Practices (the commission). The bill makes additional changes to membership of the 
commission and establishes requirements related to membership, including the length of a 
term and the staggering of terms. The Governor, the President of the Senate, and the 
Speaker of the House must appoint the commission’s chair from among the members of 
the commission. The bill removes DJS and the Department of Human Services (DHS) as 
the staffing agencies for the commission; under the bill, GOCPP must staff the commission. 
 
Under current law, the commission is tasked with:   
 
 
researching culturally competent, evidence-based, research-based, and promising 
practices relating to (1) child welfare; (2) juvenile rehabilitation; (3) mental health 
services for children; and (4) prevention and intervention services for juveniles; 
 
evaluating the cost-effectiveness of practices researched by the commission; 
 
identifying means of evaluating the effectiveness of practices researched by the 
commission; and 
 
giving special attention to organizations located in or serving historically 
underserved communities, identifying strategies to enable the community-based 
organizations that provide services for juveniles to evaluate and validate services 
and programming provided by those organizations. 
 
As noted above, the bill transfers many of the responsibilities of the State Advisory Board 
to the commission. The bill makes specified alterations to the commission’s existing duties 
and expands the commission’s duties to include:   
 
 
reviewing and reporting on (1) all juvenile services, facilities, and programs in the 
State; (2) the educational programs and services of DJS; (3) programs designed to 
divert children from the juvenile justice system; (4) the treatment and programming 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 814/ Page 14 
needs of females in the juvenile justice system; (5) the use of CINS petitions and 
the number of CINS petitions authorized or denied by jurisdiction; and (6) the 
wait times for placement of children in facilities; 
 
reviewing data relating to arrests, completion of programming, and recidivism from 
the Maryland Longitudinal Data System Center; 
 
identifying opportunities for greater coordination between DJS and specified 
entities; 
 
recommending policies and programs to improve juvenile services in the State; 
 
participating in interpreting for the public the objectives of juvenile services in the 
State; 
 
participating in planning the development and use of available resources to meet the 
needs of juveniles;  
 
coordinating with the Maryland Department of Labor to identify potential job and 
apprenticeship opportunities for juveniles under the supervision of DJS; and 
 
examining and reviewing fatalities involving children under the supervision of DJS, 
for the purpose of providing recommendations on policies and programs to prevent 
fatalities, including (1) a death caused by a child under the supervision of DJS if the 
child is convicted or adjudicated for the death and (2) the death of a child under the 
supervision of DJS. 
 
Under current law, the commission must report its findings to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on or before December 31 each year. The bill requires the submission 
of the report on or before October 1, 2025, and on or before October 1 each year thereafter.  
 
VIII. Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit (Effective June 1, 2024)  
 
The bill alters the reporting requirements of the JJMU to account for the repeal of the 
State Advisory Board for Juvenile Services and the expanded responsibilities of the 
commission under the bill. JJMU is currently housed within the Office of the Attorney 
General (OAG). Chapter 836 of 2024 transfers JJMU to the Office of the Correctional 
Ombudsman, a newly established independent unit of State government, on July 1, 2024.  
 
Background:  Chapter 42 of 2022 implemented many recommendations of the Juvenile 
Justice Reform Council, which was established in 2019 to research best practices for the 
treatment of juveniles who are subject to the criminal and juvenile justice systems and 
make recommendations to limit or otherwise mitigate contributing risk factors. Among 
other provisions, Chapter 42 raised, to age 13, the minimum age of juveniles subject to the 
jurisdiction of the juvenile court for purposes of delinquency proceedings, with an 
exception for 10- to 12-year-olds accused of specified violent offenses. The legislation also 
established limitations on the use of detention and probation and expanded the 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 814/ Page 15 
circumstances under which juveniles may be handled by an informal process within DJS 
without an opportunity for further review by a State’s Attorney. 
 
In response to news reports of increasing juvenile crime and a mass shooting in 
Baltimore City, legislators conducted hearings that included presentations from a range of 
entities involved in the juvenile justice system. In a hearing before the House Judiciary 
Committee in September 2023, committee members and presenters explored many specific 
issues and their possible impacts on juvenile crime. Broad themes included the availability 
of resources to systemically address the root causes of crime, potential hindrances for law 
enforcement officers, a perceived lack of consequences for DJS‐involved youth, and the 
overall efficacy of the current juvenile justice system in addressing repeat offenders. DJS, 
while noting that juvenile crime represents a small portion of all crime in Maryland, also 
acknowledged the need for more diverse options for judges to consider when making 
dispositional decisions for juveniles, noting, for example, that Maryland does not have a 
residential drug treatment program for adolescents. OPD further stressed that the 
availability of community services for juveniles and their families has atrophied in 
recent years, further noting that poverty, mental health, and the widespread prevalence and 
availability of firearms are among other factors that must be examined when discussing 
juvenile justice reform. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for DJS increase by at least $4.4 million 
in fiscal 2025; additional significant personnel and capital costs (not shown below) may be 
incurred, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for OPD increase by as much as 
$1.9 million in fiscal 2025, as discussed below. General fund expenditures for GOCPP 
increase by approximately $200,300 in fiscal 2025.  
 
Department of Juvenile Services 
 
General fund expenditures for DJS increase by at least $4.4 million in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s November 1, 2024 effective date for provisions related to DJS 
procedures. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 35 employees (27 case managers, 
2 case manager supervisors, 5 community detention officers, and 1 community detention 
supervisor) to implement the bill’s provisions and address the bill’s projected effect on DJS 
populations and procedures. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
ongoing operating expenses, and projected costs for contracted out-of-home placements 
under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 814/ Page 16 
Positions 
35 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$1,612,477 
Contractual Services for Out-of-home Placements 
2,587,200 
Other Operating Expenses 
250,558 
Minimum DJS FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$4,450,235 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate, however, does not include costs for additional DJS personnel to address 
notifications of electronic monitoring violations under the bill. DJS advises that it requires 
10 case managers to implement this provision. The cost associated with these positions is 
approximately $524,700 in fiscal 2025 and increases to $773,500 by fiscal 2029. The bill 
requires DJS to notify the juvenile court, the State’s Attorney, and the child’s defense 
attorney within 24 hours if a child placed on community detention under an electronic 
monitoring agreement violates the agreement. While DJS generally advises that it currently 
makes these notifications only when ordered by the court and provides this information to 
the court at the next court hearing to review the child’s compliance on community 
detention, DJS did not provide sufficient information regarding current electronic 
monitoring, violations of electronic monitoring, and how it calculated the personnel need 
for increased notifications. 
 
Although not accounted for in this analysis, DJS also anticipates significant capital costs 
(in excess of $1.5 million under a preliminary DJS estimate), funded with pay-as-you-go 
general funds and/or general obligation bonds. The State’s capital program is determined 
annually through the capital budget process subject to debt affordability limits. As total 
spending is fixed each year, to the extent that a new project is added to the program, other 
projects may receive less funding, be delayed, or get canceled. 
 
To the extent that capital projects are initiated, DJS incurs significant staffing costs (in 
excess of $2 million annually under one preliminary DJS estimate) not reflected above. 
However, The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that future year 
expenditures account for continued use of contractual services (approximately $4.0 million 
annually) for out-of-home placements. It is unclear to what extent additional capacity in 
State facilities could mitigate significant departmental costs for contracted out-of-home 
placements. DJS was not able to provide sufficient information to explain the potential 
magnitude and need for facilities and associated facility personnel under the bill. While it 
is plausible additional facilities may need to be opened (whether by reopening former 
facilities or constructing new ones with a large capital investment), the magnitude of those 
efforts and costs cannot be independently determined at this time. DJS was also not able to 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 814/ Page 17 
provide sufficient information regarding $525,000 in additional annual contractual services 
and supplies; therefore, those costs are not accounted for in this analysis. 
 
The bill has several interconnected provisions, which when viewed together, significantly 
alter procedures in juvenile cases and are anticipated to alter DJS populations, particularly 
provisions that change where children involved in juvenile cases are placed. DJS advises 
that its facilities are currently operating at or close to capacity, and there are waitlists for 
placements in its facilities and programs. DJS also advises that additional facility space 
may be needed for intake and predisposition purposes in jurisdictions that lack diversion 
programs. However, DLS notes that the bill codifies existing options for law enforcement 
officers, and diversion programs exist in the larger jurisdictions that are the source for the 
highest volume of DJS complaints. 
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
OPD advises that between 2016 and 2023, OPD’s juvenile defender personnel decreased 
from 61 attorneys to 41 attorneys; this decrease was mainly due to reassignment of juvenile 
defenders to other units within the office, including when there was a significant drop in 
juvenile prosecution and detention during the COVID pandemic. OPD further advises that 
thus far, it has not experienced a noticeable change in operations from the 2022 juvenile 
reforms. According to OPD, the office handled more juvenile matters in fiscal 2023 (2,892) 
than it did in fiscal 2022 (2,266). 
 
OPD advises that the bill’s provisions make extensive changes that increase OPD case 
volume and increase OPD workload in existing juvenile cases, including expanding 
juvenile court jurisdiction, shortening the timeframe for intake, increasing referrals to 
State’s Attorneys, expanding eligibility for detention, and extending terms of juvenile 
probation. Based on DJS data and experience, OPD estimates that it will require  
24 additional employees (16.5 attorneys, 3 social workers, and 4.5 administrative 
employees) for full implementation of the bill.  
 
OPD is in the process of developing new Maryland-specific caseload standards; the current 
OPD standards were adopted in 2005. OPD calculated this need for personnel based on a 
2022 Oregon workload study that included juvenile cases and was conducted by some of 
the same experts and used a similar methodology as the National Public Defense Workload 
Study, which was released in September 2023. The national standards use a different 
calculation/methodology than the 2005 OPD standards currently in use, which, according 
to the office, do not recognize the different levels of effort needed for different types of 
cases. According to OPD, juvenile cases are specialized and particularly 
resource-intensive, especially in cases involving younger children. 
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 814/ Page 18 
DLS notes that as mentioned above, OPD has not adopted new Maryland-specific caseload 
standards yet, and the Oregon standards are noticeably lower than current OPD caseload 
standards. For context, according to information recently submitted pursuant to the 
2023 Joint Chairmen’s Report, OPD noted that based on fiscal 2023 data, it would need 
947 additional attorneys to meet the national caseload standards that used a similar 
methodology as the Oregon caseload study OPD used in its calculations for this bill.  
 
Thus, DLS advises that the estimate below (24 positions – 16.5 attorneys, 3 social workers, 
and 4.5 administrative employees) represents a maximum estimate of additional resources 
needed for OPD to implement the bill. Correspondingly, general fund expenditures 
increase by as much as $1,916,639 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s 
November 1, 2024 effective date for provisions related to the juvenile justice process. To 
the extent that adopted caseload standards are higher than the Oregon standard or attorney 
positions overlap (OPD based its calculations using individual components of the bill), 
actual expenditures will be less. 
 
Positions 
24 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$1,738,382 
Operating Expenses 
178,257 
Maximum OPD FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$1,916,639 
 
The estimate above includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy, Governor’s Office for Children, and 
the Children’s Cabinet  
 
General fund expenditures for GOCPP increase by $200,286 in fiscal 2025, which assumes 
a 30-day start-up delay for GOCPP-related provisions. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring two project managers (one administrator and one administrative officer) for GOCPP 
to comply with its responsibilities pertaining to the Commission on Juvenile Justice 
Reform and Emerging and Best Practices. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Positions 
2 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$185,234 
Operating Expenses 
15,052 
GOCPP FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$200,286 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This estimate assumes that any 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 814/ Page 19 
travel expenses incurred by GOCPP under the bill are minimal and absorbable using 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
The commission is currently staffed by DJS and DHS; the bill removes staffing 
responsibilities from DJS and DHS and designates GOCPP as the staffing agency for the 
commission. The bill transfers responsibilities of the existing State Advisory Board for 
Juvenile Services within DJS (repealed under the bill) to the commission and establishes 
additional responsibilities for the commission. GOCPP advises while many of these 
responsibilities exist under current law, all of the responsibilities are new to the office and 
cannot be absorbed by existing staff.  
 
This analysis assumes that (1) GOCPP can produce the annual juvenile arrests report using 
existing resources and/or the additional employees listed above and (2) the State Board of 
Victim Services, which is housed within GOCPP, can develop pamphlets on filing CINS 
complaints using existing budgeted resources.  
 
The Governor’s Office advises that it can implement the bill’s provisions regarding GOC 
and the Children’s Cabinet using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
As noted above, JJMU is currently housed within OAG. Chapter 836 of 2024 transfers 
JJMU to the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman, a newly established independent unit 
of State government, on July 1, 2024. 
 
With respect to identical statutory provisions, OAG advised that due to potential increases 
in the DJS population, the provisions increase JJMU’s existing workload such that an 
additional monitor is required. According to OAG, there has been an ongoing need for 
additional personnel within JJMU and existing JJMU staff (three monitors and a director) 
cannot accommodate this additional workload. DLS advises that JJMU’s current staffing 
levels predate the changes to the juvenile justice system in 2022, and the bill’s changes to 
JJMU’s responsibilities do not independently generate the need for additional personnel. 
 
Other Agencies and Miscellaneous Impacts 
 
The Judiciary advises that it can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. The 
Maryland Department of Transportation advises that its police forces can address 
additional activity generated by the bill, including additional training and new reporting 
procedures, with existing budgeted resources. The Maryland State Department of 
Education advises that it can adjust existing policies regarding child sex offenders with 
existing resources.  
 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 814/ Page 20 
Expense reimbursements for members of the Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and 
Emerging and Best Practices are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill may affect operations related to juvenile cases for 
State’s Attorneys’ offices. Baltimore County advises that implementation of the bill 
requires an additional assistant State’s Attorney, at a cost of $139,200 in fiscal 2025 and 
increasing to $156,671 by fiscal 2029. This analysis assumes that local school systems can 
serve students affected by the bill’s juvenile sex offender registrant provisions with existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 744 (The President, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Governor’s 
Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Office of the Public Defender; Department of General Services; Department of Human 
Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department 
of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - May 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 17, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 20