START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 873 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 873 
(Delegate Taylor) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Appraisal Gap From Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program – 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose of the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial 
Assistance Program in the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) 
to include helping close appraisal gaps that occur in historically redlined neighborhoods by 
making financial assistance available to individuals who purchase a qualified property 
(1) after a qualified project is completed; (2) at an affordable sales price as determined by 
regulations adopted by DHCD; and (3) as an owner-occupant. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall finances of the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial 
Assistance Program are not affected. DHCD can handle any administrative changes with 
existing budgeted resources.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining Financial Assistance Program 
 
Chapters 702 and 703 of 2021 established the Appraisal Gap from Historic Redlining 
Financial Assistance Program and related fund within DHCD. The purpose of the program 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 873/ Page 2 
is to make financial assistance available to affordable housing developers working in 
low-income census tracts and sustainable communities in order to help close appraisal gaps 
that occur in historically redlined neighborhoods.  
 
Generally, in the fiscal year in which a qualified project is proposed, an individual or 
business entity may apply to DHCD for financial assistance to cover the appraisal gap for 
the project. “Qualified project” means the construction or substantial rehabilitation of a 
qualified property if the eligible construction expenses do not exceed $500,000. Subject to 
specified funding limits and regulations, DHCD must accept an application for financial 
assistance from an individual or business entity that proposes to develop a qualified project. 
The application must be in the form and must contain any information that DHCD requires 
by regulation. DHCD must approve all applications that qualify for financial assistance in 
a timely manner. The fiscal 2025 capital budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $10.0 million in general obligation bond proceeds for the program.  
 
Chapters 702 and 703 also required DHCD to conduct a study, aggregated by race, 
zip codes, and census tracts, of housing values, appraisals, and refinancing rates across the 
State over the past 30 years, including the impact of State and federal policies, such as 
infrastructure (road, park, and water and sewer) and other investments, on those 
communities. DHCD was required to submit the findings of the study to the Governor and 
the General Assembly by June 30, 2022; that report can be read here.  
 
DHCD advises that it currently operates the program under the title Utilizing Progressive 
Lending Investments to Finance Transformation (UPLIFT). Additional information 
regarding UPLIFT can be found here.  
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas 
 
Under current law, a sustainable community is defined as a part of a priority funding area 
that (1) is designated by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the 
Secretary of Housing and Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base 
Realignment and Closure Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a 
transit-oriented development. 
 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 873/ Page 3 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 704 (Senator Hayes) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3