START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 796

Chapter 796

(House Bill 827)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Insurance Administration – Professional Employer Organizations –
Study

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Insurance Administration to study professional
employer organizations in the State; and generally relating to health coverage and
professional employer organizations.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) The Maryland Insurance Administration shall study professional employer
organizations in the State.

(b) In conducting the study, the Administration shall:

(1) identify and compare the regulation of professional employer
organizations under federal and State law and in other states;

(2) review the history of professional employer organization activities in
the State and elsewhere and changes to the professional employer organization industry
over time;

(3) review professional employer organization health plans and plan
benefit designs;

(4) review ~~membership~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ requirements that businesses must meet
to participate in professional employer organization arrangements and to access
professional employer organization health plans;

(5) examine the regulatory structures for health insurance and
professional employer organizations in other states and under federal law that allow
individuals who are co–employed through a professional employer organization
arrangement and have a workplace employer that is a small employer to participate in the
professional employer organization’s large group plan; and

(6) ~~determine~~ ~~the~~ address any potential ~~impact~~ impacts of proposed
statutory changes in the State relating to the offering of health coverage by professional
employer organizations on the small group market in the State.

(c) On or before December 31, 2024, the Maryland Insurance Administration
shall report its findings to the House Health and Government Operations Committee and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 796 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the Senate Finance Committee in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2