START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 840 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 840 
(Delegate Hartman) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Annual Vehicle Shows - Motor and Trailer Homes 
 
 
This bill specifies that all new vehicle dealers of Class M motor homes and Class G trailers 
(and any licensed salespersons employed by them) may participate in three annual vehicle 
shows. Further, the shows do not have to be limited to Class M motor homes or 
Class G trailers. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  New vehicle dealers and any licensed salespersons employed by them are 
generally allowed to participate in two annual vehicle shows for each dealer location. 
However, new vehicle dealers franchised to sell Class M motor homes or Class G trailers 
(and the licensed salespersons employed by them) may participate in more than 
two annual vehicle shows, but only if the shows are limited to Class M motor homes or 
Class G trailers. Also, new vehicle dealers franchised to sell motorcycles (and the licensed 
salespersons employed by them) are not subject to any limitation on the number of 
annual vehicle shows in which they may participate. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 840/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 976 (Senators Carozza and West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2