START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 864 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 864 
(Delegates Crosby and Qi) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Plans 
 
 
This bill generally alters the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Program by 
(1) explicitly requiring electric companies, gas companies, and the Department of Housing 
and Community Development (DHCD) to adopt energy efficiency, conservation, demand 
response, and beneficial electrification measures to support greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions reductions; (2) setting new annual targets for GHG emissions reductions, 
including specific targets for DHCD; and (3) expanding the applicability of EmPOWER to 
specified gas companies and, if the Public Service Commission (PSC) determines it is in 
the public interest, the Choptank Electric Cooperative. The changes are primarily made by 
repealing existing provisions and establishing a new Part that includes a mixture of existing 
requirements and processes and new requirements. The bill also requires PSC to establish 
a related working group. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of the Environment 
(MDE) increase by $403,200 in FY 2025; future years reflect annualization and the 
elimination of one-time costs. Special fund revenues and expenditures for DHCD increase 
significantly beginning in FY 2027, as discussed below; amounts may exceed $12.0 million 
in FY 2027 and $24.0 million annually thereafter. PSC and other affected State agencies 
can generally implement the bill with existing resources, although special fund 
expenditures for the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) may increase by $50,000 in 
FY 2025. The effect on utility rates is discussed separately below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$403,200 
$185,400 
$193,700 
$202,100 
$211,000 
SF Expenditure 
$50,000 
$0 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($453,200) 
($185,400) 
($193,700) 
($202,100) 
($211,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 864/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments are affected to the extent they receive different, likely 
higher, funding levels under the bill through DHCD’s EmPOWER programs beginning in 
FY 2027. The effect on utility rates is discussed separately below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Repeal of Existing Requirements 
 
Existing provisions related to the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act, both the 
general provisions for electric companies and those for DHCD related to low income 
programs, are repealed. 
 
New General Requirements 
 
Subject to review and PSC approval, each electric company, each large gas company, 
DHCD, and, if required in accordance with a determination process established by the bill, 
each “midsize electric cooperative,” must develop and implement programs and services 
to encourage and promote the efficient use and conservation of energy, demand response, 
and beneficial electrification by consumers, electric companies, gas companies, and DHCD 
in support of the GHG emissions reduction goals and targets required under Title 12, 
Subtitle 2 of the Environment Article. The requirement does not apply to a gas company 
with annual gross revenues of less than 3% of the total gross annual revenues for all public 
service companies in the State during the same calendar year. The only midsize electric 
cooperative in the State is Choptank Electric Cooperative. (This provision, except for 
Choptank, aligns with current EmPOWER program participation by electric and gas 
companies.) 
 
As directed by PSC, each municipal electric or gas utility, each small gas company exempt 
from the requirement above, each small rural electric cooperative, and, if required in 
accordance with a determination process established by the bill, each midsize electric 
cooperative, must include energy efficiency and conservation, demand response, and 
beneficial electrification programs or services as part of their service to their customers. 
(This requirement is similar to the requirement in current law and distinguishes the State’s 
large utilities from the smaller utilities for purposes of EmPOWER.) 
 
Subject to specified requirements, by October 1, 2025, PSC must determine if it is in the 
public interest for a midsize electric cooperative to offer programs and services to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 864/ Page 3 
customers under the first or second provision described above. A midsize electric 
cooperative is subject to the second provision through calendar 2026, and thereafter is 
subject to either the first or the second provision, based on PSC’s determination. 
 
PSC must encourage and promote the efficient use and conservation of energy in support 
of the GHG emissions reduction goals and targets required under the Environment Article, 
established by PSC under the bill, and specified for DHCD in the bill, by:   
 
 
requiring each electric company and gas company to establish any program or 
service that PSC determines to be appropriate and cost-effective; 
 
adopting rate-making policies that provide, through a surcharge line item on 
customer bills: 
 
full cost recovery of reasonably incurred costs for the programs and services, 
including full recovery on a current basis by January 1, 2028;  
 
by December 31, 2032, the elimination of any unpaid costs and unamortized 
costs that (1) existed on December 31, 2024, or were incurred before 
January 1, 2028, and (2) were accrued for the purposes of achieving 
EmPOWER goals;  
 
compensation for any unpaid costs and unamortized costs described above at 
no more than each electric or gas company’s average cost of outstanding 
debt;  
 
reasonable 
financial 
performance 
incentives 
and 
penalties 
for 
investor-owned electric companies and gas companies, as appropriate; and 
 
ensuring that adoption of electric customer choice and gas customer choice does not 
adversely impact these goals and targets. 
 
PSC must, by regulation or order, require electric and gas companies currently participating 
in EmPOWER to disclose (1) that the surcharge includes the cost of paying down unpaid 
costs and unamortized costs that were accrued over time by programs and services required 
by PSC dating back to 2008 and (2) the period of time that the surcharge will include excess 
charges to pay down those costs. The disclosure must be in a form and format readily 
understandable to the average customer. 
 
Cost Effective Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions Programs 
 
By January 1, 2025, and every three years thereafter starting in 2027, PSC must, by 
regulation or order, require each electric company and each affected gas company to 
develop and implement a plan that (1) covers appropriate ratepayer classes; (2) starting in 
2027, covers a three-year program cycle; and (3) achieves the GHG emissions reduction 
targets established for the company under the bill through cost-effective energy efficiency 
and conservation programs and services, demand response programs and services, and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 864/ Page 4 
beneficial electrification programs and services. The bill specifies processes for 
determining appropriate targets in 2025 and 2026 (mid-EmPOWER cycle). 
 
For 2025 and 2026, and for each three-year program cycle starting in 2027, PSC must 
establish a GHG emissions reductions target for each electric company and each affected 
gas company. When doing do, PSC must measure the GHG emissions from electricity and 
gas, and the intensities of those emissions, using current data and projections from MDE. 
The targets must be measured in metric tons and relative to the GHG emissions associated 
with the electric or gas company’s weather-normalized gross retail sales and losses in a 
baseline year, as determined by PSC, and described in further detail below. PSC must also 
take into consideration the most recent final climate pollution reduction plan adopted under 
§ 2-1205 of the Environment Article when establishing the GHG emissions reduction 
targets. 
 
Specific to electric companies, as soon as possible in 2024, and at least eight months before 
the filing deadline for plans after 2024, PSC must establish GHG emission reductions 
targets for each electric company plan that will achieve at least the GHG emissions 
reduction equivalent of specified annual electricity savings percentages, calculated as a 
percentage of the electric company’s 2016 weather-normalized gross retail sales and 
electricity losses. The percentages are 2.0% in 2024, 2.25% in 2025 and 2026; and 2.5% 
each year thereafter. 
 
Specific to gas companies, by January 1, 2025, and every three years thereafter starting in 
2027, PSC must establish GHG emissions reduction targets for each gas company plan that 
will achieve at least the GHG emissions reduction equivalent, measured as specified, of the 
gas savings achieved by the gas company for the 2021-2023 EmPOWER cycle. 
 
PSC may prioritize long-lived GHG emissions reductions measures in the plans, as 
specified. Beginning January 1, 2025, at least 80% of the GHG emissions reductions 
counted toward each electric company’s and each gas company’s GHG emissions 
reductions targets must come from behind-the-meter programs, which may include 
deployment of energy storage facilities. 
 
Contributions to GHG emissions reduction goals and targets in a plan of an electric 
company or a gas company may include recovery of the reasonable and prudent costs from 
programs that are not behind-the-meter in a base rate proceeding, subject to PSC approval. 
Contributions may not include the increased adoption of electric vehicles. 
 
Specific Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets for the Department of Housing and 
Community Development and Related Requirements 
 
Beginning January 1, 2025, and by January 1 every three years thereafter starting in 2027, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 864/ Page 5 
DHCD must procure or provide to low-income individuals energy efficiency and 
conservation programs and services, demand response programs and services, and 
beneficial electrification programs and services that are on a trajectory to achieve GHG 
reductions of at least 0.9% of a 2016 baseline after 2027. The requirement applies to the 
2025-2033 time period. MDE must determine the 2016 baseline for low-income 
households. When establishing the GHG emissions reduction targets for DHCD, PSC must 
measure the GHG emissions (in metric tons) from electricity using current data and 
projections from MDE. These reductions count toward the overall statewide GHG 
emissions reduction target. The bill specifies a process for determining appropriate DHCD 
targets in 2025 and 2026 (mid-EmPOWER cycle). 
 
DHCD may procure or provide savings that are achieved through other funding sources if 
those sources meet the standards of the EmPOWER surcharge or the U.S. Department of 
Energy; in that case, the savings count toward EmPOWER targets. If directed by PSC in 
2024, and by September 1 every three years starting in 2026, DHCD must submit its plans 
for any programs or services procured or provided under the bill to PSC for review and 
approval. 
 
DHCD must adopt regulations for weatherization of leased or rented residences to achieve 
specified benefits and goals under the bill. In addition, DHCD may only approve 
contractors who follow specified labor practices, such as paying at least 150% of the State 
minimum wage, providing paid leave, and offering retirement benefits.  
 
DHCD must develop a plan to coordinate funding sources and leverage the greatest funding 
possible to support a whole home approach by addressing health and safety upgrades, 
weatherization, energy efficiency, and other general maintenance for low-income housing. 
The plan must coordinate funding among various State and federal programs and provide 
certain other services, as specified. DHCD must collaborate with members of the 
Green and Healthy Task Force established by Chapter 572 of 2023 and identify other 
interested stakeholders to develop the plan. By December 31, 2024, DHCD must submit 
the plan to the Governor and the General Assembly.  
 
Additionally, DHCD must collaborate with the task force to develop a second plan, 
including a budget, timeline, and potential funding sources, to provide energy efficiency 
retrofits to all low-income households by 2032. By December 1, 2024, DHCD must submit 
the plan to the General Assembly. 
 
DHCD, MEA, and other State units must apply for all federal funding that may become 
available to carry out the above DHCD-specific requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 864/ Page 6 
Plan Details, Review, and Approval 
 
PSC must issue, as soon as possible in 2024, and at least eight months before the filing 
deadline for plans after 2024, an order that determines the GHG emissions reduction targets 
required under the bill for each company and DHCD.  
 
Generally, if directed by PSC in 2024, and by September 1 every three years beginning in 
2026, each electric company, each affected gas company, and DHCD must submit its plan 
to PSC. However, for an electric company or gas company that did not previously submit 
an EmPOWER plan, the deadline to submit the first plan is December 1, 2024. Prior to 
submitting the plans to PSC, the entities must consult with PSC technical staff, the Office 
of People’s Counsel (OPC), MEA, and MDE regarding the design and adequacy of its plans 
for achieving their relevant GHG emissions reduction targets. 
 
Each plan must detail a proposal for achieving GHG emissions reduction targets for 
three subsequent calendar years (this is generally how EmPOWER works under current 
law). Each plan must include specified relevant information, such as anticipated costs and 
GHG emissions reductions. 
 
PSC must review each plan to determine whether it is adequate and cost effective (across 
specified metrics and categories) in achieving the GHG emissions reduction targets 
established under the bill. PSC must consider any written findings provided by MEA, 
MDE, and OPC regarding plan design and adequacy. In approving, modifying, or denying 
a plan, PSC must consider specified factors, such as cost-effectiveness and the impact on 
rates. Programs and services offered by DHCD are not required to be cost effective. 
 
MDE must prepare and submit to PSC an analysis regarding the adequacy of each plan in 
supporting the State’s GHG emissions reduction goals in the Environment Article, 
established by PSC under the bill, and required for DHCD under the bill.  
 
Plan Implementation Updates, Monitoring, and Reports 
 
Every six months, each electric company, each gas company, and DHCD must provide to 
PSC an update on plan implementation, as specified. PSC must monitor and analyze the 
impact of each program and service to ensure that the outcome of each program and service 
provides the best possible results.  
 
By May 1 each year, PSC must report to the General Assembly on (1) the status of 
programs and services approved under the bill, as specified; (2) a recommendation for the 
appropriate funding level to adequately fund the programs and services; (3) the per capita 
electricity consumption and the winter and summer peak demand for the previous 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 864/ Page 7 
calendar year; and (4) beginning in 2026, progress made toward reducing GHG emissions 
under the bill. 
 
Prohibition on Mandatory Energy Reduction 
 
Notwithstanding any other law, PSC may not require or allow an electric company or a gas 
company to require a customer to authorize the electric company or gas company to control 
the amount of the customer’s electricity usage or gas usage. However, a customer may 
provide consent to participate in a utility program that does so. 
 
Promotion of Available Incentives 
 
Each electric company and gas company must promote the availability of federal and State 
rebates, tax credits, and incentives that can be used to support energy efficiency 
investments, energy efficient and non-fossil-fuel-powered appliances and cooking 
equipment, breaker box upgrades, and portable heating and cooling equipment. PSC must 
adopt regulations to implement this requirement. 
 
Disparity Study 
 
The certification agency designated by the Board of Public Works under the State’s 
minority business enterprise (MBE) law (i.e., the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT)) and the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
(GOSBA), in consultation with DHCD, the Office of the Attorney General, and the 
General Assembly, must initiate a study regarding the energy efficiency and conservation 
services used by DHCD to evaluate whether the enactment of remedial measures to assist 
minority and women-owned businesses in the energy efficiency and conservation services 
industry and market would comply with the U.S. Supreme Court decision in City of 
Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989), and any subsequent federal or 
constitutional requirements. 
 
By December 31, 2026, MDOT and GOSBA must submit the findings of the study to the 
Legislative Policy Committee so that the General Assembly may review the findings before 
the 2027 session. 
 
An identical disparity study was required by uncodified language in Chapter 572, with a 
reporting deadline of December 31, 2025. That requirement remains in effect under current 
law and the bill. 
 
Working Group on the EmPOWER Maryland Program and Moderate-income Households 
 
PSC must establish a working group on the EmPOWER Maryland Program and 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 864/ Page 8 
moderate-income households. The purpose of the working group is to study and make 
recommendations to PSC and the General Assembly on coordination of activities and 
benefits under the EmPOWER Maryland Program between the utilities and DHCD so that 
moderate-income households may obtain the most efficient and cost-effective assistance 
under the program. The study and recommendations must include: 
 
 
development of a practical definition of “moderate-income” for use in assessing the 
scope of available activities, potentially beneficial extensions of activities, and 
associated costs under the program; 
 
an assessment of existing utility-based activities funded by the program and 
available to moderate-income households; 
 
proposals for extending utility-based activities and coordinating those activities 
with corresponding activities of DHCD with respect to low-income households 
under the program, plus an assessment of the related costs and benefits of doing so; 
 
identification of areas of potential overlap between utility-based and DHCD-based 
activities that may be harmonized to avoid duplicating efforts and promote more 
efficient means to provide assistance to moderate-income households; and 
 
identification and development of regulatory and legislative changes needed to 
implement recommended coordination, extension, and expansion of program 
activities to benefit moderate-income households. 
 
By July 1, 2025, PSC must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the 
working group study and recommendations. 
 
Current Law:   
 
EmPOWER Maryland 
 
In 2008, the General Assembly passed the EmPOWER Maryland Energy Efficiency Act, 
which set target reductions of 15% in per capita electricity consumption and peak demand, 
respectively, by 2015 from a 2007 baseline. Legislation in 2017 extended the program 
through its 2018-2020 and 2021-2023 program cycles and established a new annual energy 
savings goal of 2.0% per year, based on each electric company’s 2016 sales. That 
legislation also required PSC to conduct a related study by July 1, 2022. Chapter 38 of 
2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) further increased the goal to 2.25% per year in 
2025 and 2026 and to 2.5% annually thereafter. The Act also specified that the core 
objective of the reductions must include development and implementation of a portfolio of 
mutually reinforcing goals, including GHG emissions reduction, energy savings, net 
customer benefits, and reaching underserved customers. The Act included related 
administrative requirements in uncodified language. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 864/ Page 9 
DHCD participates in EmPOWER Maryland through two special fund programs:  the 
Low Income Energy Efficiency Program (LIEEP); and the Multifamily Energy Efficiency 
and Housing Affordability (MEEHA) Program. LIEEP helps low-income households 
undertake energy conservation projects in their homes at no charge, while 
MEEHA promotes energy efficiency and affordability in the State’s multifamily rental 
housing developments for low- and moderate-income households. Approved program costs 
are recovered by electric companies on customer bills.  
 
Chapter 572 required DHCD to procure or provide energy efficiency and conservation 
(EE&C) programs and services for electricity customers for the 2024-2026 EmPOWER 
Maryland Program cycle, subject to specified requirements. The EE&C programs and 
services must be designed to achieve a target annual incremental gross energy savings, 
compared to 2016, of at least 0.53% in 2024, 0.72% in 2025, and 1.0% in 2026. 
 
In December 2022, PSC issued Order No.90456 requiring that all unamortized EmPOWER 
program costs and interest as of December 31, 2023, which exceeded $800 million at the 
time, be paid for in full by the completion of the 2027-2029 EmPOWER program cycle. 
The order also required a change in future cost recovery to gradually move to full expensing 
of costs. Paying off the balance will increase the EmPOWER surcharge in the short-term 
but will ultimately save ratepayers from paying a rate of return to the utilities on the accrued 
balance. 
 
In December 2023, PSC issued Order No. 90957 authorizing the 2024-2026 EmPOWER 
program cycle with GHG emissions reduction targets (based on statutory energy savings 
targets) for the EmPOWER utilities (all four investor-owned electric companies, plus 
Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative and Washington Gas) and DHCD. In that order, 
PSC also delayed the unamortized EmPOWER program cost paydown period by two years 
(which, while the order does not say explicitly, should be by the end of 2031). 
 
Maryland Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets and the Climate Solutions 
Now Act 
 
The Climate Solutions Now Act made broad changes to the State’s approach to reducing 
statewide GHG emissions and addressing climate change. Among other things, the Act 
accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets originally established 
under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the State to develop 
plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to (1) reduce GHG emissions by 
60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. 
The Act also established new and altered existing energy conservation requirements for 
buildings and increased and extended the EmPOWER Maryland program, as described 
above. In December 2023, MDE published Maryland’s Climate Pollution Reduction Plan, 
which was developed to implement Chapter 38. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 864/ Page 10 
Minority Business Enterprises 
 
MDOT is designated in State regulations as the State’s MBE certification agency. In 1989, 
the U.S. Supreme Court held in City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state or local 
MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under the 
equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In addition, 
the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the program is 
narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the jurisdiction that 
operates the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDE increase beginning in fiscal 2025 
for additional staff and consulting expenses. Special fund revenues and expenditures for 
DHCD increase beginning in fiscal 2025 to expand EmPOWER programs. PSC can 
implement the required changes to the EmPOWER program with existing budgeted 
resources, as can OPC. Special fund expenditures for MEA may increase by $50,000 in 
fiscal 2025 for consultant costs related to program evaluations. Except for MDE, these 
agencies are already generally involved with EmPOWER planning and would be in the 
future under current law. PSC and any participating State entities can handle the 
requirements related to the working group with existing budgeted resources. 
 
MDOT is already required to conduct an identical disparity study on an earlier timeline 
under Chapter 572, so no additional costs are assumed in this analysis.  
 
The effect on utility rates is discussed in the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
Utilities and DHCD must consult with various State entities, including MDE, regarding the 
design and adequacy of their plans for achieving the GHG emissions reduction goals and 
targets established by PSC under the bill. MDE must also (1) conduct a GHG analysis 
regarding the adequacy of each plan in supporting GHG emissions reductions goals and 
(2) establish a 2016 baseline emissions level for use by DHCD. MDE advises that it cannot 
conduct such analyses and consult on the three-year planning cycle with existing resources. 
MDE requires two staff for ongoing plan review and analysis and anticipates a one-time 
consulting expense of $150,000 to establish a GHG analysis framework that considers 
legal, programmatic, and accounting implications for the various EmPOWER programs. 
Costs are assumed to be paid for with general funds, although special funds may be 
available. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $403,218 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
two energy policy analysts to assist with ongoing plan review and analysis. It includes 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 864/ Page 11 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and a 
one-time consulting expense of $200,000 to establish the GHG analysis framework. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$188,166 
Contractual Services 
200,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
15,052 
Total FY 2025 MDE Expenditures 
$403,218 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the elimination of one-time 
costs. MDE expenditures may further increase if ongoing requirements are more significant 
than anticipated.  
 
Department of Housing and Community Development 
 
Unlike the other agencies listed above with advisory and regulatory responsibilities, DHCD 
must directly implement GHG emissions reduction plans under the bill. This analysis 
assumes that DHCD conforms and expands where necessary its existing EmPOWER 
programs – which were already significantly expanded by Chapter 572 – in order to meet 
the bill’s new requirements. Further, as EmPOWER Maryland must continue beyond the 
current 2024-2026 planning cycle under current law, ongoing DHCD savings/costs are 
assumed to be incremental. 
 
DHCD estimated incremental costs to implement the bill begin with EmPOWER program 
spending beginning in calendar 2027, as the existing program authorization for the 
2024-2026 cycle is assumed to meet the GHG goals under the bill. DHCD estimates that 
an approximately $12.0 million in additional funding is required in fiscal 2027 and 
approximately $24.0 million is required annually thereafter. The majority of incremental 
costs each year are for grants provided through its EmPOWER programs to eligible 
recipients, with costs of less than $1.0 million annually for eight additional staff. As a point 
of reference, DHCD’s approved EmPOWER funding is approximately $75.0 million in 
2025, $112.5 million in 2026, and $167.5 million in 2027.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services cannot independently verify DHCD’s costs at this 
time but advises that they appear to be a reasonable estimate for determining the potential 
magnitude of the effect. Ultimately, costs will depend on how DHCD chooses to implement 
the bill going forward (DHCD’s programs are an expensive component of EmPOWER on 
a per-unit basis). 
 
DHCD’s costs are assumed to be paid for by EmPOWER surcharge revenues. Accordingly, 
special fund revenues increase significantly – likely by amounts similar to those described 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 864/ Page 12 
above – from additional EmPOWER surcharge revenue to the extent necessary to cover 
additional costs. The amount and timing will depend on the amount and timing of approved 
cost collection by PSC. 
 
DHCD’s EmPOWER surcharge-funded expenditures may be offset to the extent that the 
State is able to apply for and obtain federal funding to assist with implementation of the 
bill; however, that funding would be unavailable for other related uses. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local weatherization agencies receive funds through LIEEP to assist 
in program implementation, and local housing authorities receive funds through MEEHA. 
Local governments are affected to the extent they receive different, likely higher, funding 
levels under the bill through DHCD’s EmPOWER programs beginning in fiscal 2027. The 
effect on utility rates is discussed in the Additional Comments section below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses engaged in projects under the EmPOWER 
program are affected by potential changes in program funding levels. Small businesses 
engaged in weatherization and energy saving projects for DHCD benefit from a significant 
increase in program expenditures, although such businesses must comply with the specified 
labor practices, including paying 150% of the State minimum wage, providing paid leave, 
and offering retirement benefits. The effect on utility rates is discussed in the Additional 
Comments section below. 
 
Additional Comments:   
 
Utility Rates 
 
The bill makes several significant changes to the EmPOWER program, such as changing 
annual targets to explicit GHG emissions reductions, altering allowable program 
components, and reducing the utility rate of return on certain accrued costs. 
 
PSC advises that it is unclear if the bill will cause costs greater than those required to 
comply with the current requirement to meet a 2.0% to 2.5% energy efficiency goal, 
although it does not predict an instance where costs will decrease. The EmPOWER 
surcharge is assessed on utility customers to pay for the program. Accordingly, utility 
customers – including the State, local governments, and small businesses – will ultimately 
pay for additional expenditures incurred under the bill and funded through allowable 
surcharges and/or base rates when those costs are recovered by electric and gas companies. 
Of note, DHCD EmPOWER expenditures are typically funded by residential ratepayers. 
 
Transition to Greenhouse Gas Abatement Goals 
 
A July 2022 PSC report discusses the transition of EmPOWER Maryland from energy 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 864/ Page 13 
savings goals to GHG abatement goals and PSC’s recommendation that the 
General Assembly adopt GHG abatement goals. The report incorporates intent language in 
the Climate Solutions Now Act. The Maryland Commission on Climate Change also made 
related recommendations in its 2023 annual report. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 905 of 2023 and HB 1035 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Public Service 
Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Commerce; Department of General 
Services; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department of Human 
Services; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Office of the 
Attorney General; Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs; 
Board of Public Works; Department of Budget and Management; City of Hagerstown; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 20, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 23, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 13