START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 833 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 833 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Parents in Substance Use Disorder Treatment - Children in Need of Assistance 
and Treatment Facilities 
 
 
This bill establishes a presumption, for purposes of child in need of assistance (CINA) 
matters, that if a parent is receiving treatment in a residential substance use disorder (SUD) 
treatment program that has beds or services for patients’ children and the child is in the 
presence of the child’s parent for the duration of the parent’s treatment (1) placement with 
the child’s parent is in the best interest of the child and there is not an emergency situation 
that requires the removal of the child and (2) a child is receiving proper care and attention. 
In addition, the bill requires a local department of social services to file a report with the 
court in certain cases when a parent is receiving residential SUD treatment, as specified. 
The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) within the Maryland Department of Health 
(MDH) may require a facility that provides treatment for SUD to (1) provide beds and 
services for patients’ children and (2) allow a patient’s child to be in the presence of the 
child’s parent for the duration of the child’s parent’s treatment.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any potential impact on State expenditures related to out-of-home placement 
costs is indeterminate, as discussed below. Potential significant increase in State 
expenditures related to SUD treatment programs. Potential matching Medicaid revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 833/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands statutory requirements related to children in out-of-home 
placements (and certain reasonable efforts that are generally required for the preservation 
and reunification of families) to also require that a local department of social services file 
a report with the court in cases when a parent is receiving residential SUD treatment with 
beds or services for children, as specified, that explains (1) why the child was not placed 
with the parent; (2) any efforts made toward placement of the child; and (3) any difficulties 
with placing the child with the parent.  
 
The bill may not be construed to prohibit another parent or guardian, custodian, relative, 
or another person who agrees and is able to provide supervision and care for the child from 
doing so for the duration of the child’s parent’s treatment in residential SUD treatment.  
 
Current Law:  A CINA is a child who requires court intervention because (1) the child 
has been abused or neglected, has a developmental disability, or has a mental disorder and 
(2) the child’s parents, guardian, or custodian is unable or unwilling to give proper care 
and attention to the child and the child’s needs.  
 
For purposes of determining if a child is a CINA, within one year of a child’s birth, there 
is a presumption that a child is not receiving proper care and attention from the mother if 
(1) the child was born exposed to – or the mother tested positive at a hospital prior to 
delivery for having used – cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, or any such derivatives as 
evidenced by any appropriate tests and (2) drug treatment is made available to the mother 
and the mother refuses or does not successfully complete the recommended level of drug 
treatment. (The bill replaces references to “mother” with “parent” and references to “drug” 
with “substance use.”)  
 
Statutory provisions outline numerous requirements for CINA proceedings and 
circumstances under which a child may be placed in out‐of‐home care prior to or after 
being adjudicated as a CINA. For example, a local department may authorize shelter care 
for a child who may be in need of assistance and has been taken into custody (in order to 
provide ordinary care and determine placement) in accordance with statute. A court may 
continue shelter care beyond emergency shelter care only if it finds that (1) return of the 
child to the child’s home is contrary to the safety and welfare of the child and (2) removal 
of the child from the child’s home is necessary due to an alleged emergency situation and 
in order to provide for the safety of the child or reasonable efforts were made but were 
unsuccessful in preventing or eliminating the need for removal of the child from the home.  
 
Generally, subject to limited exceptions, reasonable efforts must be made to preserve and 
reunify families (1) prior to the placement of a child in an out-of-home placement, to 
prevent or eliminate the need for removing the child from the child’s home and (2) to make 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 833/ Page 3 
it possible for a child to return safely to the child’s home. In determining the reasonable 
efforts to be made (and in making the reasonable efforts), the child’s safety and health must 
be the primary concern.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The presumptions established by the bill may increase 
placements for children within residential SUD treatment programs, to the extent that beds 
are available for children within such programs. The Department of Human Services 
advises that any potential impact associated with the department’s funding of the cost of a 
child’s placement in the family-based residential SUD treatment program may not be 
material, as it would potentially be a transfer of costs from another out‐of‐home placement 
provider in some cases. However, a precise impact on State expenditures is not possible to 
reliably quantify without experience under the bill.  
 
MDH is the entity responsible for overseeing and funding SUD treatment programs (using 
multiple fund types). If the bill increases parental participation in SUD treatment programs, 
associated State expenditures increase, potentially significantly, to the extent that existing 
programs have capacity to serve additional families. Furthermore, the bill authorizes – but 
does not require – BHA to require existing SUD treatment facilities to provide beds and 
services for children. Based on preliminary information provided by MDH, to the extent 
BHA exercises this authority, additional staff within the administration may be needed to 
provide enhanced monitoring, assist facilities with implementation, and measure program 
outcomes. Overall costs associated with SUD treatment programs may likewise increase 
to the extent existing program operations and facilities are modified to accommodate 
children and families under the bill. In the absence of experience under the bill, however, 
the precise impact on State finances related to SUD treatment programs cannot be reliably 
determined at this time. To the extent Medicaid-eligible expenditures are incurred, federal 
fund matching revenues correspond accordingly. 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially impact the operations or finances of the Judiciary 
or the circuit courts.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Human Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 833/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4