START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 823 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 823 
(Delegate Charkoudian, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Fire Protection and Prevention - Residential Rental Property - Requirements 
(Melanie Nicholle Diaz Fire Safety Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes requirements related to the installation of automatic smoke detectors 
and notices regarding the lack of automatic sprinkler systems in residential rental high-rise 
buildings. It also modifies existing provisions related to notification appliances for deaf or 
hard of hearing individuals and expands those requirements to include deafblind 
individuals. In addition, the bill authorizes local governments to grant a property tax credit 
for specified residential high-rise buildings if the building owner makes fire safety 
improvements. Finally, the bill establishes the Workgroup to Develop Fire Safety Best 
Practices for Pre-1974 High-Rise Apartment Buildings, staffed by the Department of State 
Police (DSP), to study and make recommendations regarding the improvement of 
fire safety in high-rise apartment buildings that do not have fire sprinkler systems and other 
fire safety technology. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2024. The workgroup-
related provisions take effect June 1, 2024, and terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General fund expenditures increase by $35,600 only 
in FY 2025 for staff for the workgroup. Higher education expenditures increase, likely 
significantly in FY 2025, to upgrade existing residential rental high-rise buildings with 
smoke detectors and lighting equipment. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential significant decrease in local property tax revenue beginning in 
FY 2025 to the extent the property tax credits are granted, as discussed below. Local 
expenditures are not materially affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 823/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
High-rise Building – Definition 
 
“High-rise building” means a building for human occupancy that is seven or more stories 
above grade level or more than 75 feet in height. “High-rise building” does not include a 
structure or building used exclusively for open-air parking or a building used exclusively 
for agricultural purposes.  
 
Smoke Alarms and Notification Appliances 
 
Beginning July 31, 2025, smoke detectors must be installed in accordance with location 
and spacing requirements established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 
in each interior public corridor in a residential rental high-rise building. A county may not 
require upgrades to fire safety systems not specified above as a condition of issuing a 
permit for the installation of the required smoke detectors.  
 
Identical to existing requirements under current law for sleeping rooms occupied by deaf 
or hard of hearing individuals, each sleeping room occupied by a deafblind individual must 
be provided with a smoke alarm suitable for deafblind individuals. On written request on 
behalf of a tenant who is deafblind, a sleeping room occupied by a deafblind individual 
must be provided with an approved notification appliance device. The landlord must 
provide a notification device that, when activated, provides a signal that is sufficient to 
warn the deafblind tenant in those sleeping rooms.   
 
Also identical to existing requirements under current law for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals, hotels and motels must have available at least one approved notification 
appliance for deafblind individuals for each 50 units or fraction of 50 units. Hotels and 
motels must post in a conspicuous place at the reception desk a permanent sign that states 
the availability of smoke alarm notification appliances for deafblind individuals, and hotels 
and motels may require a refundable deposit for such an appliance.   
 
The bill also prohibits a landlord from requiring that a tenant (1) pay for the purchase or 
installation of a notification appliance required to be installed in a sleeping room occupied 
by a deaf, deafblind, or hard of hearing individual pursuant to current law or (2) provide 
any supporting documentation or other form of evidence with a written request for such 
notification appliances. Further, a landlord may not require reimbursement from a tenant 
for the cost of a smoke alarm required under these provisions. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 823/ Page 3 
Existing penalty provisions apply to violations of these provisions. Specifically, a person 
who knowingly violates these provisions is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is 
subject to imprisonment for up to 10 days and/or a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
Notice of Absence of Complete Automatic Sprinkler Systems 
 
Beginning July 1, 2024, the owner of a residential rental high-rise building that is not 
protected by a complete automatic sprinkler system must post notice in the building that  
(1) states, in lettering that is at least one inch high and on a contrasting background, 
“WARNING:  THIS HIGH-RISE BUILDING IS NOT PROTECTED THROUGHOUT 
BY A COMPLETE AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM” and (2) is conspicuously 
posted at all main building entrances as approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2025, and continuing until a residential rental high-rise building is 
protected by a complete automatic sprinkler system, the owner of a residential rental 
high-rise building that is not protected must include in any lease agreement a conspicuous 
notice indicating that the building is not currently protected by a complete automatic 
sprinkler system. The notice must be initialed by the tenant. 
 
The Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), in coordination with 
the State Fire Marshal and the Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
(MDEM), must identify funding sources that may be available to the owner of a residential 
rental high-rise building or the governing body of a condominium or cooperative housing 
corporation to aid the owner or governing body in protecting the building with a complete 
automatic sprinkler system. DHCD must publish information on identified funding sources 
on its website. 
 
Annual Notice Requirements 
 
In addition to other specified notice requirements, for fire safety purposes, the owner of a 
residential high-rise building with rental units must provide fire safety and building 
evacuation information and instruction to (1) new tenants at the commencement of 
occupancy and (2) existing tenants every two years. The information and instruction must 
include identification of fire alarm system elements in the building. 
 
Lighting Requirement 
 
Each residential rental high-rise building must be equipped with emergency escape lighting 
consistent with applicable NFPA standards for all common means of egress. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 823/ Page 4 
Local Property Tax Credit 
 
The Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county or 
municipal corporation may grant, by law, a tax credit against the county or municipal 
corporation property tax imposed on an apartment building, a condominium building, or a 
building owned by a cooperative housing corporation if the owner of the apartment 
building, the condominium association, or the cooperative housing corporation makes fire 
safety improvements to the building on or after July 1, 2024. The bill further authorizes 
such local governing bodies to provide, by law, for (1) the amount and duration of the tax 
credit; (2) additional eligibility criteria for the tax credit; and (3) any other provisions 
necessary to carry out the bill’s property tax provisions. 
 
Workgroup to Develop Fire Safety Best Practices for Pre-1974 High-rise Apartment 
Buildings 
 
The workgroup must (1) study fire safety risks in high-rise apartment buildings that do not 
have automatic sprinkler systems or other fire safety technology; (2) study current 
strategies, practices, and technology to mitigate fire risks, maximize evacuation of 
occupants, and allow for greater access and more expedient responses by emergency 
response professionals; and (3) develop recommendations and best practices for the 
improvement of fire safety in high-rise apartment buildings that do not have fire sprinkler 
systems and other fire safety technology. In developing its recommendations, the 
workgroup must consider (1) the availability, feasibility, and degree of fire hazard 
mitigation of each alternative fire protection system or arrangement; (2) the cost, design, 
installation, testing, and maintenance of each fire protection system; and (3) the duration 
of installation for each alternative fire protection system and the intensity of the disruption 
of normal occupancy caused by installation. 
 
By December 31, 2024, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to 
the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Workgroup members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses, as specified. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Smoke Alarms Required in Sleeping Areas 
 
An automatic smoke alarm must be provided in each sleeping area within each residential 
occupancy, including one- and two-family dwellings, lodging or rooming houses, hotels, 
dormitories, and apartment buildings, as defined in NFPA 101:  Life Safety Code as 
adopted by the State Fire Prevention Commission (SFPC). 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 823/ Page 5 
Smoke alarms must (1) be installed in accordance with NFPA 72:  National Fire Alarm 
Code as referenced by the State Fire Prevention Code; (2) be listed and labeled by a 
nationally recognized testing laboratory to comply with specified standards; (3) be suitable 
for sensing visible or invisible products of combustion; and (4) sound an alarm suitable to 
warn the occupants. 
 
Local jurisdictions may adopt smoke alarm regulations that are more stringent than those 
described above. 
 
Each sleeping room occupied by a deaf or hard of hearing individual must be provided with 
a smoke alarm suitable to alert the deaf or hard of hearing individual. On written request 
on behalf of a tenant who is deaf or hard of hearing, a sleeping room occupied by a deaf or 
hard of hearing individual must be provided with an approved notification appliance 
designed to alert deaf or hard of hearing individuals. The landlord must provide a 
notification appliance that, when activated, provides a signal that is sufficient to warn the 
deaf and hard of hearing tenant in those sleeping rooms.  
 
Hotels and motels must have available at least one approved notification appliance for the 
deaf or hard of hearing individual for each 50 units or fraction of 50 units. Hotels and 
motels must post in a conspicuous place at the registration desk a permanent sign that states 
the availability of smoke alarm notification appliances for the deaf or hard of hearing 
individual. Hotels and motels may require a refundable deposit for notification appliances 
for the deaf or hard of hearing individual, but the amount of the deposit may not exceed 
the value of the notification appliance.  
 
A landlord may require reimbursement from a tenant for the cost of a smoke alarm required 
under the provisions relating to sleeping rooms occupied by a deaf or hard of hearing 
individual. 
 
A person may not knowingly violate these provisions. A person who does so is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for up to 10 days and/or a fine 
of up to $1,000. 
 
High-rise Building Safety in Case of Fire – Automatic Sprinkler System Required 
 
“High-rise building” means a building for human occupancy that is four or more stories 
above grade level, or over 45 feet in height. “High-rise building” does not include a 
structure or building used exclusively for open air parking, or a building used exclusively 
for agricultural purposes. 
 
Each high-rise building constructed after July 1, 1974, must be protected by a complete 
automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with accepted engineering practices as 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 823/ Page 6 
approved by the authority with jurisdiction. However, the requirement does not apply to a 
building that is less than 75 feet in height above grade level if (1) the local fire department 
has at least one approved first line piece of aerial equipment that is capable of reaching the 
roof of the building and (2) accessibility to the building is provided on two sides of the 
perimeter of the building, as specified. Height above grade level must be determined by 
using the lowest elevation of the public way as a reference datum. 
 
Maryland State Fire Code 
 
The State Fire Marshal within DSP must enforce all laws of the State relating to, among 
other things, the prevention of fire and the installation and maintenance of all kinds of 
equipment intended to control, detect, or extinguish fire. The State Fire Marshal must also 
enforce regulations adopted by SFPC. 
 
SFPC must adopt comprehensive regulations as a State Fire Prevention Code. SFPC has 
adopted by reference, subject to some exceptions, NFPA 1 Fire Code (2018 Edition), the  
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (2018 Edition), and some requirements of the International 
Building Code as the State Fire Prevention Code. The State Fire Prevention Code has the 
force and effect of law in the political subdivisions of the State, and enforcement is the 
responsibility of the State Fire Marshal, a legally designated fire official of a county or 
municipality of the State, or other persons legally appointed by the State Fire Marshal (as 
specified under the Public Safety Article). 
 
The 2018 Edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code specifies requirements for means of 
egress being illuminated with emergency lighting. The 2018 Editions of the NFPA 1 and 
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code do not require the installation of automatic sprinkler systems 
in existing high-rise apartment buildings. However, the NFPA 101 2021 Edition includes 
provisions requiring the installation of automatic sprinkler systems in all existing high-rise 
apartment buildings by January 1, 2033 (unless the building meets specified egress 
requirements).  
 
A person may not knowingly violate Title 6 of the Public Safety Article (State Fire 
Prevention Commission and State Fire Marshal) or a regulation adopted by SFPC. A person 
who does so is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to imprisonment for 
up to 10 days and/or a fine of up to $1,000. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Implementation and Enforcement 
 
DSP advises that the State Fire Marshal can enforce the bill’s changes with existing 
resources.  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 823/ Page 7 
DHCD can identify and publish funding sources that may be available to the owner or 
governing body of a residential rental high-rise building to help pay for the installation of 
a complete automatic sprinkler system using existing budgeted resources; the State Fire 
Marshal and MDEM can coordinate with DHCD using existing budgeted resources.  
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill does not 
materially affect State finances. 
 
Department of State Police – Workgroup Administrative Expenditures 
 
DSP advises that it cannot staff the workgroup with existing resources. Therefore, general 
fund expenditures increase by $35,559 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for a 30-day start-up 
delay from the June 1, 2024 effective date for the bill’s provisions regarding the 
workgroup. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual management associate 
to staff the workgroup, assist the workgroup with its required duties, and complete the 
required report. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and operating 
expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$28,573 
Operating Expenses 
   6,986 
Total FY 2025 Administrative Expenditures 
$35,559 
 
Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
This estimate reflects termination of the contractual position in December 2024, consistent 
with the reporting deadline for the workgroup’s report. Accordingly, there no ongoing costs 
for DSP. 
 
The estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
University System of Maryland Expenditures 
 
The University System of Maryland (USM) advises that some of its buildings across 
two campuses need to upgrade their residential rental high-rise buildings to comply with 
the bill. For example, USM advises that (1) the University of Maryland, College Park may 
require upgrades to eight of its older university-owned high-rise residential housing 
facilities to install smoke detectors in its hallways and corridors, with estimated costs of 
$1.2 million in fiscal 2025 (to meet the July 31, 2025 deadline) and (2) Frostburg State 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 823/ Page 8 
University must evaluate its residence hall to confirm compliance, but cannot provide an 
estimate of those costs at this time.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that it cannot independently verify 
USM’s estimates, but DLS acknowledges that costs for USM increase, likely significantly, 
only in fiscal 2025 to upgrade its buildings consistent with the bill’s requirements. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease beginning in fiscal 2025 to the 
extent the property tax credits authorized by the bill are granted. The amount of the revenue 
decrease cannot be reliably estimated and depends on the number of eligible properties in 
each jurisdiction, the assessed value of eligible properties, local property tax rates, and any 
other criteria required by local governments. Depending on the jurisdiction, the revenue 
decrease could be significant. 
 
Based on reports from the State Department of Assessments and Taxation, there are 
209,223 improved condominium properties with a total assessed value of $47.3 billion and 
2,407 vacant condominium properties with a total assessed value of $67.7 million (as of  
July 1, 2023). In addition, there are 10,532 improved apartment properties with a total 
assessed value of $50.0 billion and 756 vacant apartment properties with a total assessed 
value of $147.9 million. 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the County 
Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024 published by DLS. 
 
It is anticipated that local governments can inspect residential rental high-rise buildings 
and enforce the bill’s requirements with existing resources. 
 
The application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill does not 
materially affect local expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that provides services for the installation of 
smoke detectors and lighting equipment may experience additional business as a result of 
the bill. Conversely, any small business that owns a residential rental high-rise building 
may incur additional costs to procure smoke detection and lighting equipment. Owners of 
high-rise residential rental buildings may benefit from funds identified by DHCD, the State 
Fire Marshal, and MDEM to offset the costs of installing complete automatic sprinkler 
systems. Owners of apartment and condominium buildings may also benefit to the extent 
they make fire safety improvements to their buildings and receive local property tax credits 
(to the extent they are established by local governments pursuant to the authority provided 
by the bill). 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 823/ Page 9 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 970 and HB 1292 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 689 (Senator Smith) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Baltimore City; City of 
Annapolis; Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of State Police; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; University 
System of Maryland; Department of General Services; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9