START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 812 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 812 
(Delegate J. Long, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Tri–County Council for Southern Maryland – Southern Maryland Agricultural 
Development Commission – Funding 
 
   
This bill permanently extends a requirement beyond fiscal 2025 that the Governor include 
funding in the annual budget bill to the Tri-County Council for Southern Maryland (TCC) 
from the Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF). The bill also increases the required annual 
appropriation from $900,000 to $1.0 million. Other requirements related to the amount and 
use of the funds remain unchanged:  (1) the appropriation must be in addition to, and may 
not supplant, any funding appropriated to TCC; and (2) TCC must use the funds for the 
activities of the Southern Maryland Agricultural Development Commission (SMADC). 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2024.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for TCC increase by up to $1.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2026. General fund expenditures potentially increase, by as much as 
$1.0 million annually, beginning in FY 2026 to backfill funding for other CRF-supported 
programs. Revenues are not affected. This bill permanently extends and increases a 
mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026.  
  
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Expenditure 
0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0) 
($1.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  No direct effect on local governmental operations or finances as TCC is a 
quasi-governmental entity; however, local governments currently receive funding under 
CRF that may be reallocated/backfilled under the bill. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 812/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 187 of 2022 required the Governor to include in the annual budget 
bill an appropriation of $900,000 in fiscal 2024 and 2025 to TCC from CRF. The 
appropriation must be in addition to, and may not supplant, any funding appropriated to 
TCC. TCC must use the funds for the activities of SMADC. The budget bill must contain 
a separate section that includes the appropriation for TCC, and the budget books must 
contain a budget presentation that provides an overview of the proposed expenditures for 
TCC, including proposed expenditures for SMADC. The Act terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
Tri-County Council for Southern Maryland – Generally  
 
TCC is a cooperative planning and development unit for Calvert, Charles, and 
St. Mary’s counties. The council initiates and coordinates plans and projects for the 
development of human and economic resources of the region as a Southern Maryland 
planning and development unit. Activities of TCC include research, information 
management, and the preparation of a regional plan. All of the activities of TCC are 
designed to assist federal, State, and county governments in better performing their 
respective duties.    
 
TCC receives a combination of federal, State, and local funding. Calvert, Charles, and 
St. Mary’s counties must each appropriate $125,000 annually to the council to foster 
cooperative planning and development in the region.  
 
Southern Maryland Agricultural Development Commission 
 
SMADC is a division of TCC and was convened by TCC in 2000, when the State instituted 
a voluntary tobacco buy-out program to transition farms out of tobacco production. The 
commission has assisted farmers in transitioning from tobacco production to alternative 
crops and agricultural enterprises and works to promote local farm products. 
 
TCC operates its agricultural programs through SMADC, which works with the council to 
develop programs to stabilize the region’s agricultural economy as Maryland farmers 
transition away from tobacco production. Funds from CRF are appropriated annually to the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture, which then issues grants to TCC.     
 
Cigarette Restitution Fund 
 
Chapters 172 and 173 of 1999 established CRF, which is supported by payments made 
under the cigarette Master Settlement Agreement. Through the agreement, settling tobacco 
manufacturers pay the litigating parties – 46 states, 5 territories, and the District of 
Columbia – substantial annual payments in perpetuity. The use of CRF funds is restricted 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 812/ Page 3 
by statute. For example, at least 30% of the annual appropriation must be used for 
Medicaid. More specific to this bill (1) CRF must be used to fund the activities of SMADC 
and (2) CRF must fund the implementation of the Southern Maryland Regional 
Strategy-Action Plan for Agriculture adopted by TCC with an emphasis on alternative crop 
uses for agricultural land now used for growing tobacco. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under current law, the Governor is not obligated to continue funding 
TCC or SMADC from CRF at a specific amount beyond fiscal 2025. The bill’s mandated 
appropriation ensures a minimum level of annual CRF funding, at a slightly enhanced level 
of $1.0 million, beginning in fiscal 2026, at which point CRF is projected to have minimal 
or no fund balance.  
 
Accordingly, to the extent that CRF funding would otherwise not be provided, or a lesser 
amount would be provided absent the bill, special fund expenditures for TCC increase by 
up to $1.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026 due to the extension and enhancement 
of the current mandate. General fund expenditures may increase, by as much as 
$1.0 million annually, to backfill funding for other CRF-supported programs.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are farms in Southern Maryland may benefit 
from the ensured continuation, and potential enhancement, of SMADC’s programs 
beginning in fiscal 2026. SMADC provides support, grants, and marketing and promotion 
to area farmers.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 589 (Senator Bailey, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Office of the Attorney 
General; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Budget and Management; Charles and St. Mary’s counties; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 812/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4