START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 683

Chapter 683

(House Bill 835)

AN ACT concerning

Calvert County – Procurement – Local Preference

FOR the purpose of authorizing the County Commissioners of Calvert County to enact an
ordinance that establishes a local percentage preference for certain procurement
contracts; requiring the County Commissioners to comply with certain provisions of
law under certain circumstances; and generally relating to procurement preferences
in Calvert County.

BY adding to
The Public Local Laws of Calvert County
Section 6–105
Article 5 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2002 Edition and October 2022 Supplement, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 5 – Calvert County

6–105.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “NONRESIDENT BUSINESS” MEANS A BUSINESS WHOSE
PRINCIPAL OFFICE IS OUTSIDE THE COUNTY.

(3) “PRINCIPAL OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE, IN OR OUT OF THE
STATE, WHERE THE PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF A DOMESTIC OR FOREIGN
CORPORATION IS LOCATED AND THAT IS DESIGNATED IN THE ANNUAL REPORT OR
APPLICATION FOR AUTHORITY TO TRANSACT BUSINESS IN THE STATE.

(4) “RESIDENT BUSINESS” MEANS A BUSINESS WHOSE PRINCIPAL
OFFICE IS IN THE COUNTY.

(B) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING § 6–101(D) OF THIS TITLE, THE COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS MAY ENACT AN ORDINANCE THAT GIVES A PERCENTAGE
PREFERENCE UNDER WHICH A QUALIFYING RESIDENT BUSINESS THAT SUBMITS A
RESPONSIVE BID OR OFFER THAT EXCEEDS THE LOWEST RESPONSIVE BID OR OFFER
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 683 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY A NONRESIDENT BUSINESS BY NOT MORE THAN A SPECIFIED PERCENTAGE MAY
BE AWARDED THE CONTRACT.

(2) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS SHALL COMPLY WITH THE
PROVISIONS OF §§ 9–105 AND 9–106 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ARTICLE OF THE
ANNOTATED CODE OF MARYLAND WHEN ENACTING AN ORDINANCE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2