START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 805 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 805 
(Delegate Wilson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Cannabis - Licensee Locations - Restrictions 
 
 
This bill authorizes specified individuals to file a protest against a license renewal with the 
Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA), as specified, and establishes provisions 
governing (1) when MCA must hear a protest of renewal and (2) what MCA may and may 
not consider when hearing and making determinations on a protest of renewal. MCA may 
adopt regulations to implement the bill’s provisions relating to protests of renewal. The bill 
also makes various changes related to local zoning with respect to cannabis licensees. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures may increase minimally for MCA in FY 2028 
through 2030 due to the protest of renewal provisions, as discussed below; special fund 
revenues for MCA increase correspondingly. To the extent MCA expenditures increase, 
the amount of cannabis sales and use tax revenue distributed to the general fund and other 
special funds is affected correspondingly in accordance with current law, as discussed 
below. MCA can develop a process for protests of renewal and promulgate regulations 
within existing resources.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal decrease in county revenues due to the protest of renewal 
provisions, as discussed below. The bill’s zoning provisions can likely be implemented by 
local planning and zoning departments using existing resources.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 805/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Protests of Renewal   
 
A protest against a license renewal may be filed with MCA, but it has to be filed by at least 
10 individuals – all of whom have to be located within 1,000 feet of the licensed premises 
and be residents, commercial tenants who are not holders of or applicants for a license, or 
real estate owners.  
 
A protest against a license renewal must also be signed under oath and based on the 
following: 
 
 
a violation of Title 36 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article;  
 
a violation of civil or criminal law;  
 
any other violation established by MCA by regulation; or 
 
conduct by a licensee that creates or maintains conditions that allow other 
individuals to act in a manner that disturbs the public peace, including  
(1) obstruction of public rights-of-way by unruly crowds; (2) assault, battery, or 
other disorderly conduct that disturbs the public peace; (3) vandalism; or 
(4) littering. 
 
If a protest against a license renewal is filed at least 30 days before the license expires, 
MCA may not approve the renewal without holding a hearing unless MCA finds that the 
basis of the protest filed against the renewal is without any reasonable ground. In hearing 
and making a determination on a protest against a license renewal, MCA may consider 
only (1) issues arising out of specific complaints about the operation of the licensed 
premises and (2) the performance of the license holder for the four-year period immediately 
preceding the date of the renewal application. MCA may not consider zoning issues.  
 
Zoning Provisions  
 
The bill prohibits a political subdivision from adopting an ordinance establishing zoning 
requirements for (1) licensed dispensaries that are more restrictive than zoning 
requirements for a retail dealer licensed under the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis 
Article and (2) licensed growers cultivating cannabis exclusively outdoors in an area zoned 
for agricultural use that are more restrictive than any zoning requirements that existed on 
June 30, 2023, governing a hemp farm registered under the Agriculture Article in the 
political subdivision. Further, a political subdivision may not adopt an ordinance 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 805/ Page 3 
prohibiting outdoor cannabis cultivation on a premises that was properly zoned for outdoor 
cannabis cultivation on or before June 30, 2023. 
 
The bill also modifies an existing provision that prohibits a licensed dispensary from being 
located within 500 feet of a playground, recreation center, library, or public park; under the 
bill, a licensed dispensary may not be located within 500 feet of a pre-existing playground, 
recreation center, library, public park, or place of worship. The bill clarifies that a political 
subdivision may adopt an ordinance reducing, but not increasing, those statutory distance 
requirements. However, a political subdivision may by ordinance increase the statutory 
distance limitation between dispensaries to no more than one-half mile; the statutory 
distance limitation under current law specifies that a licensed dispensary may not locate 
within 1,000 feet of another dispensary. In addition, a political subdivision may (1) by 
ordinance, establish a distance limitation for dispensaries of up to 100 feet from an area 
zoned for residential use or (2) apply to dispensaries the distance limitation for licensed 
alcoholic beverage retailers from an area zoned for residential use. 
 
A political subdivision must grant a waiver to an ordinance that provides a distance 
requirement for dispensaries under these statutory provisions (as altered by the bill) for a 
licensed dispensary that was in operation before April 1, 2024. 
 
The bill clarifies that “unduly burden” includes imposing a zoning requirement or 
restriction on the use of property by a cannabis licensee that is more restrictive than those 
established pursuant to § 36-410 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article for 
dispensaries. 
 
The bill also clarifies that a facility used by a cannabis licensee is not required to be 
submitted to, or approved by, a zoning board, as specified, if the cannabis licensee (rather 
than a grower, processor, or dispensary) held a Stage One preapproval for a license before 
October 1, 2022 (as under current law) and was not actively engaged in the growing, 
processing, or dispensing of cannabis before October 1, 2022 (rather than operational). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Cannabis Reform  
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State 
following the enactment of Chapter 26 of 2022 and the passage of the associated 
constitutional amendment by (1) creating MCA as an independent unit of State government 
that is responsible for the regulation of medical and adult-use cannabis; (2) attributing 
cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco Commission and renaming it the 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; (3) developing a licensing framework for 
the regulated sale of cannabis; (4) requiring all existing medical cannabis licensees to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 805/ Page 4 
convert to adult-use cannabis businesses; (5) establishing a 9% sales and use tax on the sale 
of adult-use cannabis; and (6) creating the Office of Social Equity (OSE) in MCA and the 
Social Equity Partnership Grant Program in OSE. The sale of adult-use cannabis began on 
July 1, 2023.   
 
Cannabis Licensure and Renewal  
 
Under current regulations, a standard cannabis license is valid for five years on initial 
licensure and five years on renewal. At least 90 calendar days before the expiration of a 
license, MCA must notify the licensee of (1) the date on which the license expires; (2) the 
process and the fee required to renew the license; and (3) the consequences of a failure to 
renew the license.   
 
At least 30 calendar days before a license expires, a licensee seeking renewal must submit: 
 
 
a renewal application, as specified;  
 
proof that fingerprints have been submitted to the Criminal Justice Information 
System and the Federal Bureau of Investigation for each agent and any owner with 
an ownership interest of at least 5%;  
 
to a full inspection of the licensed premises (unless a full inspection was 
satisfactorily completed within three months before the date of the license 
expiration); and  
 
payment of the required renewal fee.   
 
MCA may renew a license that meets the requirements specified above.  
 
If a licensee fails the inspection or submits a deficient application for renewal, the licensee 
may apply for reinstatement by (1) submitting a plan to correct the deficiencies noted 
during the inspection and (2) amending the renewal application. 
 
MCA may deny a license renewal if: 
 
 
the plan to correct deficiencies identified in an inspection is deficient; 
 
the amended application for renewal is deficient; or 
 
the licensee is repeatedly found in violation of health and safety regulations during 
the license period. 
 
A licensee who fails to apply for license renewal by the date specified by MCA, or whose 
license is not renewed by MCA, must cease operations at all premises and may not provide 
cannabis to any entity or individual. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 805/ Page 5 
A license may be reinstated upon submission of a reinstatement application approved by 
MCA and payment of the required reinstatement fee ($2,000).  
 
Violations and Hearing Authority  
 
After determining that a violation of Title 36 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis 
Article (Medical and Adult-use Cannabis) or a regulation adopted under the title has 
occurred, MCA must suspend, fine, restrict, or revoke cannabis licenses and cannabis 
registrations, whether active, expired, or surrendered, or impose any authorized penalty. 
For any violation, MCA must give notice and hold a hearing in accordance with the 
Administrative Procedure Act.  
 
MCA may issue a subpoena for a witness or evidence in connection with any disciplinary 
action or any investigation or proceeding initiated for an alleged violation of Title 36. MCA 
is authorized to delegate its hearing authority to an employee within the administration and 
hold a hearing in absentia when the person against whom action is contemplated fails to 
appear after due notice.  
 
Current regulations regarding hearing procedures apply to all hearings that MCA must 
conduct pursuant to statute or regulation (unless specific procedural regulations have 
otherwise been promulgated) and are intended to supplement the procedures required by 
law. A licensed business, registrant, agent, owner, or selected applicant that is subject to 
an MCA action has the right to a hearing. MCA must provide notice of any agency action 
and a statement of the right to a hearing. A party must file a request for a hearing within 
30 days of the notice of an agency action. If a party does not request a hearing within that 
timeframe, the agency action becomes final and is not subject to appeal. However, if a 
party requests a timely hearing, MCA acquires jurisdiction over the matter and may 
delegate a contested case regarding MCA determination to the Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH).  
 
The standard of proof in a hearing must be by a preponderance of the evidence. In the 
hearing of a contested case involving allegations that the party violated a law or regulation, 
MCA has the burden of proof. In the hearing of a contested case resulting from the denial 
or proposed denial of a license, registration, or permit, the applicant has the burden of 
establishing that the applicant is entitled to the license, registration, or permit. The hearing 
officer must issue a written final determination summarizing (1) any adjustments to the 
determination of fines or penalties and the reason for MCA’s action; (2) the deadline for 
payment of a fine or penalty; and (3) in the case of a license suspension or revocation, the 
reason for MCA’s action. The final determination exhausts all administrative remedies. A 
party may appeal the final determination of MCA to a circuit court if it does so within  
30 days of receipt of the final determination.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 805/ Page 6 
Local Zoning and Regulatory Authority 
 
A “political subdivision” (defined as a county or a municipality) may establish reasonable 
zoning requirements for cannabis businesses and decide how to distribute its allocation of 
tax revenues. A political subdivision may not (1) establish zoning or other requirements 
that unduly burden a cannabis licensee; (2) impose licensing, operating, or other fees or 
requirements on a cannabis licensee that are disproportionately greater or more 
burdensome than those imposed on other businesses with a similar impact on the area 
where the cannabis licensee is located; (3) prohibit transportation through or deliveries 
within the political subdivision by cannabis establishments located in other political 
subdivisions; (4) prevent an entity from converting a medical cannabis license that is in 
compliance with all relevant medical cannabis regulations; or (5) negotiate or enter into an 
agreement requiring a cannabis licensee or applicant to provide money, donations, in-kind 
contributions, services, or anything of value to the political subdivision.  
 
The use of a facility by a cannabis licensee is not required to be submitted to, or approved 
by a zoning board, as specified, if the facility (1) was properly zoned and operating on or 
before January 1, 2023, or (2) is used by a grower, processor, or dispensary that held a 
Stage One preapproval for a license before October 1, 2022, and was not operational before 
that date.  
 
In general, a dispensary may not be located within 500 feet of (1) a pre-existing primary or 
secondary school in the State, or a licensed child care center or registered family child care 
home or (2) a playground, recreation center, library, or public park. A dispensary also may 
not be located within 1,000 feet of another licensed dispensary. However, a political 
subdivision may adopt an ordinance reducing these distance requirements. In addition, 
these distance requirements do not apply to a medical dispensary licensee that converted 
to a cannabis business licensee and was properly zoned and operating before July 1, 2023.  
 
A political subdivision must affirmatively authorize an on-site consumption establishment 
to operate by issuing a permit or license and may place restrictions on or prohibit the 
operation of on-site consumption establishments.  
 
For additional information on cannabis reform in the State, see the Appendix – Medical 
and Adult-use Cannabis Reform. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Protest of Renewal – Hearings 
 
Because the bill requires MCA to hold a hearing on a protest against a license renewal 
before approving a renewal (unless MCA finds that the basis of the protest filed against the 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 805/ Page 7 
renewal is without any reasonable ground), MCA advises that a potentially high volume of 
hearings could occur in fiscal 2028 through 2030 based on the five-year renewal term for 
cannabis business licenses. Specifically, (1) there are 137 medical licensees that converted 
to cannabis business licenses and are due for renewal beginning in fiscal 2028 and (2) MCA 
anticipates issuing up to 179 conditional cannabis business licenses during the first-round 
lottery in fiscal 2024, which are expected to become operational and obtain licensure 
beginning in fiscal 2025 and be due for renewal beginning in fiscal 2030. As a result, MCA 
advises that it likely needs one contractual administrative officer (beginning in 
January 2028 and terminating at the end of December 2030) to serve as a paralegal and 
handle the anticipated increase in workload during this time, at a cost of approximately 
$44,100 in fiscal 2028 and $78,700 in fiscal 2029.  
 
While MCA does have hearing authority and advises that it plans to eventually conduct 
hearings internally, currently, MCA delegates hearings to OAH. Accordingly, the extent to 
which MCA alone might handle any increase in workload resulting from the bill is unclear. 
In addition, any increase in the number of hearings directly resulting from the bill – and 
the corresponding need for additional staff – cannot be reliably estimated at this time and 
can only be determined with actual experience under the bill. Nevertheless, to the extent 
that MCA ultimately needs to hire a contractual employee due to the bill, special fund 
expenditures from the Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund (CREF) for MCA 
increase in fiscal 2028 through 2030. Special fund revenues to CREF for MCA increase 
correspondingly to cover any increase in costs, as current law requires that revenues from 
the sales and use tax on the sale of adult-use cannabis must first be distributed to CREF to 
defray the entire cost of the operations and administrative expenses of MCA. However, 
any such effect is anticipated to be minimal. 
 
OAH advises that, while the bill may have an operational impact on the office, the office 
does not anticipate any material fiscal impact. 
 
Effect on License Renewal and Reinstatement Fee Revenue 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect special fund revenues collected by MCA for 
license renewals and/or reinstatements. 
 
Effect on Distribution of Sales and Use Tax Revenues   
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect overall sales of adult-use cannabis and, 
therefore, the total amount of sales and use tax revenue collected each year. However, the 
bill may affect the distribution of sales and use tax revenues for fiscal 2028 through 2030, 
as discussed below.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 805/ Page 8 
As noted above, current law requires that revenues from the sales and use tax on the sale 
of adult-use cannabis must first be distributed to CREF to defray MCA’s operating and 
administrative costs. Remaining tax revenues are then distributed as follows:  50% to the 
State’s general fund; 35% to the Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund administered 
by the Comptroller’s Office; 5% to the Cannabis Public Health Fund administered by the 
Maryland Department of Health; 5% to the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
administered by Commerce; and 5% to counties. Accordingly, any increase in costs for 
MCA results in a decrease in the amount of tax revenue remaining for distribution under 
these provisions. 
 
Thus, to the extent that the bill increases MCA’s administrative costs, the bill also results 
in a corresponding decrease in general fund revenues, special fund revenues for affected 
special funds, and county revenues. Any such effect, if it occurs, is anticipated to be 
minimal. 
 
Zoning Provisions 
 
Local planning and zoning departments can likely implement the bill’s zoning provisions 
using existing resources.   
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that a small business cannabis licensee has a protest 
of renewal filed against it, legal fees may be incurred for hearings, and the licensee faces 
possible denial of the license renewal that might not otherwise occur.  
 
MCA advises that finding a location for a cannabis business is one of the most significant 
hurdles for prospective cannabis licensees and that many of the prospective cannabis 
businesses that will become licensed pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255 will be small 
businesses. Thus, small businesses likely benefit to the extent that the generally bill makes 
it easier for such businesses to seek and obtain local zoning approval.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 537 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; City of Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; 
Maryland Cannabis Administration; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of 
Legislative Services  

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 805/ Page 9 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 805/ Page 10 
Appendix – Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Reform 
 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 of 2023 established the adult-use cannabis industry in the State by, 
among other things, (1) attributing cannabis-related duties to the Alcohol and Tobacco 
Commission and renaming it the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC); 
(2) establishing the Maryland Cannabis Administration (MCA) as an independent unit of 
State government that is responsible for the regulation of adult-use and medical cannabis; 
(3) creating a licensing framework for the regulated sale of cannabis; (4) requiring all 
existing medical cannabis licensees to either convert to adult-use cannabis businesses or 
cease operating by July 1, 2023; (5) establishing a 9% sales and use tax on the sale of 
adult-use cannabis; (6) creating the Office of Social Equity (OSE) in MCA and the Social 
Equity Partnership Grant Program within OSE; (7) establishing an advisory board on 
medical and adult-use cannabis; and (8) creating the Maryland Incubator Program. 
Additionally, ATCC and MCA must enter a memorandum of understanding providing that 
both parties agree to collaborate on enforcing provisions regarding unlicensed cannabis 
operations in the State. Multiple special funds (discussed below) were also established to 
hold specified revenues and cover specified expenses related to the cannabis industry. 
 
Maryland Cannabis Administration 
 
MCA is an independent unit of State government established to administer and enforce the 
Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages Article (including being 
the successor to the Natalie M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Commission (MMCC) in 
matters concerning medical cannabis). MCA’s responsibilities generally include 
promulgating cannabis industry regulations, licensing and registering cannabis businesses 
in the State, and enforcing the statutes and regulations related to the cannabis industry. 
 
Adult-use Cannabis 
 
The sale of adult-use cannabis began on July 1, 2023. Pursuant to Chapter 26 of 2022 and 
the passage of the associated constitutional amendment, a person at least age 21 may use 
and possess the personal use amount of cannabis, while the possession of the personal use 
amount of cannabis by a person younger than age 21, as well as the possession of the civil 
use amount of cannabis, are subject to civil penalties. Possession of more than the civil use 
amount of cannabis by anyone is subject to a criminal penalty. 
 
“Personal use amount” means (1) up to 1.5 ounces of usable cannabis; (2) up to 12 grams 
of concentrated cannabis; (3) cannabis products containing up to 750 milligrams of 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC); or (4) up to two cannabis plants. “Civil use amount” 
means (1) more than 1.5 ounces but not more than 2.5 ounces of usable cannabis; (2) more 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 805/ Page 11 
than 12 grams but not more than 20 grams of concentrated cannabis; or (3) cannabis 
products containing more than 750 milligrams but not more than 1,250 milligrams of 
delta-9-THC. 
 
Medical Cannabis 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 254 and 255, MCA – rather than MMCC – is responsible for the 
State’s medical cannabis program, which is intended to make medical cannabis available 
to qualifying patients in a safe and effective manner. There is a framework to certify health 
care providers (including physicians, physician assistants, dentists, podiatrists, nurse 
practitioners, and nurse midwives), qualifying patients, and their caregivers to provide 
qualifying patients with medical cannabis legally under State law via written certification. 
Qualifying patients may possess (1) up to 120 grams of usable cannabis; 
(2) cannabis-infused products containing up to 36 grams of delta-9-THC; or (3) for a 
qualifying patient who is at least age 21, no more than four cannabis plants. 
 
Cannabis Industry Regulations 
 
MCA proposed emergency regulations that took effect July 1, 2023; the emergency 
regulations are supplemental to the existing medical cannabis regulations. The emergency 
regulations (1) carry out the requirements for licensure of cannabis businesses, including 
implementing procedures related to applications, licenses, and registrations; (2) assist the 
Comptroller in the collection of taxes imposed on the sale of adult-use cannabis; 
(3) implement inventory management and tracking; (4) establish operating requirements 
for cannabis licensees or cannabis registrants; (5) establish limits on the maximum potency 
of cannabis products sold in the State; and (6) establish child protections, including 
child-resistant packaging and prohibitions on advertising to children. 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 require that the July 1, 2023 emergency regulations be followed by 
nonemergency regulations adopted by MCA by July 1, 2024. These regulations must 
govern Internet sales of cannabis; implement and supplement packaging and labeling 
requirements for cannabis products; establish procedures for the use of point-of-sale 
technologies by dispensaries for all transactions that verify a consumer’s age using a 
driver’s license or other valid identification; and establish health, safety, security, and 
tracking requirements for the packaging and repackaging of cannabis by a dispensary. 
Additionally, MCA must adopt minimum standards for licensed growers to protect the 
rights of growers and employees. 
 
Social Equity in the Cannabis Industry 
 
MCA must (1) conduct extensive outreach to small, minority, and women business owners 
and entrepreneurs who may have an interest in applying for a cannabis license before 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 805/ Page 12 
accepting and processing cannabis license applications and (2) connect potential social 
equity applicants with OSE. MCA began to implement this requirement in 2023 by 
attending fairs and festivals, visiting Maryland colleges and universities, and conducting 
technical assistance seminars. 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 established OSE as an independent office functioning within MCA, 
with the general purpose of promoting and encouraging full participation in the regulated 
cannabis industry by people from communities that have been disproportionately impacted 
by the war on drugs in order to positively impact those communities. OSE has several 
responsibilities in furtherance of its purpose, including consulting with other agencies, 
providing recommendations to and working with MCA, assisting businesses to obtain 
financing through the Capital Access Program, and managing the Social Equity Partnership 
Grant Program (established to promote qualifying partnerships between operational 
licensees and social equity licensees). 
 
Cannabis Licensing 
 
To operate a cannabis business in the State, a person must obtain a cannabis license from 
MCA. A license is valid for five years on initial licensure and five years upon renewal. 
MCA must issue licenses for growers, processors, dispensaries, incubator spaces, and 
on-site consumption. Additional licenses include micro licenses for growers, processors, 
and dispensaries. Licensing and renewal fees are established by MCA and range from 
$5,000 for social equity applicants for certain licenses to $50,000 for standard grower 
licenses. Existing medical licensees (growers, processors, and dispensaries) were required 
to pay a conversion fee based on the licensee’s gross revenues for calendar 2022 to convert 
to medical and adult-use cannabis business licensees of the same type. Essentially all 
medical licensees (18 grower, 23 processor, and 96 dispensary licensees) entered payment 
installment agreements to convert into cannabis business licensees. 
 
First Round Social Equity Licenses:  Social equity applicants are those with at least 65% 
ownership and control held by one or more individuals who meet certain criteria, such as 
living in or attending a public school in a disproportionately impacted area (i.e., determined 
to have had above 150% of the State’s 10-year average for cannabis possession charges). 
As announced by MCA, the available standard licenses for social equity applicants in 
round one total 16 grower licenses, 32 processor licenses, and 75 dispensary licenses. The 
available micro licenses for such applicants total 24 grower licenses, 24 processor licenses, 
and 8 dispensary licenses. MCA accepted 1,708 on-time applications for first round social 
equity licenses from November 13 through December 12, 2023. 
 
While first round licenses were expected to be awarded through a public lottery prior to  
January 1, 2024, MCA was forced to delay the lottery. Before the lottery can take place, 
MCA must review each of the 1,708 applications (1,400 of which were received within 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 805/ Page 13 
72 hours of the application deadline) to ensure that it meets the minimum requirements for 
licensure before being entered into the lottery. If selected during the lottery, an additional 
review of the application materials will commence before a conditional license is awarded. 
During the conditional period (18 to 24 months), a licensee must complete a supplemental 
license application to undergo a criminal and financial history background check and take 
additional actions, including demonstrating legal control and local zoning and planning 
approval of the proposed site for the cannabis business. An unconditional license is issued 
to applicants who satisfy the supplemental application requirements and pay a license fee. 
 
Additional Grower License Awards for Specified Class Members:  Chapters 254 and 255 
also required MCA to establish a process for issuing up to five additional grower licenses 
to recognized class members of Pigford v. Glickman, 185 F.R.D. 82 (D.D.C. 1999) or In 
re Black Farmers Litig., 856 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2011) that also meet other specified 
criteria. As of January 1, 2024, MCA reports awarding four conditional grower licenses to 
qualifying class members in the State. 
 
Second Round Licenses:  Beginning May 1, 2024, MCA must begin issuing a second round 
of licenses. The licenses may be limited to social equity applicants or opened to applicants 
from the general public, dependent on the outcome of a disparity study. 
 
Subsequent Licenses:  MCA may issue additional cannabis licenses up to the maximum 
limit authorized per statute based on the results of a market demand study. Future 
applications for licenses may be limited to social equity applicants and employ remedial 
measures based on the results of the disparity study. 
 
Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Chapters 254 and 255 also established the Advisory Board on Medical and Adult-use 
Cannabis. The advisory board must (1) consider all matters submitted to it by ATCC, the 
Governor, MCA, or the General Assembly; (2) on its own initiative, provide 
recommendations to ATCC and MCA regarding guidelines, rules, and regulations that the 
advisory board considers important or necessary for review and consideration; and 
(3) establish at least two subcommittees to focus on medical and adult-use cannabis. As of 
January 1, 2024, the advisory board has not yet convened. 
 
Cannabis Sales and Tax Revenues 
 
The fiscal and policy note for Chapters 254 and 255 estimated adult-use sales revenues of  
$400.0 million in the first fiscal year, and MCA estimated sales of $600.0 million in the 
first fiscal year. However, adult-use cannabis sales from July through December 2023 
totaled $331.8 million. With six months remaining to be counted during the first fiscal year 
of adult-use cannabis sales, revenues will likely exceed the fiscal and policy note estimate 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 805/ Page 14 
and possibly MCA’s estimate. At the established tax rate of 9%, approximately 
$29.9 million in tax revenues have already been generated during the first six months of 
adult-use cannabis sales. 
 
Local Authority to Regulate Cannabis 
 
A “political subdivision” – defined as a county or municipality – may (1) establish 
reasonable zoning requirements for cannabis businesses that do not “unduly burden” 
licensees; (2) decide how to distribute its allocation of tax revenues; and (3) adopt an 
ordinance to reduce the statutory requirements for how far a dispensary may be located 
from specified locations (e.g., schools, child care centers, playgrounds, libraries, etc.). 
 
A political subdivision may not (1) prohibit transportation through or deliveries within the 
political subdivision of cannabis; (2) prevent the conversion of an existing medical 
cannabis licensee to a cannabis business license; (3) impose fees or requirements on 
cannabis businesses that are disproportionally greater than or more burdensome than other 
businesses; and (4) impose a tax on cannabis. 
 
Additionally, an on-site consumption establishment may not operate in a location unless 
the political subdivision affirmatively authorizes the operation by issuing a permit or 
license. The political subdivision may also place restrictions on or prohibit the operation 
of on-site consumption establishments. 
 
Public Health Actions Related to Adult-use Cannabis 
 
Chapter 26 (and the subsequent passage of the associated constitutional amendment) 
established the Cannabis Public Health Advisory Council to study and report its findings 
and recommendations by December 1 each year on specified public health impacts of 
cannabis legalization. The council convened its first meeting in August 2023, forming data 
collection and youth mitigation workgroups. The Cannabis Public Health Fund was also 
established to (1) support the advisory council; (2) support data collection and research on 
the effects of cannabis legalization in the State; (3) provide funding for education and 
public awareness campaigns related to cannabis use, including funding for educational 
programs to be used in schools; (4) support substance use disorder counseling and 
treatment for individuals; (5) provide training and equipment for law enforcement to 
recognize impairments due to cannabis; and (6) purchase technology proven to be effective 
at measuring cannabis levels in drivers. The Maryland Department of Health must 
administer the fund, which consists of revenues distributed to the fund based on tax 
revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis (5% of those revenues), money appropriated 
in the State budget to the fund, and any other money from any other source accepted for 
the benefit of the fund. The fiscal 2023 budget included $5.0 million for initial 
capitalization of the fund. 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 805/ Page 15 
Cannabis-related Special Funds 
 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Funds:  Chapters 254 and 255 established the 
Cannabis Regulation and Enforcement Fund, administered by the Comptroller at the 
direction of MCA, to cover the costs of (1) operating MCA and (2) administering and 
enforcing the Medical and Adult-use Cannabis Title of the Alcoholic Beverages Article. 
The fund generally consists of fees the administration may impose (including application 
and registration fees) and tax revenues from the sale of adult-use cannabis sufficient to 
defray the entire cost of operating the administration. In addition, the balance of the Natalie 
M. LaPrade Medical Cannabis Fund, approximately $12.3 million, was credited to the fund 
to cover the costs of implementing the Acts and regulating the cannabis industry in 
Maryland. 
 
Community Reinvestment and Repair Fund:  Chapter 26 also established the Community 
Reinvestment and Repair Fund, to be administered by the Comptroller, with the stated 
purpose of providing funds to community-based organizations that serve communities 
determined by OSE (in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General) to have been 
the most impacted by disproportionate enforcement of the cannabis prohibition before 
July 1, 2022. The fund consists of conversion fees paid by medical licensees totaling 
approximately $60.9 million. The fund also receives 35% of the tax revenues from the sale 
of adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 
Cannabis Business Assistance Fund:  Chapter 26 (and the subsequent passage of the 
associated constitutional amendment) established the Cannabis Business Assistance Fund 
to assist small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses entering the adult-use 
cannabis industry. The Department of Commerce (in consultation with OSE) must 
administer the fund and must prioritize awarding grants and loans to (1) populations that 
have been historically disproportionately impacted by the enforcement of cannabis laws 
and (2) individuals who have been convicted of cannabis offenses. Commerce may not 
award grants or loans to small, minority, and women business owners and entrepreneurs 
with a personal net worth exceeding $1.7 million. The fiscal 2023 budget included 
$40.0 million for initial capitalization of the fund, and the fiscal 2024 budget includes 
$40.0 million for the fund. The fund also receives 5% of the tax revenues from the sale of 
adult-use cannabis, distributed on a quarterly basis. 
 

END OF PAGE 15