START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 857 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 857 
(Delegate D. Jones) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Shellfish Aquaculture - Harvest Hours 
 
 
This bill modifies a provision that prohibits an aquaculture leaseholder from harvesting 
shellfish between the hours of sunset and sunrise so that the provision instead prohibits a 
leaseholder from harvesting shellfish outside the hours established by the Department of 
Natural Resources (DNR) in regulation. The bill correspondingly requires DNR, in 
consultation with the Aquaculture Coordinating Council, to establish by regulation the 
hours for harvesting shellfish within leased areas. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not directly affect State finances. DNR can adopt the 
required regulations using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Aquaculture Harvest Hours 
 
An aquaculture leaseholder may not harvest shellfish between the hours of sunset and 
sunrise.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 857/ Page 2 
Aquaculture Leases 
 
A person who wishes to obtain an aquaculture lease must pay an application fee and 
complete and submit an application to DNR. Statute establishes general provisions that a 
leaseholder must follow, including the requirement that a leaseholder actively use the lease 
and comply with any standards for planting, harvesting, and use of the leased area 
established by DNR. Leaseholders must also mark the lease area and comply with any other 
DNR marking requirements, pay rent, and comply with Maryland Department of Health 
regulations carrying out the National Shellfish Sanitation Program. All leaseholders must 
also obtain and possess a shellfish aquaculture harvesting permit prior to engaging in any 
aquaculture activities on their lease. 
 
Aquaculture Coordinating Council 
 
The Aquaculture Coordinating Council was created by the General Assembly in 2005 and 
has various statutory responsibilities, including formulating and making proposals for 
advancing Maryland aquaculture and undertaking various efforts to support, study, and 
advance the aquaculture industry. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business aquaculture leaseholders may be meaningfully 
affected to the extent DNR establishes different harvest hours than the harvest hours 
currently in statute. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 879 (Senator Klausmeier, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2