START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 834 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 834 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Calvert County - Ethics - Conflict of Interest and Commissioner Expulsion 
 
   
This emergency bill requires Calvert County to (1) include provisions in its ethics law that 
are equivalent to or exceed the provisions of State law relating to a court’s authority to 
enforce the ethics law; (2) include provisions in its ethics law that require the 
Calvert County Ethics Commission to make public any recommendation it makes to expel 
a commissioner; and (3) enact a law or regulation that authorizes the governing body to 
remove a county elected official from office for violations of conflict of interest statutes, 
as specified.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to affect Calvert County government operations or 
finances.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State ethics law requires counties to enact provisions governing the public 
ethics of local officials relating to conflicts of interest, financial disclosure, and lobbying. 
Generally, local governments must establish conflict of interest and financial disclosure 
provisions that are similar with State law. For elected officials, conflict of interest and 
financial disclosure provisions must be at least as stringent as the equivalent rule that 
applies to State elected officials.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 834/ Page 2 
Conflicts of Interest and Financial Disclosures, Generally 
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law regulating conflicts of interest generally prohibits a State 
official or employee from (1) being employed or having a financial interest in an entity 
subject to the authority of that official or employee or of the governmental unit with which 
the official or employee is affiliated; (2) being employed or having financial interest in an 
entity that is negotiating or has entered a contract with that governmental unit or an entity 
that is a subcontractor on a contact with that governmental unit; or (3) holding any other 
employment relationship that would impair the impartiality and independent judgment of 
the official or employee; (4) soliciting or accepting any gift exceeding $20 in value, among 
others; (5) intentionally using the prestige of office for private gain or influence, as 
specified; (6) disclosing or using confidential information acquired by reason of the 
individual’s public position and not available to the public; (7) unlawfully harassing or 
discriminating against certain individuals; or (8) retaliating against an individual for 
reporting or participating in the investigation of a potential violation of the Maryland Public 
Ethics Law. The State Ethics Commission may make certain exemptions specified by 
statute.   
 
The Maryland Public Ethics Law regulating financial disclosures generally requires elected 
officials, candidates for State elected offices, certain State employees, and other State 
officials to identify real estate interests, equity interests, and other relationships such as 
employment, debts, and gifts as specified by statute. Financial disclosures are available to 
the public and maintained by the Ethics Commission. A State official or employee may not 
participate in a matter if the official or employee has specified conflicts of interest, 
including if the official or employee or a qualifying relative has an interest in the matter 
and the official or employee knows of the interest. 
 
Judicial Relief 
 
The court may compel compliance with an Ethics Commission order by issuing an order 
to cease and desist from the violation or granting other injunctive relief. The court may 
also impose a fine, as specified, or void an official act of an official or employee if (1) the 
official or employee had a conflict of interest that is prohibited; (2) the act arose from or 
concerned the subject matter of the conflict; (3) the proceeding was brought within 90 days 
after the act occurred; and (4) the court determines that the conflict had an impact on the 
act. The court may not void an official act that appropriates public funds, imposes a tax, or 
provides for the issuance of a bond, a note, or any other evidence of public obligation.  
 
Local Government Article § 12-107 (Public Ethics Laws and Regulations) 
 
Except in Baltimore City, a county’s governing body may enact a law or regulation 
(1) designed to prevent conflicts between private interests and public duties of county 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 834/ Page 3 
officers or employees, including the governing body and (2) to govern the conduct and 
actions of county officers and employees, including the governing body, in performing 
their public duties. The governing body of a county may enact a law or regulation to 
provide a penalty, including a fine, forfeiture, imprisonment, or a removal from office for 
violation of any law or regulation.  
 
“Local official” includes an individual who is designated as a local official and whose 
position is funded wholly or partly by the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1124 (Senator Jackson) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State Ethics 
Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3