START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 801 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 801 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Procedure - Committed Persons - Release Proceedings 
 
 
This bill makes various changes to procedures related to the release of a person committed 
to the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) after being found not criminally responsible 
(NCR). The bill (1) establishes that the Maryland Rules governing discovery in  
circuit court civil matters apply to a proceeding to determine eligibility for conditional 
release or discharge; (2) requires a court and MDH to promptly inform the committed 
person’s counsel of record when they receive a report that a committed person violated a 
condition of release or violated conditional release, respectively; (3) requires a court, on 
request by any party, to hold a hearing after an application is made for a change in the 
conditional release of a committed person to determine whether the applicant has satisfied 
the requirements for release; (4) establishes that a preponderance of the evidence standard 
applies to an applicant in change of conditional release proceedings; (5) requires MDH, on 
written request of the State’s Attorney, the committed person, or the committed person’s 
counsel, to provide all reports, assessments, evaluations, and similar documents concerning 
the committed person prepared or conducted by, for, or at the direction of MDH during the 
period of the committed person’s commitment or conditional release; and (6) clarifies that 
a court may extend a conditional release by up to five years and authorizes a court to 
shorten or terminate the conditional release. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDH increase by as much as $377,000 in 
FY 2025 to address procedural changes and additional court hearings under the bill. 
Future year expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. Other potential impacts on 
State operations are discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
377,000 
439,700 
459,400 
479,500 
500,600 
Net Effect 
($377,000) 
($439,700) 
($459,400) 
($479,500) 
($500,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 801/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Other than potential operational efficiencies for State’s Attorneys’ offices 
(as discussed below), the bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances 
or operations. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Release After Commitment of Defendants Found to Be Not Criminally Responsible 
 
A committed defendant is eligible for release only if the defendant proves by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the defendant will not be a danger to self or to the 
person or property of others due to a mental disorder or mental retardation if released from 
commitment with conditions (conditional release) or without conditions (discharge). 
Within 50 days after the finding of NCR and commitment to MDH, unless waived by the 
defendant or otherwise postponed for good cause or by agreement, MDH must hold a 
hearing at the facility before an administrative law judge from the Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH) on the issue of whether the individual is eligible for discharge or 
conditional release from inpatient confinement or requires continued commitment. Unless 
MDH has completed an examination and report during the 90 days preceding the release 
hearing, it must complete an examination and evaluation of the committed person at least 
7 days before the hearing is scheduled. Whether or not the release hearing is waived, MDH 
must send a copy of the evaluation report to the committed person, counsel for the 
committed person, the State’s Attorney, and OAH. 
 
At the administrative hearing, the formal rules of evidence and the circuit court rules of 
discovery (civil or criminal) do not apply. Both conditional release hearings and revocation 
of conditional release hearings (see below) are governed by Title 3 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article. Section 3-115(e) provides the rules of evidence that govern the hearing, 
including discovery rules. Section 3-115(e)(3) requires any record relating to evaluation or 
treatment to be made available, on request, to the committed person or counsel of record. 
Generally, most patients are represented by the Office of the Public Defender (OPD) and 
the hospital provides the records to the attorney of record. OAH may admit and consider 
any relevant evidence and must issue any appropriate subpoena for any person or evidence. 
The court may compel obedience to the subpoena. In addition, the OAH Rules of Procedure 
regarding discovery, contained in COMAR 28.02.01.13, also may apply. 
 
The defendant is entitled to be present at the hearing and to have legal representation. An 
assistant Public Defender is assigned to each facility and represents most of the defendants. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 801/ Page 3 
In addition, MDH and the State’s Attorney are entitled to participate in the hearing. MDH, 
through the hospital, will present its opinion regarding the defendant’s eligibility for 
discharge. Within 10 days after the hearing, the administrative law judge must submit a 
written report to the court with a summary of the evidence presented at the hearing and a 
recommendation as to whether the committed person is eligible for conditional release or 
discharge. If the administrative law judge determines that the committed person proved 
eligibility for conditional release, the report must also include the recommended conditions 
of the release, after giving consideration to any specific conditions recommended by the 
facility, the committed person, or counsel for the committed person. Any party may file 
exceptions to the administrative law judge’s recommendations within 10 days after 
receiving the report.  
 
The court may hold a hearing on its own initiative within 30 days after the court receives 
the administrative law judge’s report. Unless the committed person and the 
State’s Attorney waive the hearing, the court must hold a hearing within this 30-day 
timeframe if timely exceptions are filed or the court requires more information. The 
committed person is entitled to be present at the hearing and to have legal representation. 
Within 15 days after a judicial hearing ends or is waived, the court must determine whether 
the evidence indicates that the committed person has proven by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the person is eligible for release (with or without conditions), and order the 
continued commitment, conditional release, or discharge from commitment of the 
defendant. 
 
If timely exceptions are not filed and the court determines that the administrative law 
judge’s recommendations are supported by the evidence and that a judicial hearing is not 
necessary, the court must enter an order in accordance with the administrative law judge’s 
recommendations within 30 days after receiving the report. The court may not enter an 
order that is not in accordance with the administrative law judge’s recommendations unless 
the court holds a hearing or the hearing is waived.  
 
Usual conditions of release include provisions for housing (e.g., residential rehabilitation 
housing, supervised housing, etc.), mental health treatment, daytime activities 
(e.g., psychosocial programs, vocational training, etc.), and alcohol or substance abuse 
treatment. A conditional release continues for the period ordered by the court, not to exceed 
five years, unless extended by the court for an additional term on application to the court 
for a change in conditional release made by MDH, the State’s Attorney, or the defendant. 
 
The court must notify the Criminal Justice Information System Central Repository 
whenever it orders conditional release or discharge of a committed person. 
 
If the court orders continued commitment, the defendant may apply for release no earlier 
than one year after the initial release hearing ends or is waived and no more than once a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 801/ Page 4 
year thereafter. However, the committed defendant may file an application for release at 
any time outside of these time restrictions if the defendant’s application is accompanied by 
an affidavit of a physician or psychologist stating that there has been an improvement in 
the defendant’s mental condition since the last hearing. The defendant may choose to 
pursue an administrative hearing conducted before an administrative law judge and subject 
to the same procedures as the initial release hearing. In the alternative, the defendant may 
file a petition directly with the court that ordered the defendant’s commitment. The 
defendant may request a bench trial before the committing court or a jury trial. If the 
committing court was the District Court and the individual requests a jury trial, the trial 
will be held in the circuit court of that jurisdiction.  
 
In addition, MDH may apply at any time to the court to order the defendant’s conditional 
release. MDH is required to send a copy of the application to the defendant, the defendant’s 
counsel, and the State’s Attorney. After receipt of the application, the court may hold a 
hearing on the application and must issue an order within 30 days either continuing 
commitment or allowing the conditional release. 
 
Revocation or Modification of Conditional Release 
 
If the State’s Attorney receives a report that a defendant who was given a conditional 
release has violated a condition of release, or if the State’s Attorney is notified by the court 
or MDH of a violation, the State’s Attorney must determine whether there is a factual basis 
for the complaint. If the State’s Attorney determines that there was a violation and believes 
that further action is necessary, the State’s Attorney must promptly notify MDH and file 
with the court a petition for modification or revocation of conditional release. If the court 
determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a violation occurred, the court 
must note this determination on the petition and notify the State’s Attorney, MDH, and the 
person reporting the violation. If the court decides that there is probable cause to believe 
that a violation occurred, the court must issue a hospital warrant for the defendant’s 
apprehension and send a copy of the hospital warrant and the petition to the 
State’s Attorney, the Public Defender, the counsel of record for the committed person, 
MDH, the person reporting the violation, and OAH. The individual is usually returned to 
the facility from which the individual had been released.  
 
Unless all parties agree to an extension or the administrative law judge finds good cause, a 
hearing must be held within 10 days after the defendant’s return to MDH under the hospital 
warrant. At the hearing, the defendant is entitled to representation by an attorney, and all 
parties are entitled to submit evidence and call witnesses. The State is required to show by 
a preponderance of the evidence that the violation occurred. If the State meets this burden, 
the defendant may nevertheless prove by a preponderance of the evidence eligibility for 
continued release. The administrative law judge is required to report the findings and 
recommendations to the court promptly. The administrative law judge must also send 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 801/ Page 5 
copies of the report to the parties, and any party may file timely exceptions. After receipt 
of the report, and after reviewing any exceptions filed, the court may revoke the release, 
continue the release, modify the terms of release, or extend the conditional release for an 
additional five-year term.  
 
MDH and the State’s Attorney may petition the court to change the conditions of release 
at any time. Unless good cause is shown for an earlier hearing, a defendant on conditional 
release may petition the court for a change in conditions after six months on release. 
Thereafter, the defendant may petition for a change annually. If, however, the defendant 
has a physician’s or psychologist’s affidavit stating that the defendant’s mental condition 
has improved, the defendant may petition for a change at any time. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
General fund expenditures for MDH increase by as much as $377,041 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring three paralegals, one administrative officer, and two social workers for the 
Community Forensic Aftercare Program (the program that monitors individuals on 
conditional release) to address procedural changes under the bill, including application of 
circuit court discovery rules in administrative proceedings and additional hearings for 
changes in conditional release. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
6 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$333,505 
Operating Expenses 
43,536 
MDH – FY 2025 Expenditures 
$377,041 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
MDH advises that although it cannot predict how often defense counsel will demand 
document-related discovery under the bill, it is possible for counsel to request it in every 
case and for increased opportunities for disputes to occur. MDH is also unable to predict 
the number of additional court hearings that will occur under the bill at this time. However, 
according to current data provided by MDH for context, the department has 642 cases with 
an average of 13 hospital warrants per month; there are 188 people in the MDH hospitals 
currently awaiting release on conditions. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 801/ Page 6 
MDH further advises that prior civil discovery cases have required MDH staff to work 
closely with the Office of the Attorney General, with staff working more than six hours per 
case specifically on discovery. MDH hospitals are often represented at administrative 
hearings by non-attorney hospital personnel; depending on the use of depositions and the 
overall effect of the bill’s provisions, MDH may require additional attorney resources. The 
Department of Legislative Services advises that any potential need for such resources 
cannot be determined without actual experience under the bill and have therefore not been 
accounted for in this analysis. Furthermore, as indicated by OPD below, individuals are 
opting for court proceedings instead of administrative hearings. To the extent the bill 
substitutes administrative hearings subject to court discovery rules for court proceedings 
already subject to court discovery rules, workloads (and corresponding positions) may be 
less. 
 
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 
Although OAH is unable to estimate the number of additional hearings that may be 
generated by the bill to address discovery disputes, it does not anticipate a fiscal impact. 
According to OAH, it can use existing budgeted resources to train its judges on the 
substantive aspects of the bill and make any operational adjustments needed to address an 
increase in discovery disputes before the scheduled NCR hearing.  
 
OAH notes that the timelines in the circuit court civil discovery rules do not align with 
current timelines for administrative NCR release proceedings. For example,  
Maryland Rule 4-263 requires certain disclosures by the State’s Attorney and the defense, 
and Maryland Rule 4-263(h) requires disclosures within 30 days after the appearance of 
counsel or the first appearance of the defendant. Currently, for conditional release and 
revocation hearings, the MDH hospitals submit a weekly docket sheet 2 business days 
before the scheduled hearing date. This document is also provided to OPD since the office 
represents the patients scheduled for hearing on any given day. 
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
Conditional release hearings are civil proceedings and, at the choice of the patient, can 
occur before an administrative law judge, the committing court (judge), or before a jury 
trial. Circuit court civil discovery rules apply in circuit court proceedings, including jury 
trials; the bill applies these discovery rules to administrative proceedings. OPD advises that 
its attorneys have encountered difficulty in obtaining (1) information regarding OPD 
clients from MDH, including an inability to speak with healthcare providers for OPD 
clients and refusals by MDH to provide requested reports and documents; (2) information 
about decision making in the Community Forensic Aftercare Program, and (3) information 
regarding Forensic Review Board meetings. According to OPD, because the lack of access 
to information in administrative proceedings often results in hearings being brought to a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 801/ Page 7 
committing court or jury trial (a slower and costlier process), the application of court 
discovery rules in administrative proceedings would facilitate the provision of this 
information and potentially lead to efficiencies and reduced redundancy. 
 
Judiciary 
 
The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the finances of the Judiciary. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Should the bill’s requirement regarding the production of MDH 
documents on written request by the State’s Attorney facilitate the flow of information in 
NCR cases, the bill may lead to efficiencies in State’s Attorneys’ offices. According to the 
Office of the State’s Attorney for Baltimore City, until recently, the State was provided 
MDH records associated with modifications of conditional release upon request. However, 
MDH now requires subpoenas despite nothing in statute requiring a subpoena for 
production of these records. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 551 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ 
Association; Baltimore City; Maryland Department of Health; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 1, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7