START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 887 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 887 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Health Commissions and Maryland Insurance 
Administration - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to contract with an 
independent consultant to study the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), 
the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), the Maryland Community Health 
Resources Commission (MCHRC), and the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA), as 
specified. The independent consultant must seek input from MDH, HSCRC, MHCC, 
MCHRC, and MIA in conducting the study. By January 1, 2026, MDH must report to the 
Governor, the Senate Finance Committee, and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee on the results of the study. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by a total of $50,000 to contract 
with an independent consultant as required under the bill. These expenditures are likely 
incurred as $30,000 in FY 2025 and $20,000 in FY 2026. MIA and the commissions can 
provide input on the study with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
30,000 
20,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($30,000) 
($20,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 887/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The independent contractor must:   
 
 
examine overlap of the statutory and regulatory duties performed by HSCRC, 
MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA; 
 
identify statutory or regulatory duties performed by HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and 
MIA that may be more appropriately performed by MDH or another commission or 
agency; 
 
identify whether and how HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA could be 
streamlined to reduce overlap of duties; 
 
identify whether and how the functions of HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA 
could be better aligned to improve effectiveness and efficiency; 
 
examine the alignment of the statutory or regulatory duties performed by HSCRC, 
MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA with the Maryland Total Cost of Care (TCOC) model 
and the State’s participation in the Advancing All-Payer Health Equity Approaches 
and Development (AHEAD) model; and 
 
recommend any changes in HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA administrative 
structure that may improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the commission or 
agency. 
 
Current Law:  Three independent commissions within MDH comprise the Health 
Regulatory Commissions:  (1) HSCRC; (2) MHCC; and (3) MCHRC. Each commission 
has its own separate goals and initiatives. 
 
HSCRC was established to contain hospital costs, maintain fairness in hospital payment, 
provide access to hospital care, and disclose information on the operation of hospitals in 
the State. HSCRC is responsible for implementing TCOC, the successor to the Maryland 
All-Payer Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based revenues 
(commonly referred to as global budgets). 
 
MHCC’s mission is to plan for health system needs, promote informed decision making, 
increase accountability, and improve access in a rapidly changing health care environment 
by providing timely and accurate information on availability, cost, and quality of services 
to policymakers, purchasers, providers, and the public. 
 
MCHRC was established in 2005 to expand health care access through community health 
resources. Historically, MCHRC mainly funded the State’s safety net providers. However, 
the commission’s charge has been expanded in recent years. Chapter 36 of 2021 (the 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation) established the Maryland Consortium 
on Coordinated Community Supports within MCHRC. Part of the consortium’s charge is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 887/ Page 3 
to administer the Coordinated Community Supports Partnerships grant program. 
Chapters 741 and 742 required MCHRC to establish a Pathways to Health Equity/Health 
Equity Resource Community (better known as HERC) program and provide grant funding 
to reduce health disparities, improve health outcomes, improve access to primary care, 
promote primary and secondary prevention services, and reduce health care costs and 
hospital admissions and readmissions. 
 
MIA is responsible for licensing and regulating insurers, insurance agents, and brokers who 
conduct business in the State and for monitoring the financial solvency of licensed insurers. 
MIA is also responsible for collecting taxes levied on all premiums collected by insurance 
companies within the State. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, MDH must contract with an independent consultant 
to study HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA, as specified, and submit a report on the 
results of the study by January 1, 2026. 
 
MDH advises that the cost to procure an independent consult for the study is $50,000. As 
the bill takes effect October 1, 2024, and the report is due January 1, 2026, this estimate 
assumes that costs are incurred as $30,000 in fiscal 2025, and $20,000 in fiscal 2026. 
 
Additional Comments:  The AHEAD Model is an option that would allow Maryland to 
continue statewide efforts to improve health care quality and control costs under the TCOC 
model. AHEAD is a model that seeks to drive state and regional health care transformation 
and multi-payer alignment, with the goal of improving the total health of a state population 
and lowering costs across all payers. The federal government released the first of 
two Notice of Funding Opportunities for the AHEAD Model on November 16, 2023. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 694 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 887/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4