START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 469

Chapter 469

(House Bill 809)

AN ACT concerning

Members of Boards, Committees, Commissions, Task Forces, or Workgroups –
Removal or Suspension

FOR the purpose of providing that a member of a certain board, committee, commission,
task force, or workgroup created by State law may be removed or suspended for
misconduct, incompetence, neglect of duties, or other good cause by the individual or
entity that appointed the member under certain circumstances; requiring certain
procedures to be followed before a certain member may be removed or suspended;
providing that this Act is not intended to limit certain rights of members; and
generally relating to the removal or suspension of members of boards, committees,
commissions, task forces, and workgroups.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 10–1701 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 17. Miscellaneous”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

SUBTITLE 17. MISCELLANEOUS.

10–1701.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL APPOINTED FOR A
FIXED TERM TO A BOARD, COMMITTEE, COMMISSION, TASK FORCE, OR WORKGROUP
CREATED BY STATE LAW.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO THE REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION OF A
MEMBER FROM:

(1) A STANDING COMMITTEE, AS DEFINED IN § 2–101 OF THIS
ARTICLE; OR

(2) A COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 469 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, A MEMBER OF A BOARD,
COMMITTEE, COMMISSION, TASK FORCE, OR WORKGROUP CREATED BY STATE LAW
MAY BE REMOVED OR SUSPENDED FOR MISCONDUCT, INCOMPETENCE, NEGLECT OF
DUTIES, OR OTHER GOOD CAUSE BY THE INDIVIDUAL OR ENTITY THAT APPOINTED
THE MEMBER.

(D) (1) AN EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN INDIVIDUAL OR ENTITY THAT APPOINTED A MEMBER MAY REMOVE
OR SUSPEND THE MEMBER IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION
ONLY AFTER:

(1) (I) CONSULTATION WITH THE CHAIR OF THE BOARD,
COMMITTEE, COMMISSION, TASK FORCE, OR WORKGROUP; AND

(2) (II) THE MEMBER HAS BEEN GIVEN NOTICE AND AN
OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD REGARDING THE REASON FOR REMOVAL OR
SUSPENSION.

(2) THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION
DO NOT APPLY IF THE MEMBER BEING REMOVED OR SUSPENDED IS THE CHAIR OF
THE BOARD, COMMITTEE, COMMISSION, TASK FORCE, OR WORKGROUP.

(E) NOTHING IN THIS SECTION IS INTENDED TO LIMIT THE RIGHTS OF A
MEMBER TO EXPRESS THE MEMBER’S VIEWS ON MATTERS OF PUBLIC CONCERN TO
THE FULLEST EXTENT PROTECTED FOR A PUBLIC OFFICIAL, AS DEFINED IN § 5–101
OF THE GENERAL PROVISIONS ARTICLE, BY THE U.S. CONSTITUTION OR BY THE
MARYLAND CONSTITUTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2