START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 865 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 865 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance - Coverage for 
Prostheses (So Every Body Can Move Act) 
 
   
This bill expands the current mandated benefit for coverage of prosthetic devices to be 
coverage for prostheses and replacement for prostheses. Beginning January 1, 2025, 
Medicaid must provide coverage for prostheses, as specified. Each insurer, nonprofit health 
service plan, and health maintenance organization (collectively known as carriers) and 
Medicaid managed care organization (MCO) must submit a specified compliance report 
by June 30, 2030, which must be aggregated and reported to specified committees of the 
General Assembly by December 31, 2030. The Maryland Health Care Commission 
(MHCC) and the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must review utilization of 
specified codes, evaluate the cost impact of requiring coverage for orthoses, and report to 
specified committees of the General Assembly by December 1, 2024. The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2025, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, 
delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $1.7 million  
(50% general funds, 50% federal funds) in FY 2025; federal fund revenues increase 
accordingly. Future years reflect annualization and enrollment growth. Minimal special 
fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) in FY 2025 only 
from the $125 rate and form filing fee; any additional workload for MIA can be handled 
with existing budgeted resources. No meaningful impact on the State Employee and Retiree 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program, as discussed below. This bill increases the cost of 
an entitlement program beginning in FY 2025. 
 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
- 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Revenue 
$0.8 
$1.7 
$1.8 
$1.8 
$1.9 
GF/FF Exp. 
$1.7 
$3.5 
$3.6 
$3.7 
$3.8 
Net Effect 
($0.8) 
($1.7) 
($1.8) 
($1.8) 
($1.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 865/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  To the extent health insurance costs increase as a result of the bill, health 
care expenditures for local governments that purchase fully insured health benefit plans 
may increase. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Coverage of Prostheses 
 
Definitions:  The term “prosthetic device” is changed to “prosthesis” and expanded to 
include a custom-designed, -fabricated, -fitted, or -modified device to treat partial or total 
limb loss for purposes of restoring physiological function. 
 
Medical Necessity:  Covered benefits include prostheses determined by a treating health 
care provider to be medically necessary for completing activities of daily living, essential 
job-related activities, or performing physical activities to maximize the whole-body health 
and lower or upper limb function of the insured or enrollee. 
 
Coverage Requirements:  A carrier must provide – once annually – coverage for 
prostheses, components of prostheses, and repairs to prostheses, as well as replacements of 
prostheses and prosthesis components. 
 
Limitations:  Coverage for prostheses may not be subject to a higher copayment or 
coinsurance than for other similar medical and surgical benefits under the policy or 
contract. 
 
Replacement of Prostheses or Prosthesis Components:  Coverage for replacement of 
prostheses must be provided if an ordering health care provider determines that the 
provision of a replacement prosthesis (or a component) is necessary (1) because of a change 
in the physiological condition of the patient; (2) unless necessitated by misuse, because of 
an irreparable change in the condition of the prosthesis or component; or (3) unless 
necessitated by misuse, because the condition of the prosthesis or component requires 
repairs that cost more than 60% of the cost of replacing the prosthesis or component. A 
carrier may require an ordering health care provider to confirm that the prosthesis or 
component being replaced meets these requirements if the prosthesis or component is less 
than three years old. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 865/ Page 3 
Provider Network:  A carrier that uses a provider panel for a policy or contract and the 
provision of benefits for prostheses must comply with existing requirements governing 
provider panels. Specifically, a carrier must (1) ensure that all enrollees, including adults 
and children, have access to providers and covered services without unreasonable travel or 
delay and (2) include standards that ensure access to providers, including essential 
community providers, that serve predominantly low-income and medically underserved 
individuals or include alternative standards for addressing the needs of low-income, 
medically underserved individuals. 
 
Medicaid Coverage of Prostheses 
 
Beginning January 1, 2025, Medicaid must provide coverage for prostheses in accordance 
with the same requirements applicable to carriers. 
 
Uncodified language expresses the intent of the General Assembly that the bill may not be 
construed to require Medicaid MCOs to cover additional Healthcare Common Procedure 
Coding System (HCPCS) “L” codes for prosthetic procedures and devices beyond those 
that are covered by MCOs as of December 31, 2024. 
 
Compliance Reporting Requirement 
 
By June 30, 2030, each carrier and Medicaid MCO must report to MIA and MDH on its 
compliance with the bill for calendar 2025 through 2028. The report must be in a form 
jointly prescribed by MIA and MDH and include the number of claims and the total amount 
of claims paid in the State for coverage of prostheses. MIA and MDH must aggregate the 
data by calendar year in a joint report. By December 31, 2030, MIA and MDH must submit 
a joint report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee. 
 
Review of Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System “L” Codes 
 
MHCC and MDH, in consultation with MIA, must review utilization of “L” codes and 
related codes within the All-Payer Claims Database (APCD) and evaluate the cost impact 
of requiring coverage for orthoses, including medically necessary activity-specific 
orthoses, by Medicaid and commercial health insurance plans. By December 1, 2024, 
MHCC and MDH must report the findings of the review to specified committees of the 
General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that certain carriers must provide. Each health insurance contract delivered or 
issued in the State by a nonprofit health service plan must provide benefits for orthopedic 
braces. Carriers must provide coverage for prosthetic devices (an artificial device to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 865/ Page 4 
replace, in whole or in part, a leg, arm, or eye), components of prosthetic devices, and 
repair of prosthetic devices. Prosthetic devices may not be subject to a higher copayment 
or coinsurance requirement than those required for any primary care benefits. A carrier 
may not impose an annual or lifetime dollar maximum on coverage for prosthetic devices, 
separate from any maximum that applies in the aggregate to all covered benefits. A carrier 
may not establish requirements for medical necessity or appropriateness for prosthetic 
devices that are more restrictive than those under the Medicare Coverage Database. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires nongrandfathered health 
plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include rehabilitative and 
habilitative services and devices. Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs 
must be included in the State benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits 
mandated by State law, must be the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit 
plans and health benefit plans offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health 
plans) offered outside the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified 
health plans offered in MHBE. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
Medicaid Coverage of Prostheses 
 
Current Coverage for Durable Medical Equipment:  Medicaid does not apply copayment 
or lifetime limit requirements to durable medical equipment (DME). Medicaid’s 
fee-for-service (FFS) participants have access to medically necessary DME. Medicaid 
contracts with a utilization control agent that is responsible for receiving and processing 
DME requests for FFS participants. 
 
MCOs provide coverage for DME for HealthChoice participants and may require prior 
authorization. MDH advises that MCO coverage does not currently include  
87 HCPCS “L” codes (codes used by providers to bill for orthotic and prosthetic procedures 
and devices) that are covered under FFS and Medicare. 
 
Estimated Impact on Expenditures:  Medicaid advises that expenditures increase due to the 
bill’s “whole-body health” provision, which requires coverage of prostheses for 
“performing physical activities to maximize the whole-body health and lower or upper limb 
function.” Thus, Medicaid expenditures increase by an estimated $1.7 million in 
fiscal 2025 (50% general funds, 50% federal funds), which accounts for implementation of 
the bill’s Medicaid provisions effective January 1, 2025. This estimate reflects the cost of 
claims for whole-body health-related prostheses. The information and assumptions used in 
calculating the estimate are stated below: 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 865/ Page 5 
 
An average of 1,000 Medicaid participants have claims or encounters for DME with 
an associated limb loss diagnosis annually. 
 
An estimated 30% of these individuals (300) will seek whole-body health-related 
prostheses under the bill. 
 
The average cost of a “whole-body health” prosthesis is $11,250. 
 
Total costs for whole-body health-related DME claims are $3.4 million on an 
annualized basis ($1.7 million in fiscal 2025). 
 
Future years reflect 3% annual growth in the Medicaid population. 
 
Review of Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System “L” Codes 
 
The bill requires MHCC and MDH, in consultation with MIA, to review utilization of 
“L” codes and related codes within the APCD and evaluate the cost of requiring coverage 
for orthoses, including medically necessary activity-specific orthoses, by Medicaid and 
commercial health insurance plans. MHCC and MDH must report their findings to 
specified committees of the General Assembly by December 1, 2024. MHCC and MDH 
can complete this review and submit the required report using existing budgeted resources.  
 
State Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program 
 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that the State Employee and Retiree 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program provides coverage for prostheses. Thus, the bill 
would have a negligible impact on the program.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business health care providers that provide prostheses and 
related services may receive additional business under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill includes a review and related reporting requirement, 
which must be completed by December 1, 2024, which is one month before the bill’s 
effective date of January 1, 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 614 (Senator Beidle, et al.) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 865/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - April 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 6, 2024 
 
md/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6