START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 871 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 871 
(Delegate Jackson) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation - Detached Catalytic Converters - Record-Keeping 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a licensed automotive dismantler, scrap metal processor, or junk dealer 
that acquires all or part of a detached catalytic converter from a person to record and keep 
in the person’s records the vehicle identification number of the vehicle from which the 
catalytic converter was obtained. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State government operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Automotive dismantlers, scrap metal processors, and junk dealers must be 
licensed in order to operate in the State. For each of these professions, State law requires 
licensees to keep detailed records about the automobiles, scrap metal, or junk obtained in 
the course of doing business. State law also includes the circumstances under which these 
records much be submitted to a regulatory agency or a law enforcement officer.  
 
For example, for each purchase of junk or scrap metal in the State, a junk dealer or scrap 
metal processor must keep a record in English that states, among other things (1) the date 
and time of purchase; (2) a description of the junk or scrap metal purchased; and (3) the 
name and address of the individual from whom the junk or scrap metal is acquired.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 871/ Page 2 
Additionally, each automotive dismantler and recycler and scrap processor must record and 
keep for each vehicle acquired, among other things, (1) the name and address of the person 
from whom the vehicle was acquired; (2) the date on which it was acquired; and 
(3) documentary evidence acceptable to the Motor Vehicle Administration of ownership 
of the vehicle. Similar information is not required for the purchase of all or part of a 
catalytic converter (that is not attached to a vehicle). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department of State 
Police; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2