START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 55

Chapter 55

(House Bill 825)

AN ACT concerning

Libraries – Regional Resource Centers – Governing Board Membership

FOR the purpose of increasing the number of public members on the governing board for
each regional resource center; and generally relating to the membership of governing
boards for regional resource centers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–202.1(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–202.1(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

23–202.1.

(a) There is a governing board for each regional resource center.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a governing
board consists of the following members:

(i) A library trustee from each participating library system; and

(ii) Up to [one member] TWO MEMBERS of the public from each area
served by the participating library systems.

(2) (i) The board of trustees of the Washington County Free Library
shall act as the governing board for the Western Maryland Regional Resource Center.

(ii) The bylaws adopted by the board of trustees of the Washington
County Free Library shall govern the composition, appointment, qualifications, terms, and
structure of the governing board.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 55 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2