START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 819 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 819 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Economic Matters and Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Finance – Catastrophic Event Account and Federal Government Shutdown 
Employee Assistance Loan Fund – Noncivilian Federal Employees 
 
 
This bill expands the purposes of the Catastrophic Event Account and the Federal 
Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund so that funds may be used to 
provide financial assistance to federal noncivilian employees, in addition to federal civilian 
employees as authorized under current law, in the event of a full or partial federal 
government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill primarily alters the purposes for which existing funds may be used. 
To the extent it requires administrative changes, the Department of Budget and 
Management (DBM) and the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) can handle them with 
existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Catastrophic Event Account 
 
The Catastrophic Event Account, which is within the State Reserve Fund and administered 
by DBM, enables the State or a local government to respond quickly to a natural disaster 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 819/ Page 2 
or catastrophe that could not be addressed within existing State appropriations. 
Chapters 1 and 2 of 2019, among other things, expanded the account so that it may be used 
for federal civilian employee hardship in the event of a full or partial federal government 
shutdown due to a lapse in federal appropriations. 
 
Funds appropriated to the Catastrophic Event Account (1) may not be used to offset 
operating deficiencies in regular programs of State government but (2) as noted above, may 
be expended to assist a unit of State or local government in funding costs in connection 
with a natural disaster, a catastrophic situation, or a full or partial federal government 
shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
The Catastrophic Event Account consists of direct appropriations in the budget bill. 
Investment earnings are credited to the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day Fund). 
The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes a $10.0 million fiscal 2024 deficiency 
appropriation to the account but no new appropriation in fiscal 2025. The account is 
projected to have a balance of $19.4 million at the end of fiscal 2024. 
 
Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund 
 
The Federal Government Shutdown Employee Assistance Loan Fund, administered by 
MDL, must only be used to provide no-interest loans to civilian federal employees who are 
(1) required to report to work at a work site located in the State and (2) not being paid 
because of a full or partial federal government shutdown due to a lapse in appropriations. 
 
MDL must establish procedures and eligibility criteria for loans from the fund, as specified, 
such as repayment timelines. In addition to funds appropriated in the State budget and other 
sources, the fund consists of (1) money transferred from the Catastrophic Event Account 
and (2) repayments on loans made from the fund. 
 
The State Treasurer’s Office reports that the Federal Government Shutdown Employee 
Assistance Loan Fund has an approximate average daily balance of $375,000 and had 
interest earnings of approximately $1,365 for December, 2023. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 628 (Senator Gile, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 819/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3