START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

Chapter 920

(House Bill 806)

AN ACT concerning

Physician Assistants – Revisions
(Physician Assistant Modernization Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of requiring that a physician assistant have a collaboration agreement,
rather than a delegation agreement, in order to practice as a physician assistant;
altering the scope of practice of a physician assistant; altering the education required
for licensure as a physician assistant; authorizing physician assistants who are
employees of the federal government to perform acts, tasks, or functions as a
physician assistant during a certain disaster; requiring the State Board of
Physicians to review and update the list of advance duties for physician assistants;
and generally relating to physician assistants.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 36–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 36–101(m)(1)(v)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–2A–01(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–2A–01(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–402(c) and 18–802(a)(8)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–802(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–201(a) and 5–601(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–201(s) and 5–601(v)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section ~~12–102(c)(2)(iv),~~ ~~(v),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(vi)~~ 12–102(a) and (c)(2)(iv), 14–306(a), 15–101,
15–103, 15–202(b), 15–205(a), 15–301, 15–302, 15–302.2, 15–303, 15–306,
15–309(a), 15–310, 15–314(a)(41), (43), (44), and (45), 15–317, 15–401, and
15–402.1(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Occupations~~
~~Section~~ ~~12–102(c)(2)(vii)~~ ~~and~~ ~~15–314(a)(42)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 15–202(a)(1) and (2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Health Occupations
Section 15–302.1, 15–302.3, 15–313, and 15–314(a)(42)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 15–302.1, 15–309(c) and (d), and 15–314(a)(42), (43), and (44)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–616(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 13–616(a)(7)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

36–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(m) “Certifying provider” means an individual who:

(1) (v) 1. has an active, unrestricted license to practice as a
physician assistant issued by the State Board of Physicians under Title 15 of the Health
Occupations Article; AND

2. [has an active delegation agreement with a primary
supervising physician COLLABORATION AGREEMENT WITH A PATIENT CARE TEAM
PHYSICIAN who is a certifying provider; and

3.] is in good standing with the State Board of Physicians;

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

3–2A–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following terms have the meanings indicated unless the
context of their use requires otherwise.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) (1) “Health care provider” means a hospital, a related institution as defined
in § 19–301 of the Health – General Article, a medical day care center, a hospice care
program, an assisted living program, a freestanding ambulatory care facility as defined in
§ 19–3B–01 of the Health – General Article, a physician, A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT, an
osteopath, an optometrist, a chiropractor, a registered or licensed practical nurse, a dentist,
a podiatrist, a psychologist, a licensed certified social worker–clinical, and a physical
therapist, licensed or authorized to provide one or more health care services in Maryland.

(2) “Health care provider” does not include any nursing institution
conducted by and for those who rely upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer
alone in accordance with the tenets and practices of a recognized church or religious
denomination.

Article – Education

7–402.

(c) The physical examination required under subsection (b) of this section shall
be completed by:

(1) A licensed physician;

(2) A licensed physician assistant [with a delegation agreement approved
by the State Board of Physicians] WHO HAS AN ACTIVE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT;
or

(3) A certified nurse practitioner.

18–802.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(8) “Physician assistant” means an individual [to whom duties are
delegated by a licensed physician under the rules and regulations of the State Board of
Physicians] LICENSED UNDER TITLE 15 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE TO
PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

Article – Health – General

4–201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(s) “Physician assistant” means an individual who is licensed under Title 15 of
the Health Occupations Article to practice [medicine with physician supervision] AS A
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

5–601.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(v) “Physician assistant” means an individual who is licensed under Title 15 of
the Health Occupations Article to practice [medicine with physician supervision] AS A
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

Article – Health Occupations

12–102.

(a) (1) In this section the following terms have the meanings indicated.

(2) “In the public interest” means the dispensing of drugs or devices by a
licensed dentist, physician, nurse or midwife, or podiatrist to a patient when a pharmacy
is not conveniently available to the patient.

(3) “Nurse or midwife” means an individual licensed or certified by the
Board of Nursing under Title 8 of this article.

(4) [“Personally] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 15–302.2 OF THIS
ARTICLE, “PERSONALLY preparing and dispensing” means that the licensed dentist,
physician, nurse or midwife, or podiatrist:

(i) Is physically present on the premises where the prescription is
filled; and

(ii) Performs a final check of the prescription before it is provided to
the patient.

(c) (2) This title does not prohibit:

(iv) A licensed physician who complies with the requirements of item
(ii) of this paragraph from personally preparing and dispensing a prescription written by:

1. A physician assistant [in accordance with a delegation
agreement that] WHO complies with Title 15, Subtitle 3 of this article; or

2. An advanced practice registered nurse with prescriptive
authority under Title 8 of this article and is working with the physician in the same office
setting;
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(v)~~ ~~A~~ ~~hospital–based~~ ~~clinic~~ ~~from~~ ~~dispensing~~ ~~prescriptions~~ ~~to~~ ~~its~~
patients; [or]

~~(vi)~~ ~~An~~ ~~individual~~ ~~licensed~~ ~~or~~ ~~certified~~ ~~under~~ ~~Title~~ ~~8~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~
~~from~~ ~~personally~~ ~~preparing~~ ~~and~~ ~~dispensing~~ ~~a~~ ~~drug~~ ~~or~~ ~~device~~ ~~as~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~under~~ ~~Title~~ ~~8~~ ~~of~~
this article; OR

(VII) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT FROM PERSONALLY PREPARING
AND DISPENSING A PRESCRIPTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–302.1 OF THIS
~~ARTICLE.~~

14–306.

(a) [To] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTIONS (E) AND (F) OF THIS
SECTION, TO the extent permitted by the rules, regulations, and orders of the Board, an
individual to whom duties are delegated by a licensed physician OR PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT may perform those duties without a license as provided in this section.

15–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

[(b) “Alternate supervising physician” means one or more physicians designated
by the primary supervising physician to provide supervision of a physician assistant in
accordance with the delegation agreement on file with the Board.]

[(c)] (B) “Ambulatory surgical facility” means a facility:

(1) Accredited by:

(i) The American Association for Accreditation of Ambulatory
Surgical Facilities;

(ii) The Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care; or

(iii) The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations; or

(2) Certified to participate in the Medicare program, as enacted by Title
XVIII of the Social Security Act.

[(d)] (C) “Board” means the State Board of Physicians, established under §
14–201 of this article.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(D) (1) “COLLABORATION” MEANS THE COMMUNICATION AND
DECISION–MAKING PROCESS AMONG HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS WHO ARE MEMBERS
OF A PATIENT CARE TEAM RELATED TO THE TREATMENT OF A PATIENT THAT
INCLUDES THE DEGREE OF COOPERATION NECESSARY TO PROVIDE TREATMENT
AND CARE TO THE PATIENT AND INCLUDES:

(I) COMMUNICATION OF DATA AND INFORMATION ABOUT THE
TREATMENT AND CARE OF A PATIENT, INCLUDING THE EXCHANGE OF CLINICAL
OBSERVATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS; AND

(II) DEVELOPMENT OF AN APPROPRIATE PLAN OF CARE,
INCLUDING:

1. DECISIONS REGARDING THE HEALTH CARE
PROVIDED;

2. ACCESSING AND ASSESSMENT OF APPROPRIATE
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES OR EXPERTISE; AND

3. ARRANGEMENT OF APPROPRIATE REFERRALS,
TESTING, OR STUDIES.

(2) “COLLABORATION” DOES NOT REQUIRE THE CONSTANT,
PHYSICAL PRESENCE OF A COLLABORATING PHYSICIAN ON–SITE IN THE PRACTICE
SETTING, IF THE COLLABORATING PHYSICIAN IS ACCESSIBLE BY ELECTRONIC
MEANS.

(E) “COLLABORATION AGREEMENT” MEANS A DOCUMENT THAT:

(1) OUTLINES THE COLLABORATION BETWEEN A PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT AND:

(I) AN INDIVIDUAL PHYSICIAN; OR

(II) A GROUP OF PHYSICIANS; AND

(2) IS DEVELOPED BY A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT AND THE PHYSICIAN
OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS; AND

(3) IS SUBMITTED TO THE BOARD.

[(e)] (F) “Committee” means the Physician Assistant Advisory Committee.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(f)] (G) “Controlled dangerous substances” has the meaning stated in § 5–101
of the Criminal Law Article.

[(g)] (H) “Correctional facility” includes a State or local correctional facility.

[(h) “Delegated medical acts” means activities that constitute the practice of
medicine delegated by a physician under Title 14 of this article.

(i) “Delegation agreement” means a document that is executed by a primary
supervising physician and a physician assistant containing the requirements of § 15–302
of this title.

(i–1)] (I) “Disciplinary panel” means a disciplinary panel of the Board
established under § 14–401 of this article.

(j) “Dispense” or “dispensing” has the meaning stated in § 12–101 of this article.

(k) “Drug sample” means a unit of a prescription drug that is intended to promote
the sale of the drug and is not intended for sale.

(l) “Hospital” means:

(1) A hospital as defined under § 19–301 of the Health – General Article;

(2) A comprehensive care facility that:

(i) Meets the requirements of a hospital–based skilled nursing
facility under federal law; and

(ii) Offers acute care in the same building; and

(3) An emergency room that is physically connected to a hospital or a
freestanding medical facility that is licensed under Title 19, Subtitle 3A of the Health –
General Article.

(m) “License” means a license issued by the Board to a physician assistant under
this title.

(n) “National certifying examination” means the Physician Assistant National
Certifying Examination administered by the National Commission on Certification of
Physician Assistants or its successor.

(O) “PATIENT CARE TEAM” MEANS A MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAM OF HEALTH
CARE PROVIDERS ACTIVELY FUNCTIONING AS A UNIT WITH THE LEADERSHIP OF

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

ONE OR MORE PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIANS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING
AND DELIVERING HEALTH CARE TO A PATIENT OR GROUP OF PATIENTS.

(P) “PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN” MEANS A LICENSED PHYSICIAN WHO
REGULARLY PRACTICES IN THE STATE AND WHO PROVIDES LEADERSHIP IN THE
CARE OF PATIENTS AS PART OF A PATIENT CARE TEAM.

[(o)] (Q) “Physician assistant” means an individual who is licensed under this
title to practice [medicine with physician supervision] AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

[(p)] (R) “Practice as a physician assistant” means the performance of medical
acts that are:

[(1) Delegated by a supervising physician to a physician assistant;

(2) Within the supervising physician’s scope of practice; and

(3) Appropriate to the physician assistant’s education, training, and
experience]

(1) AUTHORIZED UNDER A LICENSE ISSUED BY THE BOARD; AND

(2) AUTHORIZED UNDER THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT’S
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

[(q)] (S) “Prescriptive authority” means the authority [delegated by a primary
or alternate supervising physician to] OF a physician assistant to:

(1) Prescribe and administer controlled dangerous substances, prescription
drugs, medical devices, and the oral, written, or electronic ordering of medications; and

(2) Dispense as provided under [§ 15–302.2(b), (c), and (d)] § 15–302.1 of
this title.

[(r) “Primary supervising physician” means a physician who:

(1) Completes a delegation agreement that meets the requirements under
§§ 15–301(d) and (e) and 15–302 of this title and files a copy with the Board;

(2) Acts as the physician responsible to ensure that a physician assistant
practices medicine in accordance with this title and the regulations adopted under this title;

(3) Ensures that a physician assistant practices within the scope of practice
of the primary supervising physician or any designated alternate supervising physician;
and

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) Ensures that a list of alternate supervising physicians is maintained at
the practice setting.]

[(s)] (T) “Public health facility” means a site where clinical public health
services are rendered under the auspices of the Department, a local health department in
a county, or the Baltimore City Health Department.

[(t)] (U) “Starter dosage” means an amount of a drug sufficient to begin therapy:

(1) Of short duration of 72 hours or less; or

(2) Prior to obtaining a larger quantity of the drug to complete therapy.

[(u) (1) “Supervision” means the responsibility of a physician to exercise
on–site supervision or immediately available direction for physician assistants performing
delegated medical acts.

(2) “Supervision” includes physician oversight of and acceptance of direct
responsibility for the patient services and care rendered by a physician assistant, including
continuous availability to the physician assistant in person, through written instructions,
or by electronic means and by designation of one or more alternate supervising physicians.]

15–103.

(a) In this section, “alternative health care system” has the meaning stated in §
1–401 of this article.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, an employer of a physician
assistant shall report to the Board, on the form prescribed by the Board, any termination
of employment of the physician assistant if the cause of termination is related to a quality
of care issue.

(2) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, a [supervising physician]
PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS THAT DEVELOPS A COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT WITH A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT or an employer of a physician assistant shall
notify the Board within 10 days of the termination of employment of the physician assistant
for reasons that would be grounds for discipline under this title.

(3) A [supervising physician and a] PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF
PHYSICIANS THAT DEVELOPS A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT WITH A PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT OR THE physician assistant shall notify the Board within 10 days of the
termination of the relationship under a [delegation agreement for any reason]
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(c) Except as otherwise provided under subsections (b) and (d) of this section, a
hospital, a related institution, an alternative health care system, or an employer of a
physician assistant shall report to the Board any limitation, reduction, or other change of
the terms of employment of the physician assistant or any termination of employment of
the physician assistant for any reason that might be grounds for disciplinary action under
§ 15–314 of this title.

(d) A hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or employer
that has reason to know that a physician assistant has committed an action or has a
condition that might be grounds for reprimand or probation of the physician assistant or
suspension or revocation of the license of the physician assistant under § 15–314 of this
title because the physician assistant is alcohol– or drug–impaired is not required to report
to the Board if:

(1) The hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or
employer knows that the physician assistant is:

(i) In an alcohol or drug treatment program that is accredited by the
Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations or is certified by the
Department; or

(ii) Under the care of a health care practitioner who is competent
and capable of dealing with alcoholism and drug abuse;

(2) The hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or
employer is able to verify that the physician assistant remains in the treatment program
until discharge; and

(3) The action or condition of the physician assistant has not caused injury
to any person while the physician assistant is practicing as a licensed physician assistant.

(e) (1) If the physician assistant enters, or is considering entering, an alcohol
or drug treatment program that is accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of
Healthcare Organizations or that is certified by the Department, the physician assistant
shall notify the hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or employer of
the physician assistant’s decision to enter the treatment program.

(2) If the physician assistant fails to provide the notice required under
paragraph (1) of this subsection, and the hospital, related institution, alternative health
care system, or employer learns that the physician assistant has entered a treatment
program, the hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or employer shall
report to the Board that the physician assistant has entered a treatment program and has
failed to provide the required notice.

(3) If the physician assistant is found to be noncompliant with the
treatment program’s policies and procedures while in the treatment program, the

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

treatment program shall notify the hospital, related institution, alternative health care
system, or employer of the physician assistant’s noncompliance.

(4) On receipt of the notification required under paragraph (3) of this
subsection, the hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or employer of
the physician assistant shall report the physician assistant’s noncompliance to the Board.

(f) A person is not required under this section to make any report that would be
in violation of any federal or State law, rule, or regulation concerning the confidentiality of
alcohol– and drug–abuse patient records.

(g) The hospital, related institution, alternative health care system, or employer
shall submit the report within 10 days of any action described in this section.

(h) A report under this section is not subject to subpoena or discovery in any civil
action other than a proceeding arising out of a hearing and decision of the Board or a
disciplinary panel under this title.

(i) (1) A disciplinary panel may impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for
failure to report under this section.

(2) The Board shall pay any fees collected under this subsection into the
General Fund of the State.

(j) An employer shall make the report required under this section to the Board
within 5 days after the date of termination of employment.

(k) The Board shall adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this section.

15–202.

(a) (1) The Committee shall consist of 7 members appointed by the Board.

(2) Of the 7 Committee members:

(i) 3 shall be licensed physicians;

(ii) 3 shall be licensed physician assistants; and

(iii) 1 shall be a consumer.

(b) Of the three physician members of the Committee, two shall [be previously or
~~currently~~ ~~serving~~ ~~as~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physicians~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~under~~ ~~a~~
Board–approved delegation agreement] HAVE DEVELOPED A COLLABORATION
CURRENTLY SERVING AS A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN UNDER A
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT WITH A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

15–205.

(a) In addition to the powers set forth elsewhere in this title, the Committee, on
its initiative or on the Board’s request, may:

(1) Recommend to the Board regulations for carrying out the provisions of
this title;

(2) Recommend to the Board approval, modification, or disapproval of an
application for licensure [or a delegation agreement];

(3) Report to the Board any conduct of a [supervising physician]
PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS WHO DEVELOPS A COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT WITH A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT or a physician assistant that may be cause
for disciplinary action under this title or under § 14–404 of this article; and

(4) Report to the Board any alleged unauthorized practice of a physician
assistant.

15–301.

(a) [Nothing in this] THIS title may NOT be construed to authorize a physician
assistant to practice [independent of a primary or alternate supervising physician]
INDEPENDENTLY.

(b) A license issued to a physician assistant shall limit the physician assistant’s
scope of practice to medical acts:

[(1) Delegated by the primary or alternate supervising physician;]

[(2)] (1) Appropriate to the education, training, and experience of the
physician assistant;

[(3)] (2) Customary to the practice of the [primary or alternate
supervising] physician; and

(2) CUSTOMARY TO THE PRACTICE OF A PATIENT CARE TEAM
PHYSICIAN; AND

[(4)] (3) Consistent with the [delegation] COLLABORATION agreement
~~filed~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board.~~

(3) IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH THE COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) Patient services that may be provided by a physician assistant UNDER A
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT include:

[(1) (i) Taking complete, detailed, and accurate patient histories; and

(ii) Reviewing patient records to develop comprehensive medical
status reports;

(2) Performing physical examinations and recording all pertinent patient
data;

(3) Interpreting and evaluating patient data as authorized by the primary
or alternate supervising physician for the purpose of determining management and
treatment of patients;

(4) Initiating requests for or performing diagnostic procedures as indicated
by pertinent data and as authorized by the supervising physician;

(5) Providing instructions and guidance regarding medical care matters to
patients;

(6) Assisting the primary or alternate supervising physician in the delivery
of services to patients who require medical care in the home and in health care institutions,
including:

(i) Recording patient progress notes;

(ii) Issuing diagnostic orders; and

(iii) Transcribing or executing specific orders at the direction of the
primary or alternate supervising physician; and

(7) Exercising prescriptive authority under a delegation agreement and in
accordance with § 15–302.2 of this subtitle.]

(1) OBTAINING COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH HISTORIES;

(2) PERFORMING PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS;

(3) EVALUATING, DIAGNOSING, MANAGING, AND PROVIDING
MEDICAL TREATMENT;

(4) ORDERING, PERFORMING, AND INTERPRETING DIAGNOSTIC
STUDIES, THERAPEUTIC PROCEDURES, AND LABORATORY TESTS;

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(5) ORDERING DIAGNOSTIC TESTS AND USING THE FINDINGS OR
RESULTS IN THE CARE OF PATIENTS;

(4) INTERPRETING AND EVALUATING PATIENT DATA AS AUTHORIZED
BY A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING
MANAGEMENT AND TREATMENT OF PATIENTS;

(5) INITIATING REQUESTS FOR OR PERFORMING DIAGNOSTIC
PROCEDURES AS INDICATED BY PERTINENT DATA AND AS AUTHORIZED BY A
PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN;

(6) EXERCISING PRESCRIPTIVE AUTHORITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
15–302.1 15–302.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(7) INFORMING PATIENTS ABOUT HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE
PREVENTION;

(8) PROVIDING CONSULTATIONS;

(9) WRITING MEDICAL ORDERS;

(10) PROVIDING SERVICES IN HEALTH CARE FACILITIES, INCLUDING
HOSPITALS, NURSING FACILITIES, ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES, AND HOSPICE
~~FACILITIES;~~

(11) (10) OBTAINING INFORMED CONSENT;

(12) DELEGATING OR ASSIGNING THERAPEUTIC AND DIAGNOSTIC
~~MEASURES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~PERFORMED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~UNLICENSED~~ ~~PERSONNEL~~ ~~AND~~
~~SUPERVISING~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~UNLICENSED~~ ~~PERSONNEL~~ ~~PERFORMING~~ ~~THERAPEUTIC~~
AND DIAGNOSTIC MEASURES;

(11) DELEGATING MEDICAL ACTS TO LICENSED OR UNLICENSED
PERSONNEL AS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 14–306 OF THIS ARTICLE IF THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT HAS AT LEAST 7,000 HOURS OF CLINICAL PRACTICE EXPERIENCE; AND

(13) (12) CERTIFYING A PATIENT’S HEALTH OR DISABILITY AS
REQUIRED BY A FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL PROGRAM; AND

(14) AUTHENTICATING ANY DOCUMENT THAT A PHYSICIAN MAY
AUTHENTICATE THROUGH SIGNATURE, CERTIFICATION, STAMP VERIFICATION,
AFFIDAVIT, OR ENDORSEMENT.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this title, an individual shall be
licensed by the Board before the individual may practice as a physician assistant.

(2) Except as otherwise provided in this title, a physician may not
[supervise] ENTER INTO A COLLABORATION COLLABORATE WITH a physician assistant
in the performance of [delegated] medical acts without filing NOTIFYING THE BOARD OF
a completed [delegation] COLLABORATION agreement with the Board.

(3) Except as otherwise provided in this title or in a medical emergency, a
physician assistant may not perform any medical act ~~for~~ ~~which:~~

(i) The FOR WHICH THE individual has not been licensed; and

(ii) [The medical acts have not been delegated by a primary or
alternate supervising physician] THE INDIVIDUAL HAS NOT RECEIVED APPROPRIATE
EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND EXPERIENCE

(II) THAT HAS NOT BEEN DELEGATED IN A MANNER
CONSISTENT WITH THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT;

(III) THAT IS NOT APPROPRIATE TO THE EDUCATION, TRAINING,
AND EXPERIENCE OF THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT; AND

(IV) THAT IS NOT CUSTOMARY TO THE PRACTICE OF A PATIENT
CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN LISTED ON THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

[(e) A physician assistant is the agent of the primary or alternate supervising
physician in the performance of all practice–related activities, including the oral, written,
or electronic ordering of diagnostic, therapeutic, and other medical services.]

(E) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT SHALL CONSULT AND COLLABORATE WITH OR
REFER AN INDIVIDUAL TO AN APPROPRIATE LICENSED PHYSICIAN OR ANY OTHER
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER AS APPROPRIATE.

(F) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WHO HAS NOT BEEN PREVIOUSLY LICENSED BY
THE BOARD TO PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT OR LICENSED, CERTIFIED, OR
~~REGISTERED~~ ~~AS~~ ~~A~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~ASSISTANT~~ ~~BY~~ ~~ANOTHER~~ ~~STATE~~ ~~REGULATORY~~
~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~MENTORED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PHYSICIANS~~ ~~WHO~~
~~ARE~~ ~~IDENTIFIED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INITIAL~~ ~~COLLABORATION~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONSULT~~ ~~AND~~
COLLABORATE WITH THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT FOR AT LEAST 18 MONTHS AFTER
THE DATE AN INITIAL COLLABORATION AGREEMENT IS SUBMITTED TO THE BOARD.

[(f)] (G) Except as OTHERWISE provided in [subsection (g) of this section] THIS
TITLE, the following individuals may practice as a physician assistant without a license:

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(1) A physician assistant student enrolled in a physician assistant
educational program that is accredited by the Accreditation Review Commission on
Education for the Physician Assistant or its successor and approved by the Board; or

(2) A physician assistant employed in the service of the federal government
while performing duties incident to that employment.

[(g) A physician may not delegate prescriptive authority to a physician assistant
student in a training program that is accredited by the Accreditation Review Commission
on Education for the Physician Assistant or its successor.]

(h) (G) (1) If a medical act that is to be [delegated] PERFORMED BY A
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT under this section is a part of the practice of a health occupation
that is regulated under this article by another board, any rule or regulation concerning that
medical act shall be adopted jointly by the State Board of Physicians and the board that
regulates the other health occupation.

(2) If the two boards cannot agree on a proposed rule or regulation, the
proposal shall be submitted to the Secretary for a final decision.

15–302.

(a) A physician [may delegate medical acts to a physician assistant only after:

(1) A delegation agreement has been executed and filed with the Board;
and

(2) Any advanced duties have been authorized as required under
subsection (c) of this section] ASSISTANT MAY PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
ONLY AFTER SUBMITTING A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO THE BOARD
PROVIDING NOTICE TO THE BOARD, IN A MANNER APPROVED BY THE BOARD, OF:

(1) THE EXECUTED COLLABORATION AGREEMENT; AND

(2) EACH PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN LISTED ON THE
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

(b) (1) [The delegation agreement] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT shall contain:

[(1)] (I) A description of the qualifications of the [primary supervising
physician and] PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT AND THE PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS
WHO DEVELOPED THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT WITH THE physician assistant;

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) ANY PRACTICE SPECIALTY OF THE PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF
PHYSICIANS; AND

[(2)] (III) A description of the settings in which the physician assistant will
practice[;

(3) A description of the continuous physician supervision mechanisms that
are reasonable and appropriate to the practice setting;

(4) A description of the delegated medical acts that are within the primary
or alternate supervising physician’s scope of practice and require specialized education or
training that is consistent with accepted medical practice;

(5) An attestation that all medical acts to be delegated to the physician
assistant are within the scope of practice of the primary or alternate supervising physician
and appropriate to the physician assistant’s education, training, and level of competence;

(6) An attestation of continuous supervision of the physician assistant by
the primary supervising physician through the mechanisms described in the delegation
agreement;

(7) An attestation by the primary supervising physician of the physician’s
acceptance of responsibility for any care given by the physician assistant;

(8) A description prepared by the primary supervising physician of the
process by which the physician assistant’s practice is reviewed appropriate to the practice
setting and consistent with current standards of acceptable medical practice;

(9) An attestation by the primary supervising physician that the physician
will respond in a timely manner when contacted by the physician assistant;

(10) The following statement: “The primary supervising physician and the
physician assistant attest that:

(i) They will establish a plan for the types of cases that require a
physician plan of care or require that the patient initially or periodically be seen by the
supervising physician; and

(ii) The patient will be provided access to the supervising physician
on request”; and

(11) Any other information deemed necessary by the Board to carry out the
provisions of this subtitle].

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(2) IF A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WHO SUBMITS AN INITIAL
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO THE BOARD HAS NOT BEEN PREVIOUSLY
LICENSED BY THE BOARD TO PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT OR LICENSED,
CERTIFIED, OR REGISTERED AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT BY ANOTHER STATE
REGULATORY AUTHORITY, THE INITIAL COLLABORATION AGREEMENT SHALL
~~IDENTIFY~~ ~~A~~ ~~LICENSED~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PHYSICIANS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~CONSULT~~ ~~AND~~
COLLABORATE WITH THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT FOR AT LEAST 18 MONTHS AFTER
THE DATE THE INITIAL COLLABORATION AGREEMENT IS SUBMITTED TO THE BOARD.

(3) (2) A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT MAY INCLUDE PROVISIONS
LIMITING THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT’S SCOPE OF PRACTICE, SPECIFYING OFFICE
PROCEDURES, OR OTHERWISE DETAILING THE PRACTICE OF THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT AS AGREED BY THE PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS AND THE
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

(c) (1) The Board may not require [prior] approval of a [delegation agreement
~~that~~ ~~includes~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duties,~~ ~~if~~ ~~an~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duty~~ ~~will~~ ~~be~~ ~~performed~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~or~~
~~ambulatory~~ ~~surgical~~ ~~facility,~~ ~~provided~~ ~~that:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~A~~ ~~physician,~~ ~~with~~ ~~credentials~~ ~~that~~ ~~have~~ ~~been~~ ~~reviewed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
~~hospital~~ ~~or~~ ~~ambulatory~~ ~~surgical~~ ~~facility~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~condition~~ ~~of~~ ~~employment,~~ ~~as~~ ~~an~~ ~~independent~~
~~contractor,~~ ~~or~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~member~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~medical~~ ~~staff,~~ ~~supervises~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~has~~ ~~credentials~~ ~~that~~ ~~have~~ ~~been~~ ~~reviewed~~
~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~or~~ ~~ambulatory~~ ~~surgical~~ ~~facility~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~condition~~ ~~of~~ ~~employment,~~ ~~as~~ ~~an~~
~~independent~~ ~~contractor,~~ ~~or~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~member~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~medical~~ ~~staff;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~Each~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duty~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~delegated~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~is~~
~~reviewed~~ ~~and~~ ~~approved~~ ~~within~~ ~~a~~ ~~process~~ ~~approved~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~governing~~ ~~body~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~health~~ ~~care~~
facility before the physician assistant performs the advanced duties] COLLABORATION
~~AGREEMENT.~~

[(2) (i) In any setting that does not meet the requirements of paragraph
~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection,~~ ~~a~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~shall~~ ~~obtain~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board’s~~ ~~approval~~ ~~of~~
~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~that~~ ~~includes~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duties,~~ ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~
~~performs~~ ~~the~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duties.~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~1.~~ ~~Before~~ ~~a~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~may~~ ~~perform~~ ~~X–ray~~ ~~duties~~
~~authorized~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~14–306(e)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~medical~~ ~~office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~delegating~~
~~the~~ ~~duties,~~ ~~a~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~shall~~ ~~obtain~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board’s~~ ~~approval~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~
~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~that~~ ~~includes~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duties~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~subsubparagraph~~
~~2~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subparagraph.~~

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~2.~~ ~~The~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duties~~ ~~set~~ ~~forth~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~
~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subparagraph~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~limited~~ ~~to~~ ~~nonfluoroscopic~~ ~~X–ray~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
extremities, anterior–posterior and lateral, not including the head.]

[(3)] (2) [Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subsection, a primary
supervising physician shall obtain the Board’s approval of a delegation agreement before]
A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE BOARD A COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT THAT CONTAINS ANESTHESIA DUTIES BEFORE the physician assistant
~~may~~ ~~administer,~~ ~~monitor,~~ ~~or~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~general~~ ~~anesthesia~~ ~~or~~ ~~neuroaxial~~ ~~anesthesia,~~
~~including~~ ~~spinal~~ ~~and~~ ~~epidural~~ ~~techniques,~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~agreement.~~

[(d) For a delegation agreement containing advanced duties that require Board
~~approval,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~shall~~ ~~review~~ ~~the~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~and~~ ~~recommend~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~Board~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~be~~ ~~approved,~~ ~~rejected,~~ ~~or~~ ~~modified~~ ~~to~~ ~~ensure~~
~~conformance~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title.~~

~~(e)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~may~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~a~~ ~~personal~~ ~~interview~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~
~~physician~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant.~~

~~(f)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~On~~ ~~review~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Committee’s~~ ~~recommendation~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~a~~ ~~primary~~
~~supervising~~ ~~physician’s~~ ~~request~~ ~~to~~ ~~delegate~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~duties~~ ~~as~~ ~~described~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~
~~agreement,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~May~~ ~~approve~~ ~~the~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement;~~ ~~or~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~1.~~ ~~If~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~meet~~ ~~the~~ ~~applicable~~
~~education,~~ ~~training,~~ ~~and~~ ~~experience~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~to~~ ~~perform~~ ~~the~~ ~~specified~~ ~~delegated~~ ~~acts,~~
~~may~~ ~~modify~~ ~~or~~ ~~disapprove~~ ~~the~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement;~~ ~~and~~

~~2.~~ ~~If~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~takes~~ ~~an~~ ~~action~~ ~~under~~ ~~item~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~item:~~

~~A.~~ ~~Shall~~ ~~notify~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~in~~ ~~writing~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~particular~~ ~~elements~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~proposed~~ ~~delegation~~
~~agreement~~ ~~that~~ ~~were~~ ~~the~~ ~~cause~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~modification~~ ~~or~~ ~~disapproval;~~ ~~and~~

~~B.~~ ~~May~~ ~~not~~ ~~restrict~~ ~~the~~ ~~submission~~ ~~of~~ ~~an~~ ~~amendment~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~delegation~~ ~~agreement.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~To~~ ~~the~~ ~~extent~~ ~~practicable,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~approve~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~
~~agreement~~ ~~or~~ ~~take~~ ~~other~~ ~~action~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~within~~ ~~90~~ ~~days~~ ~~after~~
~~receiving~~ ~~a~~ ~~completed~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~including~~ ~~any~~ ~~information~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~
assistant and primary supervising physician necessary to approve or take action.]

[(g)] (D) If the Board determines that a [primary or alternate supervising
physician] PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS THAT DEVELOPS A

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

COLLABORATION AGREEMENT WITH A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT or A physician assistant
~~is~~ ~~practicing~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~manner~~ ~~inconsistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~or~~ ~~Title~~ ~~14~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~article,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~on~~ ~~its~~ ~~own~~ ~~initiative~~ ~~or~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~recommendation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~may~~
demand modification of the practice[, withdraw the approval of the delegation agreement,]
~~or~~ ~~refer~~ ~~the~~ ~~matter~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~disciplinary~~ ~~panel~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~purpose~~ ~~of~~ ~~taking~~ ~~other~~ ~~disciplinary~~ ~~action~~
under § 14–404 OF THIS ARTICLE or § 15–314 of this [article] SUBTITLE.

[(h)] (E) [A primary supervising physician may not delegate medical acts under
~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~to~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~ ~~four~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistants~~ ~~at~~ ~~any~~ ~~one~~ ~~time,~~ ~~except~~ ~~in~~
a] A PHYSICIAN OR GROUP OF PHYSICIANS MAY NOT ENTER INTO A COLLABORATION
~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~ALLOWS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~COLLABORATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MORE~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~EIGHT~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~
ASSISTANTS FOR EACH PHYSICIAN IN THE AGREEMENT AT ONE TIME, EXCEPT IN A
~~hospital~~ ~~or~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~nonhospital~~ ~~settings:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~A~~ ~~correctional~~ ~~facility;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~A~~ ~~detention~~ ~~center;~~ ~~or~~

~~(3)~~ ~~A~~ ~~public~~ ~~health~~ ~~facility.~~

[(i)] (F) A person may not coerce another person to enter into a [delegation]
COLLABORATION agreement under this subtitle.

[(j) A physician may supervise a physician assistant:

~~(1)~~ ~~As~~ ~~a~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~
~~agreement~~ ~~approved~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~under~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle;~~ ~~or~~

~~(2)~~ ~~As~~ ~~an~~ ~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~if:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~The~~ ~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~supervises~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~
~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~filed~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~supervises~~ ~~no~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~
~~four~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistants~~ ~~at~~ ~~any~~ ~~one~~ ~~time,~~ ~~except~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~hospital,~~ ~~correctional~~ ~~facility,~~
~~detention~~ ~~center,~~ ~~or~~ ~~public~~ ~~health~~ ~~facility;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~The~~ ~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician’s~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~supervision,~~ ~~in~~
~~the~~ ~~temporary~~ ~~absence~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician,~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~exceed:~~

~~1.~~ ~~The~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~time~~ ~~specified~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement;~~
~~and~~

~~2.~~ ~~A~~ ~~period~~ ~~of~~ ~~45~~ ~~consecutive~~ ~~days~~ ~~at~~ ~~any~~ ~~one~~ ~~time;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~The~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~performs~~ ~~only~~ ~~those~~ ~~medical~~ ~~acts~~ ~~that:~~
– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~1.~~ ~~Have~~ ~~been~~ ~~delegated~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~filed~~
~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board;~~ ~~and~~

~~2.~~ ~~Are~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~ ~~scope~~ ~~of~~ ~~practice~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~
physician and alternate supervising physician.]

[(k)] (G) Subject to the notice required under § 15–103 of this title, a physician
assistant may terminate a [delegation agreement filed with the Board under]
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT DEVELOPED IN ACCORDANCE WITH this subtitle at any
~~time.~~

[(l)] (H) (1) In the event of the sudden departure, incapacity, or death of [the
primary supervising physician of a physician assistant] A PATIENT CARE TEAM
PHYSICIAN, or change in license status that results in [the primary supervising physician]
A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN being unable to legally practice medicine, [an
~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~designated~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~may~~
supervise the physician assistant for not longer than 15 days following the event] THE
~~COLLABORATION~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~REMAIN~~ ~~ACTIVE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~VALID~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~
SUPERVISION OF THE REMAINING LISTED PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIANS.

(2) If there is no [designated alternate supervising physician] REMAINING
PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN LISTED ON THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT or
the [designated alternate supervising physician] REMAINING PATIENT CARE TEAM
PHYSICIAN does not agree to supervise the physician assistant, the physician assistant
may not practice until the physician assistant receives approval of a new [delegation]
COLLABORATION agreement under [§ 15–302.1 of] this subtitle.

[(3) An alternate supervising physician or other licensed physician may
~~assume~~ ~~the~~ ~~role~~ ~~of~~ ~~primary~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~by~~ ~~submitting~~ ~~a~~ ~~new~~ ~~delegation~~
~~agreement~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~for~~ ~~approval~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section.~~

~~(4)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Board~~ ~~may~~ ~~terminate~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~if:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~The~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~has~~ ~~a~~ ~~change~~ ~~in~~ ~~license~~ ~~status~~ ~~that~~
~~results~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~being~~ ~~unable~~ ~~to~~ ~~legally~~ ~~practice~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~At~~ ~~least~~ ~~15~~ ~~days~~ ~~have~~ ~~elapsed~~ ~~since~~ ~~an~~ ~~event~~ ~~listed~~ ~~under~~
~~paragraph~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~if~~ ~~there~~ ~~is~~ ~~an~~ ~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~designated~~
~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section;~~ ~~or~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~Immediately~~ ~~after~~ ~~an~~ ~~event~~ ~~listed~~ ~~under~~ ~~paragraph~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~subsection~~ ~~if~~ ~~there~~ ~~is~~ ~~no~~ ~~alternate~~ ~~supervising~~ ~~physician~~ ~~designated~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)~~ ~~of~~
this section.]

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(I) THE BOARD SHALL NOTIFY THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT AND PHYSICIAN
~~OR~~ ~~GROUP~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PHYSICIANS~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~HAVE~~ ~~ENTERED~~ ~~INTO~~ ~~A~~ ~~COLLABORATION~~
AGREEMENT WITH A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT IMMEDIATELY IF:

(1) THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT HAS A CHANGE IN LICENSE
~~STATUS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~RESULTS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~ASSISTANT~~ ~~BEING~~ ~~UNABLE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~LEGALLY~~
PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT; OR

(2) AN EVENT DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (H) OF THIS SECTION
~~OCCURS.~~

[(m)] (J) A physician assistant whose [delegation] COLLABORATION agreement
~~is~~ ~~terminated~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~practice~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~until~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~
[receives preliminary approval of a new delegation agreement under § 15–302.1 of this
subtitle] SUBMITS A NEW COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO THE BOARD.

[(n) Individual members of the Board are not civilly liable for actions regarding
~~the~~ ~~approval,~~ ~~modification,~~ ~~or~~ ~~disapproval~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~described~~ ~~in~~ ~~this~~
~~section.~~

~~(o)~~ ~~A~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~may~~ ~~practice~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~a~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~agreement~~
filed with the Board under this subtitle.]

(C) IF THE BOARD DETERMINES THAT A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN OR
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT IS PRACTICING IN A MANNER INCONSISTENT WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TITLE OR TITLE 14 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE BOARD ON ITS
OWN INITIATIVE OR ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE MAY DEMAND
MODIFICATION OF THE PRACTICE, WITHDRAW THE APPROVAL OF AN ADVANCED
DUTY REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE ADVANCED DUTY REQUIRES PRIOR APPROVAL
UNDER THIS SECTION, OR REFER THE MATTER TO A DISCIPLINARY PANEL FOR THE
PURPOSE OF TAKING OTHER DISCIPLINARY ACTION UNDER § 14–404 OF THIS
ARTICLE OR § 15–314 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN MAY NOT DELEGATE MEDICAL ACTS
UNDER A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO MORE THAN EIGHT PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANTS AT ANY ONE TIME.

(2) A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN MAY DELEGATE MEDICAL ACTS
UNDER A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO MORE THAN EIGHT PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANTS IN:

(I) A HOSPITAL;

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A CORRECTIONAL FACILITY;

(III) A DETENTION CENTER; OR

(IV) A PUBLIC HEALTH FACILITY.

(E) A PERSON MAY NOT COERCE ANOTHER PERSON TO ENTER INTO A
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(F) SUBJECT TO THE NOTICE REQUIRED UNDER § 15–103 OF THIS TITLE, A
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY TERMINATE A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE AT ANY TIME.

(G) (1) IN THE EVENT OF A SUDDEN DEPARTURE, INCAPACITY, OR DEATH
OF A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN, OR CHANGE IN LICENSE STATUS THAT
RESULTS IN A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN BEING UNABLE TO LEGALLY
PRACTICE MEDICINE, THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT WILL REMAIN ACTIVE AND
VALID UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF ANY REMAINING LISTED PATIENT CARE TEAM
PHYSICIANS.

(2) IF THERE IS NO REMAINING PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN
LISTED ON THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT, THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY NOT
PRACTICE UNTIL THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT HAS EXECUTED A NEW
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT AND, IF APPLICABLE, HAS BOARD APPROVAL TO
PERFORM ANY ADVANCED DUTIES DELEGATED TO THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
UNDER THE NEW COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

(3) THE BOARD MAY TERMINATE A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT IF:

(I) THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT HAS A CHANGE IN LICENSE
STATUS THAT RESULTS IN THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT BEING UNABLE TO LEGALLY
PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT; OR

(II) IMMEDIATELY AFTER AN EVENT LISTED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THERE IS NO REMAINING PATIENT CARE
TEAM PHYSICIAN LISTED IN THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

(H) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WHOSE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT IS
TERMINATED MAY NOT PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT UNTIL THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT EXECUTES A NEW COLLABORATION AGREEMENT UNDER THIS SECTION.

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(I) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY PRACTICE IN ACCORDANCE WITH A
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(J) A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN MAY BE ADDED OR REMOVED FROM
A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT BY PROVIDING NOTIFICATION TO THE BOARD.

(K) THE BOARD MAY MODIFY A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT IF IT FINDS
THAT:

(1) THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT DOES NOT MEET THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(2) THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT IS UNABLE TO PERFORM THE
DELEGATED DUTIES SAFELY.

(L) A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT SHALL BE MAINTAINED AT THE
PRACTICE SETTING AND MADE AVAILABLE TO THE BOARD ON REQUEST.

(M) A LICENSED PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WHO FAILS TO COMPLY WITH THE
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT REQUIREMENTS IS SUBJECT TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE
PENALTY AS ESTABLISHED IN REGULATIONS.

[15–302.1.

(a) If a delegation agreement does not include advanced duties or the advanced
duties have been approved under § 15–302(c)(1) of this subtitle, a physician assistant may
assume the duties under a delegation agreement on the date that the Board acknowledges
receipt of the completed delegation agreement.

(b) In this section, “pending” means that a delegation agreement that includes
delegation of advanced duties in a setting that does not meet the requirements under §
15–302(c)(1) of this subtitle has been executed and submitted to the Board for its approval,
but:

(1) The Committee has not made a recommendation to the Board; or

(2) The Board has not made a final decision regarding the delegation
agreement.

(c) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, if a delegation agreement is pending,
on receipt of a temporary practice letter from the staff of the Board, a physician assistant
may perform the advanced duty if:

(1) The primary supervising physician has been previously approved to
supervise one or more physician assistants in the performance of the advanced duty; and

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The physician assistant has been previously approved by the Board to
perform the advanced duty.

(d) If the Committee recommends a denial of the pending delegation agreement
or the Board denies the pending delegation agreement, on notice to the primary supervising
physician and the physician assistant, the physician assistant may no longer perform the
advanced duty that has not received the approval of the Board.

(e) The Board may disapprove any delegation agreement if it believes that:

(1) The agreement does not meet the requirements of this subtitle; or

(2) The physician assistant is unable to perform safely the delegated
duties.

(f) If the Board disapproves a delegation agreement or the delegation of any
function under an agreement, the Board shall provide the primary supervising physician
and the physician assistant with written notice of the disapproval.

(g) A physician assistant who receives notice that the Board has disapproved a
delegation agreement or an advanced function under the delegation agreement shall
immediately cease to practice under the agreement or to perform the disapproved function.]

15–302.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “EXEMPT FACILITY” MEANS:

(1) A HOSPITAL;

(2) AN AMBULATORY SURGICAL FACILITY;

(3) A FEDERALLY QUALIFIED HEALTH CENTER; OR

(4) ANOTHER PRACTICE SETTING LISTED ON A HOSPITAL
DELINEATION OF PRIVILEGES DOCUMENT.

(B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION, A
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY PERFORM ADVANCED DUTIES WITHOUT BOARD
APPROVAL IF THE ADVANCED DUTY WILL BE PERFORMED IN AN EXEMPT FACILITY
AND:

(1) THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT IS SUPERVISED BY A PHYSICIAN WITH
CREDENTIALS THAT HAVE BEEN REVIEWED BY THE EXEMPT FACILITY AS A

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS AN INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR OR AS A MEMBER
OF THE MEDICAL STAFF;

(2) THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT HAS CREDENTIALS THAT HAVE BEEN
REVIEWED BY THE EXEMPT FACILITY AS A CONDITION OF EMPLOYMENT AS AN
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR OR AS A MEMBER OF THE MEDICAL STAFF; AND

(3) THE ADVANCED DUTY TO BE DELEGATED TO THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT IS REVIEWED AND APPROVED IN A PROCESS APPROVED BY THE EXEMPT
FACILITY BEFORE THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT PERFORMS THE ADVANCED DUTY.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION AND EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF
THIS SECTION, A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY PERFORM ADVANCED DUTIES IN A
PRACTICE SETTING THAT IS NOT AN EXEMPT FACILITY ONLY AFTER THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT OBTAINS BOARD APPROVAL OF THE ADVANCED DUTY UNDER THE
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY PERFORM X–RAY DUTIES AUTHORIZED UNDER §
14–306(E) OF THIS ARTICLE IN THE MEDICAL OFFICE OF A PATIENT CARE TEAM
PHYSICIAN ONLY AFTER THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT OBTAINS BOARD APPROVAL OF
THE X–RAY DUTY UNDER THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT.

(II) A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT MAY AUTHORIZE THE
DELEGATION OF X–RAY DUTIES LIMITED TO NONFLUOROSCOPIC X–RAY
PROCEDURES OF THE EXTREMITIES, ANTERIOR–POSTERIOR AND LATERAL, NOT
INCLUDING THE HEAD.

(D) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY NOT PERFORM THE MEDICAL ACTS OF
ADMINISTERING GENERAL ANESTHESIA OR NEUROAXIAL ANESTHESIA, INCLUDING
SPINAL, EPIDURAL, AND IMAGE GUIDED INTERVENTIONAL SPINE PROCEDURES.

(E) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY PERFORM AN ADVANCED DUTY IN
COLLABORATION WITH A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN WITHOUT PRIOR
APPROVAL OF THE BOARD IF:

(1) THE BOARD HAS PREVIOUSLY APPROVED THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT TO PERFORM THE ADVANCED DUTY IN COLLABORATION WITH A PATIENT
CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN; OR

(2) THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT HAS AT LEAST 7,000 HOURS OF
CLINICAL PRACTICE EXPERIENCE.

– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) IF AN ADVANCED DUTY REQUIRES BOARD APPROVAL, THE COMMITTEE:

(1) SHALL REVIEW THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT;

(2) MAY CONDUCT A PERSONAL INTERVIEW OF THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT AND PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIANS; AND

(3) MAY RECOMMEND TO THE BOARD THAT THE COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT BE MODIFIED TO ENSURE CONFORMANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENTS
OF THIS TITLE.

(G) (1) ON REVIEW OF THE COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING THE REQUEST OF A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN TO DELEGATE
ADVANCED DUTIES AS DESCRIBED IN A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT, THE BOARD
MAY MODIFY THE PERFORMANCE OF ADVANCED DUTIES UNDER A COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT IF THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT DOES NOT MEET THE APPLICABLE
EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND EXPERIENCE REQUIREMENTS TO PERFORM THE
SPECIFIED ADVANCED DUTIES.

(2) IF THE BOARD MAKES A MODIFICATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE BOARD:

(I) SHALL NOTIFY EACH PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN
LISTED IN THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT AND THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT IN
WRITING OF THE PARTICULAR ELEMENTS OF THE ADVANCED DUTY APPROVAL
REQUEST THAT WERE THE CAUSE FOR THE MODIFICATION; AND

(II) MAY NOT RESTRICT THE SUBMISSION OF AN AMENDMENT
TO THE ADVANCED DUTY.

(H) DOCUMENTATION DEMONSTRATING A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT’S
AUTHORITY TO PERFORM AN ADVANCED DUTY UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE
MAINTAINED AT THE FACILITY IN WHICH THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT IS PERFORMING
THE ADVANCED DUTY.

(I) INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS OF THE BOARD ARE NOT CIVILLY LIABLE FOR
ACTIONS REGARDING THE APPROVAL, MODIFICATION, OR DISAPPROVAL OF AN
ADVANCED DUTY UNDER THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT DESCRIBED IN THIS
SECTION.

~~[15–302.2.]~~ ~~15–302.1.~~

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

[(a) A primary supervising PATIENT CARE TEAM physician may not delegate
prescribing, dispensing, and administering of controlled dangerous substances,
prescription drugs, or medical devices unless the primary supervising physician and
physician assistant include in the delegation COLLABORATION agreement:

~~(1)~~ ~~A~~ ~~notice~~ ~~of~~ ~~intent~~ ~~to~~ ~~delegate~~ ~~prescribing~~ ~~and,~~ ~~if~~ ~~applicable,~~ ~~dispensing~~

(1) THE AUTHORITY OF THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT TO PRESCRIBE
AND, IF APPLICABLE, DISPENSE of controlled dangerous substances, prescription drugs,
or medical devices;

(2) An attestation that all prescribing and, if applicable, dispensing
activities of the physician assistant will comply with applicable federal and State LAW AND
regulations;

(3) An attestation that all medical charts or records will contain a notation
of any prescriptions written or dispensed by a physician assistant in accordance with this
section;

(4) An attestation that all prescriptions ~~written~~ ~~or~~ dispensed under this
section will include the physician assistant’s name and the supervising PATIENT CARE
TEAM physician’s name, business address, and business telephone number legibly written
or printed;

(5) AN ATTESTATION THAT ALL PRESCRIPTIONS WRITTEN UNDER
THIS SECTION WILL INCLUDE THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT’S NAME, BUSINESS
ADDRESS, AND BUSINESS TELEPHONE NUMBER LEGIBLY WRITTEN OR PRINTED;

(5) (6) An attestation that the physician assistant has:

(i) Passed the physician assistant national certification exam
administered by the National Commission on the Certification of Physician Assistants
within the previous 2 years; or

(ii) Successfully completed 8 category 1 hours of pharmacology
education within the previous 2 years; and

(6) (7) An attestation that the physician assistant has:

(i) A bachelor’s degree or its equivalent; or

(ii) Successfully completed 2 years of work experience as a physician
assistant.

– 29 –
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) A primary supervising PATIENT CARE TEAM physician may not
delegate the prescribing or dispensing of substances that are identified as Schedule I
controlled dangerous substances under § 5–402 of the Criminal Law Article.

(2) A primary supervising PATIENT CARE TEAM physician may delegate
the prescribing or dispensing of substances that are identified as Schedules II through V
controlled dangerous substances under § 5–402 of the Criminal Law Article, including
legend drugs as defined under § 503(b) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.

(3) A primary supervising PATIENT CARE TEAM physician may not
delegate the prescribing or dispensing of controlled dangerous substances to a physician
assistant unless the physician assistant has a valid:

(i) State controlled dangerous substance registration; and

(ii) Federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) registration.]

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PERSONALLY PREPARE AND DISPENSE” MEANS THAT
A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT:

(1) IS PHYSICALLY PRESENT ON THE PREMISES WHERE A
PRESCRIPTION IS FILLED; AND

(2) PERFORMS A FINAL CHECK OF THE PRESCRIPTION BEFORE IT IS
PROVIDED TO THE PATIENT.

(B) SUBJECT TO THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT SUBMITTED UNDER §
15–302 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY PRESCRIBE, PROCURE,
DISPENSE, ORDER, OR ADMINISTER:

(1) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS SECTION, DRUGS AND
SUBSTANCES THAT ARE IDENTIFIED AS SCHEDULES II THROUGH V CONTROLLED
DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES UNDER §§ 5–403 THROUGH 5–406 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
ARTICLE, INCLUDING LEGEND DRUGS AS DEFINED UNDER § 503(B) OF THE
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT;

(2) MEDICAL DEVICES; AND

(3) DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT.

(C) (1) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY NOT PRESCRIBE OR DISPENSE
SUBSTANCES THAT ARE IDENTIFIED AS SCHEDULE I CONTROLLED DANGEROUS
SUBSTANCES UNDER § 5–402 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

– 30 –
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

(2) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY NOT PRESCRIBE OR DISPENSE
~~CONTROLLED~~ ~~DANGEROUS~~ ~~SUBSTANCES~~ ~~UNLESS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~ASSISTANT~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~A~~
~~VALID:~~

(I) STATE CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE
REGISTRATION; AND

~~(II)~~ ~~FEDERAL~~ ~~DRUG~~ ~~ENFORCEMENT~~ ~~AGENCY~~ ~~(DEA)~~
~~REGISTRATION.~~

[(c)] (D) (C) (1) A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN MAY AUTHORIZE A
physician assistant TO personally may prepare and dispense [a drug that the physician
assistant is authorized to prescribe under a delegation COLLABORATION agreement if]:

[(1) (I) Except as otherwise provided under § 12–102(g) of this article,
the supervising PATIENT CARE TEAM physician possesses a dispensing permit; and

(2) (II) The physician assistant dispenses drugs only within:

(i) 1. The supervising PATIENT CARE TEAM physician’s scope
of practice; and

(ii) 2. The scope of the delegation COLLABORATION
~~agreement.]~~

(2) A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN MAY DELEGATE ANY
DISPENSING DUTIES, INCLUDING THE PERFORMANCE OF THE FINAL CHECK OF
PRESCRIPTIONS AS REQUIRED UNDER § 12–102(A)(4)(II) OF THIS ARTICLE.

(D) IF A PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIAN WHO HAS DELEGATED AUTHORITY
TO EXERCISE PRESCRIPTIVE AUTHORITY TO A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT
SUBSEQUENTLY RESTRICTS OR REMOVES THE DELEGATION, THE PATIENT CARE
TEAM PHYSICIAN SHALL NOTIFY THE BOARD OF THE RESTRICTION OR REMOVAL
WITHIN 5 BUSINESS DAYS.

(I) A STARTER DOSAGE OF ANY DRUG THAT THE PHYSICIAN
~~ASSISTANT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PRESCRIBE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~PATIENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~
ASSISTANT IF:

1. THE STARTER DOSAGE COMPLIES WITH THE
LABELING REQUIREMENTS OF § 12–505 OF THIS ARTICLE;

2. NO CHARGE IS MADE FOR THE STARTER DOSAGE; AND

– 31 –
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT ENTERS AN APPROPRIATE
RECORD IN THE PATIENT’S MEDICAL RECORD; OR

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, ANY
~~DRUG~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~A~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~ASSISTANT~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~PRESCRIBE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXTENT~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~
BY LAW IN THE COURSE OF TREATING A PATIENT AT:

1. A MEDICAL FACILITY OR CLINIC THAT SPECIALIZES IN
THE TREATMENT OF MEDICAL CASES REIMBURSABLE THROUGH WORKERS’
COMPENSATION INSURANCE;

2. A MEDICAL FACILITY OR CLINIC THAT IS OPERATED
ON A NONPROFIT BASIS;

3. A HEALTH CENTER THAT OPERATES ON A CAMPUS OF
AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION;

4. A PUBLIC HEALTH FACILITY, A MEDICAL FACILITY
UNDER CONTRACT WITH A STATE OR LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT, OR A FACILITY
FUNDED WITH PUBLIC FUNDS; OR

5. A NONPROFIT HOSPITAL OR A NONPROFIT HOSPITAL
~~OUTPATIENT~~ ~~FACILITY~~ ~~AS~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~POLICIES~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
~~HOSPITAL.~~

(2) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WHO PERSONALLY PREPARES AND
~~DISPENSES~~ ~~A~~ ~~DRUG~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COURSE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TREATING~~ ~~A~~ ~~PATIENT~~ ~~AS~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) COMPLY WITH THE LABELING REQUIREMENTS OF § 12–505
OF THIS ARTICLE;

(II) RECORD THE DISPENSING OF THE PRESCRIPTION DRUG ON
THE PATIENT’S CHART;

(III) ALLOW THE OFFICE OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
ADMINISTRATION TO ENTER AND INSPECT THE OFFICE IN WHICH THE PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT PRACTICES AT ALL REASONABLE HOURS; AND

(IV) EXCEPT FOR STARTER DOSAGES OR SAMPLES DISPENSED
WITHOUT CHARGE, PROVIDE THE PATIENT WITH A WRITTEN PRESCRIPTION,
MAINTAIN PRESCRIPTION FILES, AND MAINTAIN A SEPARATE FILE FOR SCHEDULE
II PRESCRIPTIONS FOR A PERIOD OF AT LEAST 5 YEARS.

– 32 –
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

[(d)] (E) A physician assistant who personally dispenses a drug in the course of
treating a patient as authorized under subsections (b) and [(c)] (D) of this section shall
~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~under~~ ~~Titles~~ ~~12~~ ~~and~~ ~~14~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article~~ ~~and~~ ~~applicable~~ ~~federal~~
~~law~~ ~~and~~ ~~regulations.~~

[(e) Before a physician assistant may renew a license for an additional 2–year
~~term~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~15–307~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle,~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ ~~shall~~ ~~submit~~ ~~evidence~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~successful~~ ~~completion~~ ~~of~~ ~~8~~ ~~category~~ ~~1~~ ~~hours~~ ~~of~~ ~~pharmacology~~ ~~education~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~
previous 2 years.]

(F) A PRESCRIPTION DISPENSED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE
THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT’S:

~~(1)~~ ~~NAME;~~

(2) BUSINESS ADDRESS; AND

(3) BUSINESS TELEPHONE NUMBER.

(G) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT STUDENT IN A TRAINING PROGRAM THAT IS
ACCREDITED BY THE ACCREDITATION REVIEW COMMISSION ON EDUCATION FOR
THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT MAY NOT EXERCISE PRESCRIPTIVE AUTHORITY.

[15–302.3.

(a) On a quarterly basis, the Board shall provide to the Board of Pharmacy a list
of physician assistants whose delegation agreements include the delegation of prescriptive
authority.

(b) The list required under subsection (a) of this section shall specify whether
each physician assistant has been delegated the authority to prescribe controlled dangerous
substances, prescription drugs, or medical devices.

(c) If a primary supervising physician who has delegated authority to exercise
prescriptive authority to a physician assistant subsequently restricts or removes the
delegation, the primary supervising physician shall notify the Board of the restriction or
removal within 5 business days.]

15–303.

(a) To qualify for a license, an applicant shall:

(1) Complete a criminal history records check in accordance with §
14–308.1 of this article;

– 33 –
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Be of good moral character;

(3) Demonstrate oral and written competency in the English language as
required by the Board;

(4) Be at least 18 years old; [and]

(5) [(i) Be a graduate of a physician assistant training program
approved by the Board; or

(ii) Have passed the physician assistant national certifying
examination administered by the National Commission on Certification of Physician
Assistants prior to 1986, maintained all continuing education and recertification
requirements, and been in continuous practice since passage of the examination] EXCEPT
AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, HAVE SUCCESSFULLY
COMPLETED AN EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM FOR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS ACCREDITED
BY:

(I) THE ACCREDITATION REVIEW COMMISSION ON
EDUCATION FOR THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT; OR

(II) IF COMPLETED BEFORE 2001:

1. THE COMMITTEE ON ALLIED HEALTH EDUCATION
AND ACCREDITATION; OR

2. THE COMMISSION ON ACCREDITATION OF ALLIED
HEALTH EDUCATION PROGRAMS; AND

(6) HAVE PASSED THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT NATIONAL
CERTIFYING EXAMINATION ADMINISTERED BY THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON
CERTIFICATION OF PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS.

[(b) Except as otherwise provided in this title, the applicant shall pass a national
certifying examination approved by the Board.]

[(c)] (B) An applicant who graduates from [a physician assistant training
program] AN ACCREDITED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM FOR PHYSICIAN ASSISTANTS
UNDER THIS SECTION after October 1, 2003, shall have a bachelor’s degree or its
equivalent.

15–306.

– 34 –
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

A license authorizes the licensee to practice as a physician assistant [under a
delegation agreement] while the license is effective.

15–309.

(a) Each licensee shall keep a license and [delegation] COLLABORATION
agreement for inspection at the primary place of business of the licensee.

(C) THE BOARD MAY AUDIT AND REVIEW COLLABORATION AGREEMENTS
KEPT BY THE LICENSEE AT THE PRIMARY PLACE OF BUSINESS OF THE LICENSEE AT
ANY TIME.

(D) A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WHO FAILS TO PRODUCE A COLLABORATION
AGREEMENT TO THE BOARD ON REQUEST IS SUBJECT TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE
PENALTY AS ESTABLISHED IN REGULATIONS.

15–310.

(a) In reviewing an application for licensure or in investigating an allegation
brought under § 15–314 of this subtitle, the Committee may request the Board to direct, or
the Board on its own initiative may direct, the physician assistant to submit to an
appropriate examination.

(b) In return for the privilege given to the physician assistant to [perform
delegated medical acts] PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT in the State, the
physician assistant is deemed to have:

(1) Consented to submit to an examination under this section, if requested
by the Board in writing; and

(2) Waived any claim of privilege as to the testimony or examination
reports.

(c) The unreasonable failure or refusal of the licensed physician assistant or
applicant to submit to an examination is prima facie evidence of the licensed physician
assistant’s inability to [perform delegated medical acts] PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT and is cause for denial of the application or immediate suspension of the
license.

(d) The Board shall pay the costs of any examination made under this section.

[15–313.

(a) (1) Except as otherwise provided under § 10–226 of the State Government
Article, before the Board takes any action to reject or modify a delegation agreement or

– 35 –
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

advanced duty, the Board shall give the licensee the opportunity for a hearing before the
Board.

(2) The Board shall give notice and hold the hearing under Title 10,
Subtitle 2 of the State Government Article.

(3) The Board may administer oaths in connection with any proceeding
under this section.

(4) At least 14 days before the hearing, the hearing notice shall be sent to
the last known address of the applicant or licensee.

(b) Any licensee aggrieved under this subtitle by a final decision of the Board
rejecting or modifying a delegation agreement or advanced duty may petition for judicial
review as allowed by the Administrative Procedure Act.]

15–314.

(a) Subject to the hearing provisions of § 15–315 of this subtitle, a disciplinary
panel, on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum, may reprimand any physician
assistant, place any physician assistant on probation, or suspend or revoke a license if the
physician assistant:

(41) Performs [delegated] medical acts beyond the scope of the [delegation]
COLLABORATION agreement filed with the Board [or after notification from the Board
that an advanced duty has been disapproved] IN A MANNER THAT IS NOT CONSISTENT
WITH THE COLLABORATION AGREEMENT;

[(42) Performs delegated medical acts without the supervision of a
~~physician;]~~

(42) PERFORMS MEDICAL ACTS WHICH ARE OUTSIDE THE EDUCATION,
TRAINING, AND EXPERIENCE OF THE PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT;

(43) PERFORMS MEDICAL ACTS THAT ARE NOT CUSTOMARY TO THE
PRACTICE OF THE PATIENT CARE TEAM PHYSICIANS LISTED ON THE
COLLABORATION AGREEMENT;

(42) (44) PRACTICES AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT WITHOUT FIRST
SUBMITTING A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO THE BOARD; PROVIDING NOTICE
TO THE BOARD AS REQUIRED UNDER § 15–302(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(43)] (45) Fails to complete a criminal history records check under §
14–308.1 of this article;

– 36 –
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 920

[(44)] (46) Fails to comply with the requirements of the Prescription Drug
Monitoring Program under Title 21, Subtitle 2A of the Health – General Article; or

[(45)] (47) Fails to comply with any State or federal law pertaining to the
practice as a physician assistant.

15–317.

(a) A physician assistant WHO IS LICENSED in this State or in any other state
OR WHO IS AN EMPLOYEE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT is authorized to perform
acts, tasks, or functions as a physician assistant [under the supervision of a physician
licensed to practice medicine in the State] during a disaster as defined by the Governor,
within a county in which a state of disaster has been declared, or counties contiguous to a
county in which a state of disaster has been declared.

(b) The physician assistant shall notify the Board in writing of the names,
practice locations, and telephone numbers for the physician assistant [and each primary
supervising physician] within 30 days [of] AFTER the first performance of medical acts,
tasks, or functions as a physician assistant during the disaster.

(c) A team of physicians and physician assistants or physician assistants
practicing under this section may not be required to maintain on–site documentation
describing [supervisory arrangements] COLLABORATION AGREEMENTS as otherwise
required under this title.

15–401.

[(a)] Except as otherwise provided in this title, a person may not practice, attempt
to practice, or offer to practice as a physician assistant in the State unless the person has
[a]:

(1) A license issued by the Board TO PRACTICE AS A PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT; AND

(2) SUBMITTED A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO THE BOARD.

(2) PROVIDED NOTICE TO THE BOARD AS REQUIRED UNDER §
15–302(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

[(b) Except as otherwise provided in this title, a person may not perform, attempt
to perform, or offer to perform any delegated medical act beyond the scope of the license
and which is consistent with a delegation agreement filed with the Board.]

15–402.1.

– 37 –
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
Ch. 920 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, a licensed physician may not
employ [or supervise] an individual practicing as a physician assistant who does not have
a license OR WHO HAS NOT SUBMITTED A COLLABORATION AGREEMENT TO THE
BOARD PROVIDED NOTICE TO THE BOARD AS REQUIRED UNDER § 15–302(A) OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

Article – Transportation

13–616.

(a) (1) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(7) “Licensed physician assistant” means an individual who is licensed
under Title 15 of the Health Occupations Article to practice [medicine with physician
supervision] AS A PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) A physician assistant authorized to practice under a delegation agreement on
October 1, 2024, may continue to practice as a physician assistant under the delegation
agreement.

(b) The delegation agreement in effect on October 1, 2024, shall be treated the
same as the collaboration agreement required under § 15–302 of the Health Occupations
Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, until ~~an~~ ~~initial~~ ~~collaboration~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~is~~
~~submitted~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Physicians~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~physician~~ ~~assistant~~ the physician
assistant has provided notice to the State Board of Physicians as required under §
15–302(a) of the Health Occupations Article, as enacted under Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before January 1, 2025,
the State Board of Physicians, with representatives from the Maryland Academy of
Physician Assistants, the Physician Assistant Education Association, and physician
assistant education programs in the State, shall review and update the list of advanced
duties for physician assistants.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 38 –
END OF PAGE 38