START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 160

Chapter 160

(House Bill 860)

AN ACT concerning

Housing and Community Development – Community Action Boards

FOR the purpose of requiring certain community action boards to meet certain federal
requirements for tripartite boards; repealing certain requirements relating to the
composition of community action boards; and generally relating to community action
agencies and community action boards.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 8–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 8–105(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

8–104.

(a) A political subdivision may designate a community action agency to serve a
community within the political subdivision or may change or revoke a designation by:

(1) an act, an ordinance, or a resolution of its governing body; or

(2) an order of its chief executive, if the chief legal officer certifies in writing
that the chief executive has power to make the designation.

(b) (1) The governing body shall notify the public and hold a public hearing
before a designation is made, changed, or revoked.

(2) A transition or close–down plan shall accompany the notification of a
proposed change or revocation of a designation.

(c) A change in or revocation of a designation takes effect at the start of the State
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 160 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

fiscal year.

8–105.

(a) (1) A community action agency shall administer its programs through a
community action board.

(2) A community action board [consists of at least 15 members, of whom:

(i) one–third are elected public officials currently holding office, or
their designees;

(ii) at least one–third are chosen by a democratic selection method
designed to assure that they will represent low–income persons in the community; and

(iii) the others are officials or members of business, industry, labor,
religious, welfare, education, or other major groups and interests in the community.

(3) A member chosen to represent a geographic area shall reside in the
area.

(4) A person selected under paragraph (2)(ii) or (iii) of this subsection may
not serve for more than 5 years consecutively or for more than a total of 10 years] SHALL
MEET THE REQUIREMENTS FOR A TRIPARTITE BOARD UNDER 42 U.S.C. § 9910.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2