START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 817 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 817 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - Issuance of License Near a Place 
of Worship or School  
PG 307-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to issue 
an alcoholic beverages license for an establishment that is within 500 feet of a place of 
worship or within 1,000 feet of a school building if a license of the same class had been 
issued and was (1) held by the same person seeking the new license and (2) in effect for 
the establishment before the place of worship or school building was built. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase by approximately 
$2,305 annually beginning in FY 2025 from the issuance of one Class B beer, wine, liquor 
(BWL) license under the bill. Prince George’s County can handle any additional 
enforcement activity using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, in Prince George’s County, the board may not issue an alcoholic 
beverages license for an establishment that is within 500 feet of a place of worship or within 
1,000 feet of a school building, as specified. Alcoholic beverages licenses can be renewed 
if a place of worship or school is built within the prohibited distance after an establishment 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 817/ Page 2 
was issued a license. However, if a license holder fails to renew a license in a timely 
manner, or a license otherwise expires, a subsequent license application would be treated 
as new by the board and the distance requirements from a place of worship or school 
building would apply. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County estimates issuing one Class B BWL license 
under the bill. The Class B BWL license fee is $2,305; therefore, Prince George’s County 
revenues increase by approximately $2,305 annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 66 (Senator Rosapepe) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2