START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 580

Chapter 580

(House Bill 877)

AN ACT concerning

Board of Public Works – Transparency Data Dashboard

FOR the purpose of requiring the Comptroller to develop and maintain on the ~~Comptroller’s~~
Board of Public Works’ website a certain procurement ~~dashboard;~~ transparency data
dashboard; establishing a certain governance committee to review the contents of
the dashboard; establishing certain requirements for the dashboard; and generally
relating to ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller’s~~ ~~procurement~~ a transparency data dashboard.

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 4–114
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

4–114.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “DASHBOARD” MEANS THE PROCUREMENT
DASHBOARD DEVELOPED AND MAINTAINED BY THE COMPTROLLER.
TRANSPARENCY DATA DASHBOARD REQUIRED TO BE PUBLISHED ON THE BOARD OF
PUBLIC WORKS’ WEBSITE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(B) (1) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN ON THE
COMPTROLLER’S WEBSITE A PROCUREMENT DASHBOARD. BOARD OF PUBLIC
WORKS’ WEBSITE A PROCUREMENT TRANSPARENCY DATA DASHBOARD.

(2) A GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE COMPOSED OF THE LIAISONS TO THE
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS FROM THE OFFICES OF THE GOVERNOR, THE
COMPTROLLER, AND THE STATE TREASURER SHALL REVIEW THE CONTENTS OF
THE DASHBOARD FOR ACCURACY AND COMPLETENESS.

(C) THE DASHBOARD SHALL:

(1) BE PUBLIC, INTERACTIVE, AND SEARCHABLE; AND

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 580 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) INCLUDE INFORMATION RELATED TO STATE PROCUREMENT,
INCLUDING:

(I) BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS MEETING ANNOUNCEMENTS,
AGENDAS, AND RELATED MATERIALS, INCLUDING CONTRACT SPENDING AMOUNTS;
AND

(II) INFORMATION ON STATE PROCUREMENT PREFERENCE
PROGRAMS ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 14 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE, INCLUDING:

1. THE MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
PARTICIPATION GOAL ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND
PROCUREMENT ARTICLE; AND

2. THE VETERAN–OWNED SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE
GOAL ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–602 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT
ARTICLE; AND

(3) BE COMPATIBLE WITH THE COMPTROLLER’S ONLINE PAYMENT
PROCESSING PORTAL TO ALLOW FOR INTEGRATION OF VENDOR PAYMENTS DATA.

(D) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 2025 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION IN
AN AMOUNT NECESSARY FOR:

(1) AT LEAST ONE FULL–TIME POSITION IN THE COMPTROLLER’S
OFFICE TO DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN THE DASHBOARD; AND

(2) SOFTWARE NECESSARY TO DEVELOP AND MAINTAIN THE
DASHBOARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2