START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 303

Chapter 303

(House Bill 821)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Student Support – Specialist Networks and Success
Action Plans
(Student Supports and Success Act)

PG 502–24

FOR the purpose of establishing a Student Support Specialist Network consisting of certain
school–based personnel at each public high school in Prince George’s County;
requiring the Prince George’s County Board of Education to develop a certain
template using certain guidelines; requiring each Student Support Specialist
Network in the county to develop, approve, and implement a certain plan subject to
review and approval by the Prince George’s County Board of Education; and
generally relating to Student Support Specialist Networks and Student Support
Success Action Plans in Prince George’s County.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–452
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–452.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “NETWORK” MEANS A STUDENT SUPPORT SPECIALIST
NETWORK.

(3) “PLAN” MEANS A STUDENT SUPPORT SUCCESS ACTION PLAN.

(4) “TEMPLATE” MEANS THE TEMPLATE DEVELOPED BY THE PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION USED BY A STUDENT SUPPORT
SPECIALIST NETWORK.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 303 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(C) THERE IS A STUDENT SUPPORT SPECIALIST NETWORK IN EACH PUBLIC
HIGH SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY.

(D) EACH NETWORK SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, IF
APPLICABLE:

(1) THE VICE PRINCIPAL OF THE SCHOOL;

(2) PROFESSIONAL SCHOOL–BASED COUNSELORS;

(3) SCHOOL–BASED PSYCHOLOGISTS;

(4) SCHOOL–BASED NURSES;

(5) LICENSED CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKERS;

(6) CRISIS INTERVENTION RESOURCE TEACHERS;

(7) CAREER COACHES;

(8) COMMUNITY SCHOOL COORDINATORS;

(9) SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICERS; AND

(10) SCHOOL SECURITY EMPLOYEES.

(E) (1) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST DECEMBER 31, 2024, THE PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL DEVELOP, APPROVE, AND
DISSEMINATE A TEMPLATE FOR A STUDENT SUPPORT SUCCESS ACTION PLAN TO
BE USED BY EACH NETWORK.

(2) THE TEMPLATE FOR A PLAN DEVELOPED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE METRICS TO MEASURE AND CONCRETE STEPS TO
ACHIEVE IMPROVEMENTS IN:

(I) THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS WHO HAVE ACCESS TO
BEHAVIORAL AND MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS;

(II) THE RATIO OF LICENSED CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKERS,
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL COUNSELORS, CRISIS INTERVENTION RESOURCE
TEACHERS, AND CLINICAL THERAPISTS TO STUDENTS;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 303

(III) REFERRALS OF STUDENTS TO MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES,
NURSES, CAREER COUNSELING, AND FOOD PANTRIES;

(IV) COMMUNITY SCHOOL ASSESSMENT RESULTS;

(V) THE USE OF RESTORATIVE APPROACHES IN ADDRESSING
STUDENT MISCONDUCT;

(VI) THE USE OF TRAUMA–INFORMED APPROACHES TO A
STUDENT IN DISTRESS;

(VII) THE NUMBER OF SCHOOL–BASED ARRESTS;

(VIII) THE NUMBER OF STUDENT DISCIPLINARY REFERRALS
ISSUED;

(IX) THE NUMBER OF SUSPENSIONS;

(X) REFERRALS TO THE DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE
SERVICES; AND

(XI) THE NUMBER OF EXPULSIONS FOR NONVIOLENT BEHAVIOR.

(3) IN ADDITION TO THE METRICS REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)
OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE TEMPLATE FOR A PLAN DEVELOPED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL ALSO ADDRESS:

(I) STRENGTHENING SCHOOL CULTURE, CLIMATE, AND
COMMUNITY;

(II) FOSTERING COOPERATION AND COORDINATION BETWEEN
NETWORKS;

(III) ENSURING STUDENTS IN CRISIS ARE SUPPORTED;

(IV) REDUCING OUT–OF–SCHOOL SUSPENSIONS AND
EXPULSIONS;

(V) INCREASING ACCESS TO AND KNOWLEDGE OF BEHAVIORAL
HEALTH SUPPORTS;

(VI) REDUCING IN–SCHOOL VIOLENCE, GANG–RELATED
ACTIVITY, AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 303 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(VII) CULTIVATING POSITIVE RELATIONSHIPS OF
UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN SCHOOL PERSONNEL, SCHOOL RESOURCE OFFICERS,
SECURITY PERSONNEL, AND STUDENTS; AND

(VIII) STRENGTHENING THE NETWORK OF SERVICES FOR
STUDENTS AND STAFF WHO ARE IN CRISIS.

(F) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (G) OF THIS SECTION, EACH NETWORK SHALL
COLLECTIVELY DEVELOP, COMPLETE, AND IMPLEMENT A PLAN UTILIZING THE
APPROVED COUNTY BOARD TEMPLATE.

(G) (1) BEFORE IMPLEMENTING A PLAN IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION, EACH NETWORK SHALL SUBMIT THE PLAN TO
THE COUNTY BOARD FOR APPROVAL.

(2) THE DEADLINE FOR SUBMISSION SHALL BE DETERMINED BY THE
COUNTY BOARD.

(H) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025, AND ON OR BEFORE EACH JULY 1
THEREAFTER, EACH NETWORK SHALL REPORT THE RESULTS OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NETWORK’S PLAN TO THE COUNTY BOARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4