START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 899 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 899 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Charles W. Riley Firefighter and Ambulance and Rescue 
Squad Member Scholarship - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the Charles W. Riley Firefighter and Ambulance Rescue Squad Member 
Scholarship by (1) authorizing individuals who enroll in courses (rather than programs) to 
receive the award; (2) reducing maximum award amounts; (3) requiring that initial awards 
be provided to scholarship recipients on a first-come, first-served basis; and (4) specifying 
that any student financial aid, other than a student loan, must be credited to the recipient’s 
tuition before the calculation of any award amount provided through the scholarship. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) general fund 
expenditures increase by $10,000 in FY 2025 for system enhancements. Appropriations 
for the Riley scholarship are more likely to be expended, as discussed below. Any effect 
on higher education revenues is assumed to be minimal. 
  
Local Effect:  Any effect on community college revenues and expenditures is assumed to 
be minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands eligibility requirements such that an individual must only 
be accepted for admission or enrolled in a course offered at an eligible institution (instead 
of enrolled in a regular undergraduate program at a Maryland institution of higher 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 899/ Page 2 
education or a two-year terminal certificate program in which the course work is eligible 
for transfer into a baccalaureate program at a Maryland institution of higher education). 
Accordingly, the bill specifies that service requirements must be completed after 
completion of study at an eligible institution (instead of completion of an eligible program 
in an eligible institution). 
 
Under the bill, awards may be up to 100% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory 
fees of a resident student at a two-year public institution of higher education with the 
highest annual expenses for a full-time resident student or 50% of the equivalent annual 
tuition and fees of a resident undergraduate student at the four-year public institution of 
higher education within the University System of Maryland (USM), other than the 
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) and University of Maryland,  
Baltimore Campus (UMB), with the highest annual expenses for a full-time resident 
undergraduate. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 503 of 2013 established the Charles W. Riley Firefighter and 
Ambulance Rescue Squad Member Scholarship and repealed the Charles W. Riley Fire 
and Emergency Medical Services Tuition Reimbursement Program, effectively converting 
the tuition reimbursement program to a scholarship program. 
 
To be eligible for a scholarship, an actively engaged firefighter, ambulance, or rescue squad 
member must be a Maryland resident and must be accepted for admission or enrolled in a 
regular undergraduate program at a Maryland institution of higher education or a two-year 
terminal certificate program in which the course work is eligible for transfer into a 
baccalaureate program at a Maryland institution of higher education. Scholarship recipients 
must maintain a grade point average of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale and may hold the 
scholarship for up to five years of full-time study or eight years of part-time study. 
 
A scholarship may be up to 100% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory fees of a 
resident undergraduate student at the four-year public institution of higher education within 
USM, other than UMGC and UMB, with the highest annual expenses for a full-time 
resident undergraduate. A scholarship may be used for the tuition and mandatory fees at 
any eligible institution. A firefighter or ambulance or rescue squad member must use the 
scholarship for courses credited toward a degree in fire service technology, emergency 
medical technology, fire service management, or public safety administration with a minor 
or concentration in fire service technology or fire service management.  
 
A recipient of a Charles W. Riley Firefighter and Ambulance Rescue Squad Member 
Scholarship must work for at least one year as a volunteer or career firefighter or ambulance 
or rescue squad member in an organized fire department or ambulance or rescue squad in 
the State after completion of an eligible program in an eligible institution. A scholarship 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 899/ Page 3 
recipient must repay MHEC the funds received for a scholarship if the recipient does not 
perform the required service obligation. 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Charles W. Riley Firefighter and Ambulance Rescue Squad Member Scholarship 
 
The Charles W. Riley Firefighter and Ambulance Rescue Squad Member Scholarship is 
special funded through a required annual appropriation from a $7.50 surcharge on certain 
District Court traffic cases. Since the scholarship was fully transitioned from the tuition 
reimbursement program in fiscal 2015, $358,000 has been appropriated to the scholarship 
annually. The fiscal 2025 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, includes the 
$358,000 appropriation funded through that surcharge as well as an additional $350,000 
general fund appropriation, bringing total funding for the scholarship to $708,000 in 
fiscal 2025. 
 
Even though additional funding is available in fiscal 2025, the bill does not require more 
funding to be annually appropriated for the scholarship. For example, in fiscal 2023, just 
21 applicants received $134,809 in awards under the scholarship. Thus, to the extent 
additional applicants qualify for the Riley scholarship under the bill, the appropriated funds 
are more likely to be expended. Further, it is assumed that MHEC awards scholarships that 
total to no more than the annual appropriation. 
 
For fiscal 2025, 50% of the highest resident tuition and fees at a USM institution, excluding 
UMB and UMGC, is $7,770. As of fall 2023, 100% of the highest service area resident 
tuition and fees at a community college in the State was $5,564; however, 100% of the 
highest State resident (from outside the service area) tuition and fees at a 
two-year community college was $10,398. In any case, the maximum award amounts 
established by the bill are lower than the current law amount of 100% of the highest tuition 
and fees for a resident undergraduate student at a USM institution, except UMGC and 
UMB, which is $15,541 for fiscal 2025. Accordingly, to the extent the new scholarship 
maximum amounts result in smaller average award amounts, funds appropriated for the 
Riley scholarship are less likely to be expended. However, this analysis assumes the effect 
of any decrease in average award amounts is offset by an increase in the number of 
additional applicants, which may be significant given the possibility for awards to 
firefighter and ambulance rescue squad members enrolled in individual courses at 
community colleges. Further, in fiscal 2023, the average award amount was only $6,400, 
such that the lower maximum award amounts may not be a binding constraint for many 
awards. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 899/ Page 4 
Maryland Higher Education Commission Administrative Expenditures 
 
General fund expenditures for MEHC increase by $10,000 in fiscal 2025 for system 
enhancements to the Maryland College Aid Processing System to change the maximum 
award amount and award eligibility criteria. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 691 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics; 
Commission to Advance and Strengthen Firefighting and Emergency Medical Services 
within Maryland; Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery 
counties; Maryland Association of Counties; City of Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal 
League; Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of Maryland; 
Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - April 2, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 26, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4