START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 821 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 821 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Prince George's County - Student Support - Specialist Networks and Success 
Action Plans (Student Supports and Success Act)  
PG 502-24 
 
 
This bill establishes a student support specialist network with specified membership in each 
public high school in Prince George’s County, and requires each network to develop, 
complete, and implement a student support success action plan. To support each network 
in developing plans, the Prince George’s County Board of Education must, by 
December 31, 2024, develop, approve, and disseminate a template for a student support 
success action plan with specified elements. The county board must set a deadline for 
submission of plans for approval from networks, and each network must submit a plan for 
approval before implementation. By July 1, 2025, and each July 1 thereafter, each network 
must report on the results of the plan’s implementation to the county board. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County expenditures increase by as much as $3.7 million 
annually, beginning in FY 2025, for additional staffing in some or all high schools in the 
county. Local revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 821/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Networks must implement a plan utilizing the approved board template. 
The template for a plan must include metrics to measure and concrete steps to achieve 
improvements in: 
 
 
the number of students who have access to behavioral and mental health supports; 
 
the ratio of licensed clinical social workers, licensed professional counselors, crisis 
intervention resource teachers, and clinical therapists to students; 
 
referrals of students to mental health services, nurses, career counseling, and food 
pantries; 
 
community school assessment results; 
 
use of restorative approaches in addressing student misconduct; 
 
the use of trauma-informed approaches to a student in distress; 
 
the number of school-based arrests; 
 
the number of student disciplinary referrals issued; 
 
the number of suspensions; 
 
referrals to the Department of Juvenile Services; and 
 
the number of expulsions for nonviolent behavior. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Mental Health in Public Schools  
 
With the assistance of the local health department (LHD), each local board of education 
must provide adequate school health services, instruction in health education, and a 
healthful school environment. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and 
the Maryland Department of Health must jointly develop public standards and guidelines 
for school health programs and assist local boards of education and LHDs in their 
implementation.  
 
Chapter 36 of 2020, The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint) established the 
Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports within the Maryland 
Community Health Resources Commission. The consortium must complete certain tasks 
related to the development of coordinated community supports partnerships to meet student 
behavioral health needs and other related challenges in a holistic, nonstigmatized, and 
coordinated manner, including developing a statewide framework for the creation of a 
coordinated community supports partnership, implementing a related grant program, 
evaluating a payment reimbursement program for providers, and developing a program for 
uninsured students. In addition, in consultation with MSDE, the consortium must develop 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 821/ Page 3 
best practices for the creation of a positive classroom for all students. The Blueprint also 
expanded funding for school-based health centers and for local school systems to train 
school staff to recognize student behavioral health issues and required local boards of 
education to enhance and expand the availability of behavioral health services to students. 
 
Community Schools 
 
“Community school” means a public school that establishes a set of strategic partnerships 
between the school and other community resources that promote student achievement, 
positive learning conditions, and the well-being of students, families, and the community 
by providing wraparound services. The Director of Community Schools in MSDE must 
coordinate professional development for community school coordinators at each 
community school.  
 
A community school coordinator is responsible for completing an assessment of the needs 
of the students in the school for appropriate wraparound services to enhance the success of 
all students in the school, and developing an implementation plan based on the assessment, 
in cooperation with other interested stakeholders. The needs assessment must (1) include 
an assessment of the physical, behavioral, mental health needs and wraparound service 
needs of students, their families, and their communities and (2) be submitted to MSDE and 
the local school system within one year of receiving a Concentration of Poverty Personnel 
Grant or within one year of becoming a community school. Local governments are 
expected to demonstrate support for a community school through meaningful partnerships 
and support that is supplemental to and does not supplant existing efforts. “Wraparound 
services” provided by a community school, according to its implementation plan, may 
involve extended learning time and an extended school year as well as any of a wide range 
of specified services, supports, and practices. 
 
The fiscal 2025 State budget as passed by the General Assembly includes funding for 
grants to 131 community schools in Prince George’s County. 
 
Suspension and Expulsion in Public Schools  
 
In accordance with rules developed by each local school board, a principal may suspend a 
student for cause for up to 10 school days. The principal must provide the suspended 
student and the student’s parents with a conference during the suspension period and a list 
of community resources. Upon request by a principal, a local superintendent may suspend 
a student for more than 10 days or expel a student, subject to investigation, conferencing, 
and appeal procedures in statute. A student may not be suspended or expelled only for 
attendance-related offenses but may be subject to in-school suspension for those offenses.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 821/ Page 4 
A student who has been suspended or expelled may not return to the classroom until the 
principal confers with (1) the teacher(s) who referred the student (if appropriate); (2) other 
appropriate school personnel; (3) the student; and (4) the student’s parent or guardian.  
 
If disruptive behavior results in action less than suspension, the principal or designee must 
confer with the teacher who referred the student prior to the student returning to the 
teacher’s classroom.  
 
Discipline Guidelines  
 
The State Board of Education (SBE) must establish guidelines that define a State code of 
discipline for all public schools with standards of conduct and consequences for violations 
of the standards. The guidelines were last updated in 2014. In December 2018, the board 
established a Task Force on Student Discipline Regulations to review the guidelines and 
regulations. The task force issued its final report in August 2019, but no changes to the 
regulations or guidelines were made as a result.  
 
The State board must also (1) upon request, provide technical assistance and training to 
local school boards on the use of restorative practices and (2) assist each local school board 
with implementing the guidelines. Each local school board must adopt regulations designed 
to create and maintain within schools the atmosphere of order and discipline necessary for 
effective learning. The local regulations must state that the primary purpose of any 
disciplinary measure is rehabilitative, restorative, and educational. They must also provide 
for educational and behavioral interventions, restorative approaches, counseling, student 
and parent conferencing, and alternative programs. 
 
Reportable Offenses  
 
When a student is arrested for a “reportable offense” or an offense related to the student’s 
membership in a criminal organization, the law enforcement agency making the arrest must 
notify (1) the local superintendent; (2) the school principal; and (3) if appropriate, the 
school security officer. The law enforcement agency may also notify the State’s Attorney. 
 
A reportable offense is an offense that (1) occurred off school premises; (2) did not occur 
at an event sponsored by the school; and (3) includes a crime of violence, as specified in 
current law, and numerous other specified weapons-, drug-, assault-, and theft-related 
offenses. If a student is removed or excluded from the student’s regular school for a 
reportable offense, the student’s attorney (if applicable) must be invited to participate in a 
conference between the student or the student’s parent or guardian and the principal or 
county superintendent. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 821/ Page 5 
Except by order of a juvenile court with good cause shown, information about a student’s 
arrest is confidential and may not be redisclosed, except as specified, and may not be part 
of the student’s permanent educational record. A superintendent may share the information 
as part of a confidential file with another superintendent or a nonpublic school in the State 
in which the student has enrolled. The information shared must include information 
regarding any educational programming and related services provided to the student. SBE 
is required to adopt regulations to ensure that information obtained by local 
superintendents, principals, or school security officers is used only for specified 
educational purposes and is destroyed when the student graduates, otherwise permanently 
leaves school, or turns 22 years old, whichever comes first. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The actual cost to implement student support success action plans at 
each public high school in Prince George’s County depends on the metrics and concrete 
steps identified in the template developed by the county board of education. To the extent 
the county board develops a plan that requires additional resources for a student support 
specialist network to appropriately implement their plans, Prince George’s County school 
expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2025.  
 
The Department of Legislative Services notes that, of the county’s 27 public high schools, 
14 qualify for a State personnel grant under the Concentration of Poverty Grant program 
in fiscal 2025, which can be used for many of the same objectives outlined for the student 
support specialist networks. However, in schools that do not receive Concentration of 
Poverty grants, or if the grants are not sufficient to address all of the bill’s requirements, 
additional county expenditures may be required. The Prince George’s County Public 
School System estimates that it may need to hire a student support network specialist at 
each of the 27 public high schools in the county. The salary and fringe benefits for the 
additional position is estimated to cost $138,000 annually, resulting in up to $3.7 million 
in annual staffing expenditures beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 654 (Senator A. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Center for 
School Safety; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Maryland Association of County 
Health Officers; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 821/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6