START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 825 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 825 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Libraries - Regional Resource Centers - Governing Board Membership 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the maximum authorized number of public members (from 
one to two) on the governing board for each regional library resource center 
(e.g., Eastern Shore, Southern Maryland, Western Maryland). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the appointment process of board members does not affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Altering the appointment process of board members does not affect 
governmental finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland State Library Agency (MSLA) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapters 676 and 677 of 2023 altered the governance 
structure of the three public libraries designated as regional resource centers 
(e.g., Eastern Shore, Southern Maryland, Western Maryland) by establishing a governing 
board for each regional resource center. 
 
Specifically, for the Eastern Shore and Southern Maryland regional resource centers, the 
governing board consists of the following members:  (1) a library trustee from each 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 825/ Page 2 
participating library system; and (2) up to one member of the public from each area served 
by the participating library systems. 
 
The initial members of the governing board must be appointed by the Regional Advisory 
Council; thereafter, the governing board must appoint future board members. 
 
For the Western Maryland regional resource center, the Board of Trustees of the 
Washington County Free Library serves as the governing board. In addition, the bylaws of 
the Washington County Free Library govern the composition, appointment, qualifications, 
terms, and structure of the governing board. 
 
According to MSLA, increasing the maximum number of public members will improve 
the diversity of the regional resource center boards and allow for more equitable 
representation of various communities served by the centers. MSLA further notes that, 
currently, board membership consists overwhelmingly of retirees, with minimal 
representation of other demographic groups. Under the bill, MSLA states that regional 
resource centers will have greater flexibility in recruiting board members that are aligned 
with library and community initiatives. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 248 (Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Library) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Maryland State Library Agency; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - February 23, 2024 
 
js/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 825/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Libraries - Regional Resource Centers - Governing Board Membership 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB0825 
 
PREPARED BY:  Irene Padilla, State Librarian 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
__X__  WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
_____ WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3