START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 845 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 845 
(The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax - Individual Income Tax Credit Eligibility Awareness Campaign 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the Comptroller to implement and administer an individual 
income tax credit eligibility awareness campaign to identify underserved individuals who 
may be eligible to claim an individual income tax credit and encourage them to apply for 
credits. To assist in identifying underserved individuals who may be eligible to claim an 
individual income tax credit, the Comptroller may partner with other State agencies by 
entering into data sharing agreements that comply with proper data use standards, as 
specified. In each of fiscal 2026 through 2030, the Governor must include $300,000 in the 
annual budget bill for the awareness campaign. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and 
terminates December 31, 2030.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No impact in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase by 
$300,000 annually in FY 2026 through 2030. Other State agencies may incur minimal 
administrative 
costs 
to 
implement 
any 
data 
sharing 
agreements 
with 
the 
Comptroller’s Office (not shown below). To the extent the awareness campaign generates 
increased utilization of individual income tax credits, general fund revenues may decrease 
beginning in FY 2026 (not shown below). This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation in FY 2026 through 2030.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
$0 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$300,000 
$300,000 
$300,000 
$300,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
($300,000) 
($300,000) 
($300,000) 
($300,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  No impact in FY 2025. To the extent the bill results in increased utilization 
of the local earned income and poverty level credits, local revenues may decrease 
beginning in FY 2026, and Montgomery County expenditures for its earned income credit 
supplement program may increase beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below.    

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 845/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Comptroller may decide which individual income tax credits and 
underserved populations to include in the awareness campaign. For each tax year, the 
Comptroller must utilize any information provided by other State agencies under the bill 
or obtained through other means and contact and inform each identified individual of their 
potential eligibility to claim an individual income tax credit and how to apply for the credit.    
 
For a data sharing agreement entered into under the bill, information may not be disclosed 
if prohibited by federal law, and the Comptroller may not use any disclosed information 
for a purpose other than identifying individuals who may be eligible to claim an individual 
income tax credit.      
 
By December 1, 2026, and every two years thereafter, the Comptroller must report to the 
General Assembly on the awareness campaign.           
 
Current Law/Background:  The State offers a number of personal income tax credits. 
The Comptroller’s Office advises that many of these credits are underutilized, particularly 
credits aimed at supporting children, families, and seniors, such as the State earned income 
credit, child tax credit, child and dependent care credit, and senior tax credit. The bill aims 
to increase utilization of these credits through public outreach and education.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
$300,000 annually in fiscal 2026 through 2030 due to the bill’s funding mandate.  
 
Other State agencies may incur minimal administrative costs in order to implement any 
data sharing agreements entered into with the Comptroller’s Office. However, any such 
costs depend on implementation choices and cannot be reliably estimated at this time.  
 
State Revenues/Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the bill results in increased utilization 
of individual income tax credits, general fund revenues decrease, presumably beginning in 
fiscal 2026. Any such impact cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
To the extent the bill results in increased utilization of the State’s local earned 
income credit and local poverty level credit, local income tax revenues decrease beginning 
in fiscal 2026. In addition, Montgomery County expenditures for the Working Families 
Income Supplement Program, which provides a match to county residents based on the 
amount of the State earned income credit, may increase beginning in fiscal 2026.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 845/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1105 (The President)(By Request - Office of the Comptroller) 
- Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Human Services; Department of Commerce; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of Budget 
and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 845/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Income Tax - Individual Income Tax Credit Eligibility Awareness 
Campaign 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB0845 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Justin Hayes, Director of State Affairs 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This bill creates a recurring appropriation of $300,000 to support targeted outreach and 
education on personal income tax credits.  Some example credits that would be eligible 
for outreach and education under this bill include the Earned Income Tax Credit, the 
Child or Dependent Tax Credit, and the Senior Tax Credit.  There is no anticipated 
impact on small businesses from this legislation.  
 

END OF PAGE 4