START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 888 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 888 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Corporations and Associations - Ratification of Defective Corporate Acts - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill generally alters statutory provisions under the Corporations and Associations 
Article regarding the ratification of defective corporate acts. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The bill generally implements numerous recommendations, 
some of which are described below, of the Maryland State Bar Association, whose 
Committee on Corporation Law regularly reviews the Corporations and Associations 
Article. 
 
Definitions 
 
The bill (1) repeals the definition of “corporate act” and (2) alters definitions of “overissue” 
and “putative stock” by generally incorporating references to stock at the time of the 
purported issuance and including stock purportedly issued in an overissue in the definition 
of putative stock. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 888/ Page 2 
Ratification of a Defective Corporate Act 
 
Currently, a board of directors of a corporation may ratify a defective corporate act by 
adopting a resolution stating specified items, including (1) if the board of directors could 
have authorized or approved the defective corporate act without stockholder approval and 
stockholder action is not otherwise required, that the board ratifies the defective corporate 
act or (2) if stockholder approval or action is required, a direction that the ratification be 
submitted for consideration at a meeting of the stockholders. 
 
The bill establishes that ratification of a defective corporate act approved in a resolution 
adopted under the aforementioned provisions must be submitted for consideration at a 
meeting of the stockholders if stockholder approval is required or would have been required 
on the date of the defective corporate act by any provision of (1) the Maryland General 
Corporation Law; (2) the charter or bylaws of the corporation; (3) any action taken by the 
board of directors, a committee of the board of directors, or the stockholders; or (4) any 
plan or agreement to which the corporation is a party in effect at the time a resolution was 
adopted under the provisions. To ratify a defective corporate act under these provisions, 
the stockholder must adopt a resolution, as specified. 
 
Voting Requirements 
 
The bill specifies that if the charter or bylaws of a corporation in effect at the time of 
ratification of the defective corporate act (or in effect at the time of the defective corporate 
act) requires (or required) a larger number or portion of votes cast by stockholders, and 
others, as specified, to elect the director, then the affirmative vote of the larger number or 
portion of votes cast must be required to ratify the election of the director. 
 
The bill also makes technical, conforming, and stylistic changes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 544 (Senators Waldstreicher and West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 888/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3