START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 774

Chapter 774

(House Bill 808)

AN ACT concerning

Alcoholic Beverages – Retail Delivery – Local Delivery Service Permit

FOR the purpose of establishing a local delivery service permit that authorizes the holder
to deliver alcoholic beverages from a certain retail license holder that is authorized
to deliver alcoholic beverages to purchasers in a certain jurisdiction under certain
circumstances; authorizing certain retail license holders to deliver alcoholic
beverages to purchasers in a certain jurisdiction through a third–party contractor,
an independent contractor, or an agent that holds a certain delivery service permit
under certain circumstances; altering certain standards and requirements for the
retail delivery of alcoholic beverages; and generally relating to retail delivery of
alcoholic beverages.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 4–507
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 4–1107
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

4–507.

(a) This section does not apply to:

(1) the delivery of wine from a direct wine shipper to a consumer using a
common carrier in accordance with Title 2, Subtitle 1, Part V of this article; or

(2) the holder of a common carrier permit in the course of delivering
directly shipped wine in accordance with Title 2, Subtitle 1, Part V of this article.

(b) Retail delivery to a purchaser of alcoholic beverages is prohibited unless:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 774 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) a retail license holder obtains a letter of authorization from the local
licensing board to make deliveries; and

(2) the delivery is made from the licensed premises by [the retail license
holder or an employee of the retail license holder]:

(I) THE RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER;

(II) AN EMPLOYEE OF THE RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER; OR

(III) A THIRD–PARTY CONTRACTOR, AN INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTOR, OR AN AGENT THAT:

1. HOLDS A LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER § 4–1107 OF THIS TITLE; AND

2. HAS CONTRACTED WITH THE RETAIL LICENSE
HOLDER TO MAKE DELIVERIES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

4–1107.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN A JURISDICTION WHERE THE LOCAL
LICENSING BOARD HAS ADOPTED REGULATIONS TO AUTHORIZE THE DELIVERY OF
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY A THIRD–PARTY CONTRACTOR, AN INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTOR, OR AN AGENT.

(B) A LOCAL LICENSING BOARD MAY ISSUE A LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE
PERMIT.

(C) THE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO DELIVER ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES FROM A RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER AUTHORIZED TO DELIVER
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UNDER § 4–507 OF THIS TITLE TO AN INDIVIDUAL IN THE
JURISDICTION WHERE THE RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER IS LOCATED.

(D) A LOCAL LICENSING BOARD MAY SET BY REGULATION:

(1) THE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE LOCAL DELIVERY
SERVICE PERMIT; AND

(2) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR HOLDERS OF THE LOCAL
DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT WHO DELIVER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON BEHALF OF
A RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 774

(E) (1) THE LOCAL LICENSING BOARD MAY CHARGE A FEE FOR THE
LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT.

(2) THE ANNUAL FEE FOR THE LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT IS
$1,000.

(F) A LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT HOLDER MAY:

(1) USE THE DELIVERY SERVICE’S EMPLOYEES OR INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTORS WHO ARE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD TO DELIVER ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES; AND

(2) FACILITATE ORDERS FOR THE SALE AND DELIVERY OF
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY TELEPHONE, INTERNET, OR OTHER ELECTRONIC
MEANS.

(G) THE PURCHASER OR RECEIVER OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UNDER THIS
SECTION SHALL:

(1) BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD; AND

(2) PROVIDE VALID IDENTIFICATION AS PROOF OF AGE ON RECEIPT
OF THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

(H) ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD FOR OFF–PREMISES DELIVERY UNDER
THIS SECTION SHALL BE:

(1) PROVIDED IN THE MANUFACTURER’S ORIGINAL SEALED
CONTAINER; AND

(2) SOLD ONLY DURING THE HOURS THE RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER IS
OPEN FOR IN–STORE PURCHASES.

(I) AN INDIVIDUAL DELIVERING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES UNDER A LOCAL
DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT SHALL:

(1) BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD; AND

(2) HAVE SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED AN APPROVED ALCOHOL
AWARENESS PROGRAM UNDER § 4–505 OF THIS TITLE.

(J) A LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT HOLDER MAY NOT DELIVER
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 774 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO DOES NOT PROVIDE VALID IDENTIFICATION
PROVING THAT THE INDIVIDUAL IS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD;

(2) ANOTHER PREMISES LICENSED TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES;
OR

(3) AN INDIVIDUAL LOCATED OUTSIDE THE JURISDICTION WHERE
THE RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER IS LOCATED.

(K) A LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT HOLDER IS SUBJECT TO THE
FOLLOWING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING THIS SECTION:

(1) FOR A FIRST VIOLATION, A FINE OF $1,000;

(2) FOR A SECOND VIOLATION, A FINE OF $3,000 AND A SUSPENSION
OF THE LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT FOR 30 DAYS;

(3) FOR A THIRD VIOLATION, A FINE OF $6,000 AND A SUSPENSION OF
THE LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT FOR 60 DAYS; AND

(4) FOR ANY SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION, REVOCATION OF THE LOCAL
DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT.

(L) THE HOLDER OF A LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT MAY NOT:

(1) SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; OR

(2) STORE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR DELIVERY.

(M) (1) A PERSON SHALL APPLY TO THE LOCAL LICENSING BOARD FOR A
LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT BEFORE CONTRACTING TO DELIVER ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES FOR A RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER.

(2) IF A RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER CONTRACTS WITH A LOCAL
DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT HOLDER TO DELIVER ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, THE
RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER AND THE LOCAL DELIVERY SERVICE PERMIT HOLDER
SHALL ESTABLISH A METHOD TO ENSURE THAT THE RETAIL LICENSE HOLDER
RETAINS CONTROL OVER SALES TO AND PAYMENTS MADE FROM A PURCHASER FOR
THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

(N) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ENFORCE
THIS SECTION.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 774

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5