START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 895 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 895 
(Delegate Embry) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act - Sheriffs and Deputy Sheriffs - County Responsibility 
 
 
This bill clarifies the responsibilities of the State and local governments and establishes 
related procedures for claims filed in State court under the Maryland Tort Claims Act 
(MTCA) against a sheriff or deputy sheriff engaged in a “detention center function” or 
“law enforcement function.” The bill also expresses the intent of the General Assembly 
regarding various provisions of the bill and cooperation and collaboration between 
specified stakeholders regarding allocation of responsibility for these tort claims. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for the State Insurance Trust Fund (SITF) decrease 
by at least $75,000 in FY 2025, as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization. 
Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
(75,000) 
(100,000) 
(100,000) 
(100,000) 
(100,000) 
Net Effect 
$75,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000 
$100,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures (collectively) increase by at least $75,000 in FY 2025 
and by $100,000 annually thereafter to account for current SITF expenditures being 
transferred to counties. Future expenditures for counties may decrease because of insurance 
coverage, as discussed below. Revenues are not directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 895/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Definitions 
 
“Detention center function” includes (1) operating and administering a detention center 
and (2) supervising personnel who perform those functions. 
 
“Law enforcement function” includes conducting patrol, making stops and arrests, 
investigating criminal offenses, and supervising personnel who perform those functions. 
 
Insurance and Assessments – § 9-108 of the State Finance and Procurement Article 
 
The bill incorporates the definitions of “detention center function” and “law enforcement 
function” into § 9-108 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, which addresses 
insurance options for counties and assessments against counties for liability coverage and 
defense costs in MTCA claims involving a sheriff or deputy sheriff engaged in specified 
activities, including law enforcement functions and detention functions. The bill also 
clarifies that the insurance authorization under § 9-108 does not specifically apply to 
personnel covered under that statute. 
 
Tort Claims – Procedures, Responsibilities, and Liability 
 
The bill clarifies procedures, responsibilities, and liability for a tort claim filed in State 
court against a sheriff, a deputy sheriff, or the State claiming tortious conduct by a sheriff 
or a deputy sheriff arising out of activities related to the performance of a law enforcement 
function or a detention center function (“tort claim”). 
 
A tort claim must be considered defended, settled, and paid in the same manner as any 
other claim filed against a county. The State is the proper defendant in a tort claim, and the 
county may not be named as a defendant in a tort claim. 
 
Liability for a tort claim may not exceed the State’s waiver of immunity under MTCA, and 
the State Treasurer is not liable for a tort claim under provisions that address property loss 
or damage. The duties, responsibilities, and liabilities of the State under MTCA for a 
tort claim must be assumed by the applicable county. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 895/ Page 3 
Intent of the General Assembly 
 
The bill specifies that it is the intent of the General Assembly that: 
 
 
counties bear responsibility for all matters related to the performance by sheriffs and 
deputy sheriffs of a county or Baltimore City for “law enforcement functions” and 
“detention center functions” as defined under the bill; 
 
the list of activities included within the definitions of “law enforcement functions” 
and “detention center functions” in the bill are illustrative and not exhaustive; and 
 
the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and the State Treasurer work 
cooperatively with the Maryland Association of Counties (MACo), the counties, 
and the counties’ respective insurers when disputes arise regarding the allocation of 
responsibility for tort claims under the bill. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Court Decision and Legislative History 
 
Prior to 1989, the State Treasurer and the Board of Public Works were not asked to pay a 
settlement or judgment arising from a sheriff’s office; this was the responsibility of local 
governments. In Rucker v. Harford County, 316 Md. 275 (1989), the Maryland Court of 
Appeals (now the Supreme Court of Maryland) held that sheriffs and deputy sheriffs are 
State personnel for purposes of MTCA, and the State bears financial responsibility for 
judgments, settlements, and defense costs for their tort claims, in accordance with the 
terms, conditions, and limitations of MTCA. 
 
Sheriffs have a variety of duties. In some counties, sheriffs only perform traditional State 
functions (e.g., courthouse security); in other counties, sheriffs perform State and local 
functions (e.g., detention center operations). Chapter 508 of 1990, which represented a 
compromise between stakeholders, specified that sheriffs and deputy sheriffs are State 
personnel under MTCA, but counties indemnify the State for liability arising out of law 
enforcement and detention center functions of sheriffs and deputy sheriffs. This 
indemnification occurs through insurance obtained by counties or the set off of tax funds 
if the insurance is insufficient. In addition to provisions under MTCA, the compromise 
included the initial version of the provisions of § 9-108 of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article discussed below. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under MTCA, the State statutorily waives its own 
common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA applies to tortious acts or 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 895/ Page 4 
omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel performed in the course 
of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made without malice or gross 
negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign or governmental 
immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the state employee 
committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004). Lawsuits filed under MTCA 
typically proceed against the State as the named defendant, not the State employee. 
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. Sheriffs and deputy sheriffs are considered State personnel under MTCA. 
In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the scope of the public 
duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the State’s color of 
authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable. 
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. However, for claims arising on or after July 1, 2022, if liability of 
the State or its units arises from intentional tortious acts or omissions or a violation of a 
constitutional right committed by a law enforcement officer, the following limits on 
liability apply:  (1) the combined award for both economic and noneconomic damages may 
not exceed a total of $890,000 for all claims arising out of the same incident or occurrence, 
regardless of the number of claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award; and (2) in a 
wrongful death action in which there are two or more claimants or beneficiaries, an award 
for noneconomic damages may not exceed $1,335,000, regardless of the number of 
claimants or beneficiaries who share in the award. 
 
The State does not waive its immunity for punitive damages. Attorney’s fees are included 
in the liability cap under MTCA. Under MTCA, attorneys may not charge or receive a fee 
that exceeds 20% of a settlement or 25% of a judgment. 
 
Local Governments – Insurance Coverage and Assessments 
 
Section 9-108 of the State Finance and Procurement Article authorizes a county or 
Baltimore City to obtain insurance to provide the coverage and defense necessary under 
MTCA for personnel covered under statutory provisions addressing a sheriff or 
deputy sheriff engaged in specified activities, including law enforcement functions and 
detention center functions. If a county or Baltimore City does not obtain adequate insurance 
coverage to satisfy the coverage and defense necessary under MTCA, an assessment for 
coverage and for payment of any litigation expenses, other than for compensation for the 
time spent by any State employee working for the Attorney General, must be set off from 
(1) any tax that has been appropriated in the State budget to the county or Baltimore City 
or (2) the subdivision’s share of any income tax collected by the State Comptroller. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 895/ Page 5 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures for SITF decrease by at least $75,000 in 
fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date, and by $100,000 
annually thereafter. According to the State Treasurer’s Office, State out-of-pocket costs of 
litigation (including settlements) for law enforcement and detention center cases over the 
last five years have averaged approximately $100,000 per year, excluding personnel costs 
associated with handling the coverage and defense of these cases. While the bill also 
reduces OAG workloads, that reduction is not associated with a reduction in SITF 
expenditures. 
 
In the 34 years since the 1990 compromise discussed above, there has been a gradual 
breakdown in the distribution of liability and responsibility between the State and counties 
for tort claims involving sheriffs and deputy sheriffs. In recent years, OAG has been 
unsuccessful in rejecting the State’s liability for sheriffs’ local functions. While the State 
has (and has had) the authority to pursue indemnification through tax set offs, it did not do 
so for several years and only recently restarted the practice (one time). 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local expenditures for affected counties (collectively) increase by 
at least $75,000 in fiscal 2025 and by $100,000 annually thereafter to account for current 
SITF expenditures transferred to counties under the bill. Future expenditures for counties 
may decrease because of insurance coverage, as discussed below. 
 
According to MACo, the bill’s provisions allow counties to obtain insurance coverage for 
claims through the Local Government Insurance Trust (LGIT), which has not been possible 
under existing statute. Coverage through LGIT is often less expensive than other options. 
MACo further advises that paying for claims through LGIT coverage is less expensive than 
tax set offs under existing statute. As noted above, the State has not used tax set offs to 
recoup the costs of defense and liability in applicable tort claims for several years. 
However, MACo advises that should the State resume regular use of tax set offs, future 
expenditures for affected counties are reduced if counties can pay for those settlements 
directly through LGIT coverage, which is made possible under the bill. According to 
MACo, potential settlements in pending cases range from thousands to millions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 793 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 895/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Office of the Attorney General; State 
Treasurer’s Office; Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6