START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 832 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 832 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
General Provisions - Damages or Losses - Definition 
 
   
This bill specifies that in statutory causes of action created by the Maryland Code to protect 
civil rights or consumer rights, “damages” or “losses” (1) mean money claimed by, or 
ordered to be paid to, a person as compensation for loss or injury resulting from the 
violation of the person’s rights or protections and (2) includes reasonable nominal 
damages. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Types of Damages 
 
Actual damages, also known as compensatory damages, are intended to make a plaintiff 
whole by returning the plaintiff to the position they were in prior to the alleged harm caused 
by the defendant. Actual damages include both economic damages – compensation for 
things like lost wages, medical expenses, and costs to repair or replace property – and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 832/ Page 2 
noneconomic damages – compensation for things like pain, suffering, inconvenience, 
physical impairment, loss of consortium, or other nonpecuniary injury. 
 
Nominal damages are a small sum awarded when a legal right has been violated but no 
actual damages have ensued. 
 
In general, punitive damages are awarded in addition to compensatory damages to punish 
the tortfeasor and deter others from committing similar acts. 
 
Civil Rights and Consumer Protection Causes of Action 
 
A variety of damages are available in State civil rights actions, depending on the type of 
claim.  
 
In addition to actions that may be brought by the Office of the Attorney General, any person 
may bring an action to recover for injury or loss sustained as a result of a practice prohibited 
by the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA). Damages and attorney’s fees may be 
awarded. Plaintiffs in a private cause of action for violations of MCPA must prove they 
suffered actual injury or loss in order to recover under the Act. See Citaramanis v. 
Hallowell, 328 Md. 142 (1992). Punitive damages are not available in these private causes 
of action. Golt v. Phillips, 308 Md. 1 (1986). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 839 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Office of the Attorney 
General (Consumer Protection Division); Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Tort Law Handbook; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2