START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 373

Chapter 373

(House Bill 838)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County Family Child Care Home Expansion Grant Program –
Establishment

PG 505–24

FOR the purpose of establishing the Prince George’s County Family Child Care Home
Expansion Grant Program in the ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~Early~~ ~~Childhood~~ ~~Education~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education~~ Prince George’s County public school system; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~
~~Governor~~ ~~to~~ ~~include~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~budget~~ ~~bill~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~appropriation~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program;~~
and generally relating to the Prince George’s County Family Child Care Home
Expansion Grant Program.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 4–142
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section ~~9.5–101(a),~~ ~~(d),~~ ~~and~~ ~~(e)~~ ~~and~~ 9.5–301(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Education~~
~~Section~~ ~~9.5–117~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

~~9.5–101.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~In~~ ~~this~~ ~~title~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~words~~ ~~have~~ ~~the~~ ~~meanings~~ ~~indicated.~~

~~(d)~~ ~~“Family~~ ~~child~~ ~~care~~ ~~home”~~ ~~has~~ ~~the~~ ~~meaning~~ ~~stated~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~ ~~9.5–301~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~title.~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 373 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(e)~~ ~~“Large~~ ~~family~~ ~~child~~ ~~care~~ ~~home”~~ ~~has~~ ~~the~~ ~~meaning~~ ~~stated~~ ~~in~~ ~~§~~ ~~9.5–301~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~
~~title.~~

~~9.5–117.~~ 4–142.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(B) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DIVISION” MEANS THE DIVISION OF EARLY CHILDHOOD
DEVELOPMENT IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(3) (2) “FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 9.5–301 OF THIS TITLE ARTICLE.

(4) (3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME EXPANSION GRANT PROGRAM.

(C) (1) THERE IS A PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY FAMILY CHILD CARE
HOME EXPANSION GRANT PROGRAM.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO INCREASE THE NUMBER
OF REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDERS, REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE
HOMES, AND REGISTERED LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES IN LOW–INCOME
COMMUNITIES IN PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(3) THE DIVISION PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEM SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(D) (1) TO CARRY OUT THE PROGRAM, THE DIVISION LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM SHALL AWARD GRANTS TO NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS IN PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY THE COUNTY TO PROVIDE TRAINING AND FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE TO INDIVIDUALS INTENDING TO BECOME FAMILY CHILD CARE
PROVIDERS THAT OPERATE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES AND LARGE FAMILY CHILD
CARE HOMES IN LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES.

(2) TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR A GRANT UNDER THIS SECTION, AN
APPLICANT SHALL DEMONSTRATE IN AN APPLICATION PROCESS DEVELOPED BY
THE DIVISION LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM THAT THE APPLICANT:

(I) IS A NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION WITH EXPERIENCE IN
PROVIDING CHILD CARE SUPPORT SERVICES TO INDIVIDUALS, WHICH INCLUDES

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 373

OFFERING TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO BECOME A REGISTERED
FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER; AND

(II) WILL PROVIDE CHILD CARE SUPPORT SERVICES TO
INDIVIDUALS WHO:

1. INTEND ON BECOMING REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD
CARE PROVIDERS THAT WILL OPERATE REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES OR
REGISTERED LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES;

2. LIVE IN A LOW–INCOME COMMUNITY IN PRINCE
GEORGE’S COUNTY THE COUNTY, AS DETERMINED BY THE DIVISION LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM;

3. HAVE A GROSS HOUSEHOLD INCOME THAT DOES NOT
EXCEED 50% OF THE STATEWIDE MEDIAN INCOME FOR A HOUSEHOLD OF LIKE SIZE;
AND

4. OWN OR RENT AS THEIR PRIMARY RESIDENCE THE
DWELLING THAT WILL BE USED AS THE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME OR LARGE
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME.

(E) A GRANT AWARDED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY BE USED TO OFFER
SERVICES TO INDIVIDUALS DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(2)(II) OF THIS
SECTION BY:

(1) PROVIDING MULTILINGUAL OUTREACH AND TRANSLATION
SERVICES TO RECRUIT AND TRAIN INDIVIDUALS TO BECOME REGISTERED FAMILY
CHILD CARE PROVIDERS;

(2) PROVIDING TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND START–UP ASSISTANCE
FOR RECRUITED INDIVIDUALS AS THEY NAVIGATE THE DEPARTMENT’S PROCESS TO
BECOME A REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDER, WHICH INCLUDES
ASSISTANCE IN MEETING BUILDING CODE REQUIREMENTS AND INSPECTION
EXPENSES TO ESTABLISH REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES AND
REGISTERED LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES;

(3) ASSISTING NEWLY REGISTERED AND ESTABLISHED FAMILY CHILD
CARE PROVIDERS THROUGH TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO ACHIEVE QUALITY
BENCHMARKS; AND

(4) ASSISTING INDIVIDUALS WITH OBTAINING BACKGROUND CHECKS
TO BECOME REGISTERED FAMILY CHILD CARE PROVIDERS.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 373 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$500,000 TO THE PROGRAM.

9.5–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Child care provider” means the adult who has primary responsibility for the
operation of a family child care home or a large family child care home.

(d) “Family child care” means the care given to a child under the age of 13 years
or to any developmentally disabled person under the age of 21 years, in place of parental
care for less than 24 hours a day, in a residence other than the child’s residence, for which
the child care provider is paid.

(e) “Family child care home” means a residence in which family child care is
provided for up to eight children.

(f) “Family child care provider” means an individual who cares for children in a
registered family child care home or a registered large family child care home.

(g) “Large family child care home” means a residence in which family child care
is provided for at least nine children, but not more than 12 children.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4