START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 809 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 809 
(Delegate Vogel, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Members of Boards, Committees, Commissions, Task Forces, or Workgroups – 
Removal or Suspension 
 
 
The bill establishes, except as otherwise provided by law, that a member of a board, 
committee, commission, task force, or workgroup created by State law may be removed or 
suspended for misconduct, incompetence, neglect of duties, or other good cause by the 
individual or entity that appointed the member. An individual or entity that appointed a 
member may remove or suspend the member only after (1) consultation with the chair of 
the board, committee, commission, task force, or workgroup (unless the member being 
removed is the chair), and (2) the member has been given notice and an opportunity to be 
heard regarding the reason for removal or suspension. The bill does not apply to a standing 
committee of the General Assembly or a committee established under Title 2 of the State 
Government Article (“General Assembly”). Nothing in the bill is intended to limit the 
rights of a member to express the member’s views on matters of public concern to the 
fullest extent protected for a public official by the U.S. Constitution or by the 
Maryland Constitution. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Since it is assumed that this bill applies in a limited number of cases, State 
finances are not materially affected. The bill may have a minimal operational effect on 
some affected entities to the extent that removal of a member disrupts their work. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 809/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, when a committee, commission, task force, or workgroup is 
created by State law, provisions are established for the appointment of members for that 
specific body. The statutory language that authorizes the creation of a specified body may 
contain provisions regarding the removal of a member or specify that the members serve 
at the pleasure of the appointing authority. In some instances, the language requires 
automatic disqualification if a member does not attend a specified number or percentage 
of meetings. 
 
Most long-standing boards and commissions in the State include provisions for the removal 
of appointed members, although the process and causes for removal vary widely. For 
instance, the State Board of Education, the State Board of Elections, the Board of Trustees 
of the State Retirement and Pension System, the Maryland Parole Commission, the 
Interagency Commission on School Construction, as well as virtually all regulatory boards 
and commissions in the Maryland Department of Labor and the Maryland Department of 
Health all allow for the removal of appointed members. However, some affected entities 
do not have provisions for the removal of appointed members, including the Maryland 
Transportation Authority and many temporary commissions, work groups, or task forces. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Commission on Civil 
Rights; State Board of Contract Appeals; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the 
Attorney General; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Maryland State Department of Education; University System of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department 
of Human Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; 
Department of State Police; Office of Administrative Hearings; Maryland State Board of 
Elections; Maryland Energy Administration; State Ethics Commission; Maryland 
Insurance Administration; Public Service Commission; Baltimore City Public Schools; 
Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 809/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3