START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 759

Chapter 759

(House Bill 801)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Procedure – Committed Persons – Release Proceedings

FOR the purpose of providing that certain provisions of the Maryland Rules relating to
discovery apply in a certain administrative proceeding; requiring a court that
receives a certain report to promptly notify certain persons; requiring the Maryland
Department of Health to notify the court and certain persons if the Department
receives a certain report; requiring a court to hold a hearing on request by any party
after a certain application is made; establishing that a certain applicant has a certain
burden of proof to establish a certain issue by a preponderance of the evidence;
authorizing a court to modify a certain conditional release in a certain manner at a
certain time; requiring the Department to provide certain documents on request by
certain persons; and generally relating to release proceedings.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 3–119, 3–121(b), and 3–122
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Criminal Procedure

3–119.

(a) (1) Not earlier than 1 year after the initial release hearing ends or was
waived, and not more than once a year thereafter, a committed person may apply for release
under either subsection (b) or (c) of this section, but not both.

(2) Notwithstanding the time restrictions in paragraph (1) of this
subsection, a committed person may file an application for release at any time if the
application is accompanied by an affidavit of a physician or licensed psychologist that states
an improvement in the mental condition of the committed person since the last hearing.

(b) (1) To apply for release under this subsection, the committed person shall
file an application for release with the Health Department and notify the court and State’s
Attorney, in writing, of this request.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 759 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, the provisions of this title governing administrative hearing and judicial
determination of eligibility for release apply to any application for release under this
subsection.

(3) IN A PROCEEDING HELD UNDER THIS TITLE TO DETERMINE
ELIGIBILITY FOR CONDITIONAL RELEASE OR DISCHARGE, THE MARYLAND RULES
GOVERNING DISCOVERY IN CIVIL MATTERS IN THE CIRCUIT COURT SHALL APPLY
REGARDLESS OF THE VENUE OF THE HEARING.

(c) (1) To apply for release under this subsection, the committed person shall
file a petition for release with the court that ordered commitment.

(2) The committed person shall send a copy of the petition for release to the
Health Department and the State’s Attorney.

(3) If the committed person requests a trial by jury, the trial shall be held
in a circuit court with a jury as in a civil action at law.

(4) The trier of fact shall:

(i) determine whether the committed person has proved eligibility
for release by a preponderance of the evidence; and

(ii) render a verdict for:

1. continued commitment;

2. conditional release; or

3. discharge from commitment.

(5) If the trier of fact renders a verdict for conditional release, within 30
days after the verdict, the court shall release the committed person under conditions it
imposes in accordance with specific recommendations for conditions under § 3–116(b) of
this title.

(d) (1) An appeal from a District Court order shall be on the record in the
circuit court.

(2) An appeal from a circuit court order shall be by application for leave to
appeal to the Appellate Court of Maryland.

3–121.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 759

(b) (1) If a court receives a report that alleges that a committed person has
violated a condition of a conditional release, the court promptly shall:

(i) notify:

1. the Health Department;

2. COUNSEL OF RECORD FOR THE COMMITTED PERSON;
and

[(ii)] 3. [notify] the State’s Attorney; and

(II) provide THE STATE’S ATTORNEY WITH the name, address, and
telephone number of the person who reported the violation and a copy of the order for
conditional release.

(2) If the Health Department receives a report that alleges that a
committed person has violated conditional release, the Department shall:

(i) notify:

1. the court;

2. COUNSEL OF RECORD FOR THE COMMITTED PERSON;
and

3. the State’s Attorney; and

(ii) provide the State’s Attorney with the name, address, and
telephone number of the person who reported the violation and a copy of the order for
conditional release.

3–122.

(a) (1) An application to the court for a change in conditional release of a
committed person may be made by:

(i) the Health Department or the State’s Attorney at any time; or

(ii) the committed person not earlier than 6 months after the court
ordered the conditional release, unless the court for good cause permits an earlier
application.

(2) The applicant for a change in conditional release shall notify the court
and other parties, in writing, of the application and the reasons for the requested change.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 759 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) ON REQUEST BY ANY PARTY, THE COURT SHALL HOLD A HEARING
AFTER AN APPLICATION IS MADE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION TO DETERMINE
WHETHER THE APPLICANT HAS SATISFIED THE REQUIREMENTS FOR RELEASE
UNDER § 3–114 OF THIS TITLE.

(b) The APPLICANT HAS THE burden [of proof of] TO ESTABLISH, BY A
PREPONDERANCE OF THE EVIDENCE, any issue raised [by the] IN AN application for
change in conditional release [rests with the applicant] UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION.

(C) ON WRITTEN REQUEST BY THE STATE’S ATTORNEY, THE COMMITTED
PERSON, OR COUNSEL OF RECORD FOR THE COMMITTED PERSON, THE HEALTH
DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE ALL REPORTS, ASSESSMENTS, EVALUATIONS, AND
SIMILAR DOCUMENTS CONCERNING THE COMMITTED PERSON PREPARED OR
CONDUCTED BY, FOR, OR AT THE DIRECTION OF THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT DURING
THE PERIOD OF THE COMMITTED PERSON’S COMMITMENT OR CONDITIONAL
RELEASE.

(c) (D) After the court considers the application for change in conditional
release and the evidence, in accordance with § 3–114 of this title, the court shall:

(1) change the conditions;

(2) impose appropriate additional conditions;

(3) revoke the conditional release;

(4) continue the present conditions of release; [or]

(5) extend the conditional release by an additional term [of] NOT
EXCEEDING 5 years;

(6) SHORTEN THE CONDITIONAL RELEASE; OR

(7) TERMINATE THE CONDITIONAL RELEASE.

(d) (E) (1) Not earlier than 1 year after the court action on the application
for change filed by the committed person, and not more than once a year thereafter, a
committed person may reapply for a change in conditional release.

(2) Notwithstanding the time restrictions in paragraph (1) of this
subsection, a committed person may apply for a change in conditional release at any time
if the application is accompanied by an affidavit of a physician or licensed psychologist that
states an improvement in the mental condition of the committed person.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 759

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5