START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 806 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 806 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Physician Assistants - Revisions (Physician Assistant Modernization Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill requires a physician assistant (PA) to have a “collaboration agreement” rather than 
a delegation agreement and authorizes a PA who has provided notice of an executed 
collaboration agreement to the State Board of Physicians (MBP) to practice medical acts 
that are authorized under a license issued by MBP and the PA’s collaboration agreement 
(rather than medical acts delegated by a supervising physician under an approved 
delegation agreement). A PA may perform additional duties within a PA’s scope of 
practice, as specified, and may perform specified advanced duties with authorization from 
MBP. By January 1, 2025, MBP (with representatives of the Maryland Academy of 
Physician Assistants, the Physician Assistant Education Association, and PA education 
programs in the State) must review and update the list of advanced duties for PAs. The bill 
also alters the education and examination requirements for licensure, alters the membership 
for the Physician Assistant Advisory Committee, and makes other conforming changes.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBP can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. MBP special 
fund revenues are not materially affected, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 806/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Physician Assistant Licensure – Education and Examination Requirements 
 
The bill alters the education requirements to qualify for a PA license to require that an 
applicant have successfully completed an educational program for PAs accredited by 
(1) the Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant (rather 
than a training program approved by MBP as under current law) or (2) if completed before 
2001, accredited by either the Committee on Allied Health Education and Accreditation or 
the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs. An applicant must 
also have passed the Physician Assistant National Certifying Examination administered by 
the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants (NCCPA) (rather than 
having passed the PA national certifying examination administered by the NCCPA prior 
to 1986, maintained all continuing education and recertification requirements, and been in 
continuous practice since passage of the examination, as under current law). 
 
Collaboration Agreements 
 
The bill repeals provisions relating to delegation agreements. Instead, “collaboration 
agreement” means a document that outlines the “collaboration” between a PA and an 
individual physician or a group of physicians and is developed by a PA and the physician 
or group of physicians. A PA may practice only after providing notice to MBP (in a manner 
approved by MBP) of the executed collaboration agreement and each patient care team 
physician listed on the collaboration agreement. A copy of the collaboration agreement 
must be maintained at the practice setting. MBP may, at any time, audit and review a 
collaboration agreement kept by the licensee at the licensee’s primary place of business. A 
patient care team physician may not delegate medical acts under a collaboration agreement 
to more than eight PAs at one time (rather than four PAs for a supervising physician under 
a delegation agreement) with limited specified exceptions.   
 
“Collaboration” means the communication and decision-making process among health 
care providers who are members of a “patient care team” related to the treatment of a 
patient that includes the degree of cooperation necessary to provide treatment and care to 
the patient and includes communication of data and information about the treatment and 
care of a patient, as specified, and development of an appropriate plan of care, including 
(1) decisions regarding the health care provided, (2) accessing and assessment of 
appropriate additional resources or expertise; and (3) arrangement of appropriate referrals, 
testing, or studies. Collaboration does not require the constant, physical presence of a 
collaborating physician on site in the practice setting if the collaborating physician is 
accessible by electronic means.   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 806/ Page 3 
A collaboration agreement must contain (1) a description of the qualifications of the PA 
and the physician or group of physicians who developed the collaboration agreement with 
the PA; (2) any practice specialty of the physician or group of physicians; and (3) a 
description of the settings in which the PA will practice (as under current law for a 
delegation agreement). A collaboration agreement may include provisions limiting the 
PA’s scope of practice, specifying office procedures, or otherwise detailing the practice of 
the PA as agreed by the physician or group of physicians and the PA. A patient care team 
physician may be added to or removed from a collaboration agreement by providing 
notification to MBP.  
 
MBP may modify a collaboration agreement if it finds that the collaboration agreement 
does not meet the requirements of the bill, or the PA is unable to perform the delegated 
duties safely. 
 
A PA may terminate a collaboration agreement at any time, subject to the requirement that 
the PA or the person who developed the collaboration agreement with the PA notify MBP 
within 10 days of the termination. If a PA’s collaboration agreement is terminated, the PA 
may not practice until executing a new collaboration agreement and notifying MBP, as 
specified. MBP may terminate a collaboration agreement if the PA has a change in license 
status that results in the PA being unable to legally practice or immediately after the 
occurrence of certain circumstances (specified below).  
 
If a patient care team physician is no longer able to legally practice medicine, as specified, 
the collaboration agreement must remain active and valid under the supervision of the 
remaining listed patient care team physicians. If there are no remaining patient care team 
physicians, the PA may not practice until the PA executes a new collaboration agreement, 
notifies MBP, and, if applicable, has MBP approval to perform any advanced duties.  
 
Scope of Practice 
 
“PA” means an individual licensed by MBP to practice as a PA, subject to the limitation 
that a PA may not practice independently. “Practice as a physician assistant” means the 
performance of medical acts that are authorized under a license issued by MBP and the 
PA’s collaboration agreement. Subject to specified exceptions and to the extent permitted 
by MBP rules, regulations, and orders, a PA (in addition to a physician) may delegate duties 
to unlicensed individuals. Patient services that may be provided by a PA include:  
 
 
obtaining comprehensive health histories; 
 
performing physical examinations; 
 
evaluating, diagnosing, managing, and providing medical treatment; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 806/ Page 4 
 
interpreting and evaluating patient data (with specified authorization), for the 
purpose of determining management and treatment of patients; 
 
initiating requests for or performing diagnostic procedures (with specified 
authorization) as indicated by pertinent data; 
 
exercising prescriptive authority pursuant to the bill (as discussed below); 
 
informing patients about health promotion and disease prevention; 
 
providing consultations; 
 
writing medical orders; 
 
obtaining informed consent; 
 
delegating medical acts to licensed or unlicensed personnel (with specified 
authorization) if the PA has at least 7,000 hours of clinical practice experience; and 
 
certifying a patient’s health or disability as required by a federal, State, or local 
program. 
 
With specified exceptions, a PA may not perform any medical act (1) for which the 
individual has not been licensed; (2) that has not been delegated consistent with the 
collaboration agreement; (3) that is not appropriate to the education, training, and 
experience of the PA; and (4) that is not customary to the practice of a patient care team 
physician including in the collaboration agreement.  
 
Advanced Duties  
 
With specified exceptions, a PA may only perform advanced duties after the PA obtains 
MBP approval of the advanced duty subject to a collaboration agreement. Documentation 
demonstrating a PA’s authority to perform an advanced duty must be maintained in the 
facility where that advanced duty is being performed.  
 
When MBP approval is required, the Physician Assistant Advisory Committee must review 
the collaboration agreement and MBP (based on any recommendation of the committee if 
provided) may modify the performance of advanced duties under a collaboration agreement 
if the PA does not meet the applicable education, training, and experience requirements to 
perform the advanced duties. If MBP makes a specified modification, MBP (1) must notify 
each patient care team physician and the PA in writing of the particular elements of the 
advanced duty request that caused the modification and (2) may not restrict the submission 
of an amendment to the advanced duty. Individual members of MBP are not civilly liable 
for actions regarding the approval, modification, or disapproval of an advanced duty under 
a collaboration agreement.  
 
A PA may perform advanced duties without MBP approval if the advanced duty will be 
performed in an “exempt facility” (a hospital, ambulatory surgical facility, federally 
qualified health center, or other practice setting listed on a hospital delineation of privileges 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 806/ Page 5 
document) and (1) the PA is supervised by a physician with credentials that have been 
reviewed by the exempt facility; (2) the PA has credentials that have been reviewed by the 
exempt facility; and (3) the advanced duty is reviewed and approved by the exempt facility. 
 
Prescriptive Authority 
 
A patient care team physician may delegate prescribing, dispensing, and administering of 
controlled dangerous substances (CDS) if the collaboration agreement includes (1) the 
authority of the PA to prescribe, and if applicable, dispense CDS, prescription drugs, or 
medical devices; (2) an attestation that all prescriptions written will include the PA’s name, 
business address, and business telephone number legibly written or printed; and (3) other 
specified attestations as applicable under current law for delegation agreements. A patient 
care team physician who has delegated prescriptive authority to a PA must notify MBP 
within five business days if the specified physician subsequently restricts or removes the 
delegated prescriptive authority. 
 
As under current law for a primary supervising physician, a patient care team physician 
may not delegate the prescribing or dispensing of Schedule I CDS but may delegate the 
prescribing or dispensing of Schedule II-V CDS if the PA has a valid State CDS registration 
and a federal Drug Enforcement Agency registration. A patient care team physician may 
delegate any dispensing duties, including performing the required final check of a 
prescription.  
 
Disciplinary Actions   
 
If MBP determines that a PA or a patient care team physician is practicing in a manner 
inconsistent with specified requirements, MBP may on its own initiative or on the 
recommendation of the Physician Assistant Advisory Committee, demand modification of 
the practice, withdraw the approval of an advanced duty (regardless of whether the 
advanced duty requires prior approval), or refer the matter to a disciplinary panel for other 
disciplinary action.  
 
A disciplinary panel, on the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum, may reprimand, 
place on probation, or suspend or revoke the PA’s license if a PA (1) performs medical acts 
in a manner that is not consistent with the collaboration agreement; (2) performs medical 
acts, which are outside the education, training, and experience of the PA; (3) performs 
medical acts that are not customary to the practice of the patient care team physicians listed 
on the collaboration agreement; or (4) practices as a PA without first providing notice of a 
collaboration agreement to MBP.  
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 806/ Page 6 
A PA who fails to produce a collaboration agreement to MBP on request or fails to comply 
with collaboration agreement requirements is subject to administrative penalties 
established in regulation.  
 
Practice during a State of Disaster 
 
In addition to PAs licensed in the State or in any other state (as under current law), an 
employee of the federal government is authorized to practice as a PA in Maryland during 
a state of disaster.   
 
Medical Malpractice  
 
The bill explicitly includes a PA in the definition of “health care provider” for the purposes 
of health care malpractice claims under the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article.  
 
Uncodified Language 
 
A PA who is authorized to practice under a delegation agreement on October 1, 2024, may 
continue to practice as a PA under the delegation agreement. The delegation agreement 
must be treated the same as a collaboration agreement under the bill, until the PA provides 
notice of a collaboration agreement to MBP. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Licensure Qualifications 
 
To qualify for a license, a PA must have graduated from a PA training program, pass a 
national certifying exam approved by MBP, and have a bachelor’s degree or its equivalent 
if the applicant graduated from a PA training program after October 1, 2003. 
 
Delegation Agreements 
 
A PA is not authorized to practice independent of a supervising physician. A PA may only 
be licensed to practice medical acts after the Physician Assistant Advisory Committee has 
approved a delegation agreement formed between a supervisory physician and a PA. 
 
A “delegation agreement” means a document that is executed by a primary supervising 
physician and a PA that contains (1) a description of the qualifications of the primary 
supervising physician and PA; (2) a description of the settings in which the PA will 
practice; (3) a description of the continuous physician supervision mechanisms that are 
reasonable and appropriate to the practice setting; (4) a description of the delegated medical 
acts that are within the primary or alternate supervising physician’s scope of practice and 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 806/ Page 7 
require specialized education or training that is consistent with accepted medical practice; 
(5) an attestation that all medical acts to be delegated to the PA are within the scope of 
practice of the primary or alternate supervising physician and appropriate to the PA’s 
education, training, and level of competence; (6) an attestation of continuous supervision 
of the PA by the primary supervising physician through the mechanisms described in the 
delegation agreement; (7) an attestation by the primary supervising physician of the 
physician’s acceptance of responsibility for any care given by the PA; (8) a description 
prepared by the primary supervising physician of the process by which the PA’s practice 
is reviewed appropriate to the practice setting and consistent with current standards of 
acceptable medical practice; and (9) an attestation by the primary supervising physician 
that the physician will respond in a timely manner when contacted by the PA. In addition, 
the agreement must include a statement in the following form:  “The primary supervising 
physician and the PA attest that:  they will establish a plan for the types of cases that require 
a physician plan of care or require that the patient initially or periodically be seen by the 
supervising physician; the patient will be provided access to the supervising physician on 
request”; and any other information deemed necessary by MBP. 
 
Scope of Practice 
 
Patient services that may be provided by a PA include:   
 
 
taking patient histories and reviewing patient records to develop medical status 
reports; 
 
performing physical examinations and recording patient data; 
 
interpreting and evaluating patient data as authorized by the supervising physician 
to determine management and treatment of patients; 
 
initiating requests for or performing diagnostic procedures as indicated by pertinent 
data and authorized by the supervising physician; 
 
providing instructions and guidance regarding medical care matters to patients; 
 
assisting the supervising physician in the delivery of services to patients, including 
recording patient progress notes, issuing diagnostic orders, and transcribing or 
executing specific orders at the direction of the supervising physician; and 
 
exercising prescriptive authority under a delegation agreement. 
 
Advanced duties are medical acts that require additional training beyond the basic PA 
education program required for licensure. PAs must obtain prior approval from MBP 
before practicing any advanced duty. PAs must submit specific training and education 
documentation to MBP, including procedure logs, evidence of advanced education and 
training, and consent forms. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 806/ Page 8 
A PA may not practice within the scope of any of the following health occupations:  
radiography, nuclear medicine technology, nursing, optometry, physical therapy, 
psychology, radiation therapy, or psychotherapy. 
 
Prescriptive Authority 
 
Prescriptive authority for a PA means the authority delegated by a primary or alternate 
supervising physician to a PA to prescribe and administer CDS, prescription drugs, medical 
devices, and the oral, written, or electronic ordering of medications; and to dispense, as 
specified. 
 
Disciplinary Actions 
 
A licensed PA must keep copies of the license and delegation agreement for inspection at 
the licensee’s primary place of business. A disciplinary panel may impose an 
administrative penalty of $100 on licensees who fail to do so. 
 
Hospitals, related institutions, alternative health care systems, and employers of PAs must 
report to MBP regarding changes in the terms of a PA’s employment, with certain 
exceptions for alcohol- or drug-impaired licensees. If a report is not filed with MBP within 
10 days, a disciplinary panel may impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000, payable to the 
general fund. 
 
A person may not practice, attempt to practice, or offer to practice as a PA unless licensed 
to do so. A person may also not perform, attempt to perform, or offer to perform any 
delegated medical act beyond the scope of the license, and which is consistent with a 
delegation agreement filed with MBP. A person who violates these prohibitions is guilty 
of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum penalty of up to five years imprisonment 
and/or a fine of up to $5,000 and must lose licensure as a PA. In addition, a disciplinary 
panel may impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000. 
 
A licensed physician who employs or supervises an unlicensed PA, or an institution that 
employs an unlicensed PA, is subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000, imposed by a 
disciplinary panel and payable to MBP’s special fund. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MBP advises that it has the necessary resources to implement 
collaboration agreements under the bill. It can leverage its current resources to design and 
create the collaboration agreement template, reconfigure the board’s existing database to 
include collaboration agreements, and convert any existing delegation agreement data. 
MBP also advises that special fund revenues decrease by an indeterminate amount due to 
a loss of fee revenues currently received from delegation agreements. The current fee for 
submission of delegation agreements, which must be approved by MBP, is $200. While 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 806/ Page 9 
the bill requires that a PA notify MBP of an executed collaboration agreement (rather than 
obtaining approval as under current law for delegation agreements), this analysis assumes 
that MBP would, at a minimum, have to track the executed collaboration agreements. 
Moreover, a PA must still obtain approval from MBP before the PA may perform certain 
advanced duties. Under current law, MBP may set reasonable fees for services rendered in 
connection with PAs. Therefore, the Department of Legislative Services advises that MBP 
may impose a fee on the approval of collaboration agreements that contain advanced duties. 
Thus, special fund revenues for MBP are likely not materially affected.   
 
Furthermore, as MBP is no longer required to approve every collaboration agreement, the 
board’s workload is reduced, and staff resources may instead be redirected to other 
activities. 
 
Small Business Effect:  PAs that practice under a collaboration agreement may perform 
additional duties due to an expanded scope of practice, including advanced duties, as 
specified.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 673 and HB 727 of 2023; and SB 808 and HB 961 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 167 (Senator Carozza) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 8, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9