START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 822

Chapter 822

(House Bill 865)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program and Health Insurance – Coverage for
~~Orthoses~~ ~~and~~ Prostheses
(So Every Body Can Move Act)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Medical Assistance Program and certain
insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance organizations to
provide certain coverage related to ~~orthoses~~ ~~and~~ prostheses; ~~requiring~~ ~~certain~~
~~insurers,~~ ~~nonprofit~~ ~~health~~ ~~service~~ ~~plans,~~ ~~and~~ ~~health~~ ~~maintenance~~ ~~organizations~~ ~~to~~
~~render~~ ~~utilization~~ ~~review~~ ~~determinations~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~
~~nondiscriminatory~~ ~~manner;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~provider~~ ~~network~~ ~~and~~
~~reimbursement~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~covered~~ ~~benefits~~ establishing that
certain insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance
organizations must comply with certain provider network requirements; and
generally relating to coverage and reimbursement for ~~orthoses~~ ~~and~~ prostheses.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xxii) and (xxiii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(xxiv)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section ~~15–820~~ ~~and~~ 15–844
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 822 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Health – General

15–103.

(a) (1) The Secretary shall administer the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program.

(2) The Program:

(xxii) Beginning on January 1, 2024, shall provide gender–affirming
treatment in accordance with § 15–151 of this subtitle; [and]

(xxiii) Beginning on July 1, 2025, shall provide, subject to the
limitations of the State budget, and as permitted by federal law, coverage for biomarker
testing in accordance with § 15–859 of the Insurance Article; AND

(XXIV) BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1, 2025, SHALL PROVIDE
COVERAGE FOR ORTHOSES AND PROSTHESES IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 15–820 AND
15–844 § 15–844 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE.

Article – Insurance

~~15–820.~~

(a) In this section, [“orthopedic brace” means a rigid or semi–rigid device that is
~~used~~ ~~to:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~support~~ ~~a~~ ~~weak~~ ~~or~~ ~~deformed~~ ~~body~~ ~~member;~~ ~~or~~

(2) restrict or eliminate motion in a diseased or injured part of the body.]
“ORTHOSIS” MEANS A CUSTOM DESIGNED, CUSTOM FABRICATED, CUSTOM FITTED,
PREFABRICATED, OR MODIFIED DEVICE TO TREAT A NEUROMUSCULAR OR
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDER OR ACQUIRED CONDITION.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

(1) INSURERS AND NONPROFIT HEALTH SERVICE PLANS THAT
PROVIDE HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, OR SURGICAL BENEFITS TO INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS
ON AN EXPENSE–INCURRED BASIS UNDER HEALTH INSURANCE POLICIES OR
CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE; AND

(2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE
HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, OR SURGICAL BENEFITS TO INDIVIDUALS OR GROUPS UNDER
CONTRACTS THAT ARE ISSUED OR DELIVERED IN THE STATE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 822

[(b)] (C) [Each health insurance contract that is delivered or issued for delivery
in the State by a nonprofit health service plan and that provides hospital benefits] AN
ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION shall provide [benefits] COVERAGE for [orthopedic
braces] ORTHOSES AND, SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION,
REPLACEMENTS FOR ORTHOSES.

(D) (1) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL PROVIDE
~~COVERAGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~REPLACEMENTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ORTHOSES~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~REGARD~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONTINUOUS~~
~~USE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~USEFUL~~ ~~LIFETIME~~ ~~RESTRICTIONS~~ ~~IF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ORDERING~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~PROVIDER~~
~~DETERMINES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROVISION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~REPLACEMENT~~ ~~ORTHOSIS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~
REPLACEMENT OF A COMPONENT OF THE ORTHOSIS IS NECESSARY:

(I) BECAUSE OF A CHANGE IN THE PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITION
OF THE PATIENT;

(II) BECAUSE OF AN IRREPARABLE CHANGE IN THE CONDITION
OF THE ORTHOSIS OR A COMPONENT OF THE ORTHOSIS; OR

(III) BECAUSE THE CONDITION OF THE ORTHOSIS OR A
~~COMPONENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORTHOSIS~~ ~~REQUIRES~~ ~~REPAIRS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REPAIRS~~
WOULD BE MORE THAN 60% OF THE COST OF REPLACING THE ORTHOSIS OR THE
COMPONENT OF THE ORTHOSIS.

(2) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY REQUIRE AN
~~ORDERING~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~PROVIDER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONFIRM~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORTHOSIS~~ ~~OR~~
~~COMPONENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORTHOSIS~~ ~~BEING~~ ~~REPLACED~~ ~~MEETS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~OF~~
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE ORTHOSIS OR COMPONENT IS LESS
THAN 3 YEARS OLD.

(E) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL CONSIDER THE COVERED
~~BENEFITS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~HABILITATIVE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~REHABILITATIVE~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~FOR~~
PURPOSES OF ANY FEDERAL OR STATE REQUIREMENT FOR COVERAGE OF
ESSENTIAL HEALTH BENEFITS.

(F) THE COVERED BENEFITS UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE SUBJECT
~~TO:~~

(1) SEPARATE FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS THAT ARE APPLICABLE
ONLY WITH RESPECT TO THAT COVERAGE; OR

(2) A HIGHER COPAYMENT OR COINSURANCE REQUIREMENT THAN
~~THE~~ ~~COPAYMENT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~COINSURANCE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~COVERED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~POLICY~~ ~~OR~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 822 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~CONTRACT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INSURED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ENROLLEE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~RELATE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PRIMARY~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~OR~~
INPATIENT PHYSICIAN OR SURGICAL SERVICES.

(G) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY NOT IMPOSE AN ANNUAL OR
~~LIFETIME~~ ~~DOLLAR~~ ~~MAXIMUM~~ ~~ON~~ ~~COVERAGE~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~
~~SEPARATE~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~ANNUAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~LIFETIME~~ ~~DOLLAR~~ ~~MAXIMUM~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~APPLIES~~ ~~IN~~
~~THE~~ ~~AGGREGATE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~COVERED~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~POLICY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~CONTRACT~~ ~~OF~~
THE INSURED OR ENROLLEE.

(H) (1) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY NOT ESTABLISH
~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~NECESSITY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~APPROPRIATENESS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~
~~COVERAGE~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~MORE~~ ~~RESTRICTIVE~~ ~~THAN~~
~~THE~~ ~~INDICATIONS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LIMITATIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~COVERAGE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~NECESSITY~~
ESTABLISHED UNDER THE MEDICARE COVERAGE DATABASE.

(2) THE COVERED BENEFITS UNDER THIS SECTION INCLUDE
~~ORTHOSES~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TREATING~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~DETERMINES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ORTHOSIS~~ ~~IS~~
MEDICALLY NECESSARY FOR:

(I) COMPLETING ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING;

(II) ESSENTIAL JOB–RELATED ACTIVITIES; OR

(III) PERFORMING PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING RUNNING,
BIKING, SWIMMING, STRENGTH TRAINING, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES TO MAXIMIZE
THE WHOLE–BODY HEALTH AND LOWER OR UPPER LIMB FUNCTION OF THE INSURED
OR ENROLLEE.

(I) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL RENDER UTILIZATION
~~REVIEW~~ ~~DETERMINATIONS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONDISCRIMINATORY~~ ~~MANNER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~DENY~~
~~COVERAGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~SOLELY~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BASIS~~
OF AN INSURED’S OR ENROLLEE’S ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED DISABILITY.

(J) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY NOT DENY BENEFITS
~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~LIMB~~ ~~LOSS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ABSENCE~~
~~THAT~~ ~~WOULD~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~BE~~ ~~COVERED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONDISABLED~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~SEEKING~~
~~MEDICAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SURGICAL~~ ~~INTERVENTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RESTORE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~MAINTAIN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ABILITY~~ ~~TO~~
PERFORM THE SAME PHYSICAL ACTIVITY.

(K) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE LANGUAGE
DESCRIBING THE INSURED’S OR ENROLLEE’S RIGHTS UNDER SUBSECTIONS (I) AND
(J) OF THIS SECTION IN ITS EVIDENCE OF COVERAGE AND ANY BENEFIT DENIAL
~~LETTER.~~

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 822

(L) (1) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL ENSURE ACCESS TO
AT LEAST TWO DISTINCT ORTHOPEDIC PROVIDERS IN THE ENTITY’S PROVIDER
NETWORK IN THE STATE FOR ORTHOSES, ORTHOSIS TECHNOLOGY, AND MEDICALLY
NECESSARY CLINICAL CARE FOR ORTHOSES.

(2) (I) IN THE EVENT THAT THE BENEFITS REQUIRED UNDER THIS
SECTION ARE NOT AVAILABLE FROM AN IN–NETWORK PROVIDER, AN ENTITY
~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~PROCESSES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~REFER~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INSURED~~ ~~OR~~
ENROLLEE TO AN OUT–OF–NETWORK PROVIDER.

(II) 1. AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL
REIMBURSE AN OUT–OF–NETWORK PROVIDER AT A MUTUALLY AGREED ON RATE
AFTER SUBTRACTING ANY COST–SHARING REQUIREMENTS OF AN INSURED OR
~~ENROLLEE.~~

2. COST–SHARING REQUIREMENTS OF AN INSURED OR
ENROLLEE UNDER SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH SHALL BE
DETERMINED AS IF THE BENEFITS WERE PROVIDED BY AN IN–NETWORK PROVIDER.

15–844.

(a) (1) In this section, [“prosthetic device” means “PROSTHESIS” MEANS an
artificial device to replace, in whole or in part, a leg, an arm, or an eye] “PROSTHESIS”
MEANS A CUSTOM DESIGNED, FABRICATED, FITTED, OR MODIFIED DEVICE TO TREAT
~~PARTIAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TOTAL~~ ~~LIMB~~ ~~LOSS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PURPOSES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RESTORING~~ ~~PHYSIOLOGICAL~~
FUNCTION OR COSMESIS.

(2) “PROSTHESIS” INCLUDES A CUSTOM–DESIGNED, –FABRICATED,
–FITTED, OR –MODIFIED DEVICE TO TREAT PARTIAL OR TOTAL LIMB LOSS FOR
PURPOSES OF RESTORING PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTION.

(b) This section applies to:

(1) insurers and nonprofit health service plans that provide hospital,
medical, or surgical benefits to individuals or groups on an expense–incurred basis under
health insurance policies or contracts that are issued or delivered in the State; and

(2) health maintenance organizations that provide hospital, medical, or
surgical benefits to individuals or groups under contracts that are issued or delivered in
the State.

(c) An entity subject to this section shall provide ONCE ANNUALLY coverage for:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 822 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) [prosthetic devices] PROSTHESES;

(2) components of [prosthetic devices] PROSTHESES; [and]

(3) repairs to [prosthetic devices] PROSTHESES; AND

(4) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, REPLACEMENTS
OF PROSTHESES OR PROSTHESIS COMPONENTS.

(D) (1) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL PROVIDE
COVERAGE FOR REPLACEMENTS OF PROSTHESES ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~REGARD~~ ~~TO~~
~~CONTINUOUS~~ ~~USE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~USEFUL~~ ~~LIFETIME~~ ~~RESTRICTIONS~~ IF AN ORDERING HEALTH
CARE PROVIDER DETERMINES THAT THE PROVISION OF A REPLACEMENT
PROSTHESIS OR A COMPONENT OF THE PROSTHESIS IS NECESSARY:

(I) BECAUSE OF A CHANGE IN THE PHYSIOLOGICAL CONDITION
OF THE PATIENT;

(II) UNLESS NECESSITATED BY MISUSE, BECAUSE OF AN
IRREPARABLE CHANGE IN THE CONDITION OF THE PROSTHESIS OR A COMPONENT
OF THE PROSTHESIS; OR

(III) UNLESS NECESSITATED BY MISUSE, BECAUSE THE
CONDITION OF THE PROSTHESIS OR THE COMPONENT OF THE PROSTHESIS
REQUIRES REPAIRS AND THE COST OF THE REPAIRS WOULD BE MORE THAN 60% OF
THE COST OF REPLACING THE PROSTHESIS OR THE COMPONENT OF THE
PROSTHESIS.

(2) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY REQUIRE AN
ORDERING HEALTH CARE PROVIDER TO CONFIRM THAT THE PROSTHESIS OR
COMPONENT OF THE PROSTHESIS BEING REPLACED MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE PROSTHESIS OR COMPONENT IS LESS
THAN 3 YEARS OLD.

(E) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL CONSIDER THE COVERED
~~BENEFITS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~HABILITATIVE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~REHABILITATIVE~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~FOR~~
PURPOSES OF ANY FEDERAL OR STATE REQUIREMENT FOR COVERAGE OF
ESSENTIAL HEALTH BENEFITS.

[(d)] (F) (E) The covered benefits under this section may not be subject to:

(1) SEPARATE FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS THAT ARE APPLICABLE
ONLY WITH RESPECT TO THAT COVERAGE; OR

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 822

(2) a higher copayment or coinsurance requirement than the copayment or
coinsurance for [primary care] OTHER SIMILAR MEDICAL AND SURGICAL benefits
covered under the policy or contract of the insured or enrollee THAT RELATE TO PRIMARY
CARE OR INPATIENT PHYSICIAN OR SURGICAL SERVICES.

[(e)] (G) (F) An entity subject to this section may not impose an annual or lifetime
dollar maximum on coverage required under this section separate from any annual or
lifetime dollar maximum that applies in the aggregate to all covered benefits under the
policy or contract of the insured or enrollee.

[(f)] (H) (G) (1) An entity subject to this section may not establish requirements
for medical necessity or appropriateness for the coverage required under this section that
are more restrictive than the indications and limitations of coverage and medical necessity
established under the Medicare Coverage Database.

(2) THE COVERED BENEFITS UNDER THIS SECTION INCLUDE
PROSTHESES ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TREATING~~ ~~PHYSICIAN~~ ~~DETERMINES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROSTHESIS~~ ~~IS~~
DETERMINED BY A TREATING HEALTH CARE PROVIDER TO BE MEDICALLY
NECESSARY FOR:

(I) COMPLETING ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING;

(II) ESSENTIAL JOB–RELATED ACTIVITIES; OR

(III) PERFORMING PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING RUNNING,
BIKING, SWIMMING, STRENGTH TRAINING, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES TO MAXIMIZE
THE WHOLE–BODY HEALTH AND LOWER OR UPPER LIMB FUNCTION OF THE INSURED
OR ENROLLEE.

(I) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL RENDER UTILIZATION
~~REVIEW~~ ~~DETERMINATIONS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONDISCRIMINATORY~~ ~~MANNER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~DENY~~
~~COVERAGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~BENEFITS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~SOLELY~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BASIS~~
OF AN INSURED’S OR ENROLLEE’S ACTUAL OR PERCEIVED DISABILITY.

(J) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION MAY NOT DENY BENEFITS
~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~LIMB~~ ~~LOSS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ABSENCE~~
~~THAT~~ ~~WOULD~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~BE~~ ~~COVERED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~NONDISABLED~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~SEEKING~~
~~MEDICAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SURGICAL~~ ~~INTERVENTION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~RESTORE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~MAINTAIN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ABILITY~~ ~~TO~~
PERFORM THE SAME PHYSICAL ACTIVITY.

(K) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL INCLUDE LANGUAGE
DESCRIBING THE INSURED’S OR ENROLLEE’S RIGHTS UNDER SUBSECTIONS (I) AND

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 822 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(J) OF THIS SECTION IN ITS EVIDENCE OF COVERAGE AND ANY BENEFIT DENIAL
~~LETTER.~~

(L) (1) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL ENSURE ACCESS TO
AT LEAST TWO DISTINCT PROSTHESIS PROVIDERS IN THE ENTITY’S PROVIDER
NETWORK IN THE STATE FOR PROSTHESES, PROSTHESIS TECHNOLOGY, AND
MEDICALLY NECESSARY CLINICAL CARE FOR PROSTHESES.

(2) (I) IN THE EVENT THAT THE BENEFITS REQUIRED UNDER THIS
SECTION ARE NOT AVAILABLE FROM AN IN–NETWORK PROVIDER, AN ENTITY
~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~PROCESSES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~REFER~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INSURED~~ ~~OR~~
ENROLLEE TO AN OUT–OF–NETWORK PROVIDER.

(II) 1. AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION SHALL
REIMBURSE AN OUT–OF–NETWORK PROVIDER AT A MUTUALLY AGREED ON RATE
AFTER SUBTRACTING ANY COST–SHARING REQUIREMENTS OF AN INSURED OR
~~ENROLLEE.~~

2. COST–SHARING REQUIREMENTS OF AN INSURED OR
ENROLLEE UNDER SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH SHALL BE
DETERMINED AS IF THE BENEFITS WERE PROVIDED BY AN IN–NETWORK PROVIDER.

(H) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION THAT USES A PROVIDER PANEL
FOR A POLICY OR CONTRACT DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION AND
THE PROVISION OF COVERED BENEFITS UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL COMPLY WITH
§ 15–112(B)(3) OF THIS TITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
Assembly that Section 1 of this Act may not be construed to require managed care
organizations under the Maryland Medical Assistance Program to cover additional
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) “L” codes for prosthetic
procedures and devices than are covered by managed care organizations as of December
31, 2024.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) On or before June 30, 2030, each entity that is subject to ~~§§~~ ~~15–820~~ ~~and~~
~~15–844~~ § 15–844 of the Insurance Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, and each
managed care organization providing coverage under the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program shall report to the Maryland Insurance Administration and the Maryland
Department of Health, respectively, on its compliance with ~~§§~~ ~~15–820~~ ~~and~~ ~~15–844~~ § 15–844
of the Insurance Article or § 15–103(a)(2)(xxiv) of the Health – General Article, as enacted
by Section 1 of this Act and as applicable, for calendar years 2025 through 2028.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 822

(b) (1) The report required under subsection (a) of this section shall be in a
form prescribed jointly by the Maryland Insurance Administration and the Maryland
Department of Health.

(2) The form shall include the number of claims and the total amount of
claims paid in the State for the coverage required by ~~§§~~ ~~15–820~~ ~~and~~ ~~15–844~~ § 15–844 of the
Insurance Article or § 15–103(a)(2)(xxiv) of the Health – General Article, as enacted by
Section 1 of this Act and as applicable.

(c) (1) The Maryland Insurance Administration and the Maryland
Department of Health shall aggregate the data required under subsection (b) of this section
by calendar year in a joint report.

(2) On or before December 31, 2030, the Maryland Insurance
Administration and the Maryland Department of Health shall submit the joint report to
the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations
Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Health Care Commission and the Maryland Department of
Health, in consultation with the Maryland Insurance Administration, shall review
utilization of “L” codes and related codes within the All–Payer Claims Database and
evaluate the cost impact of requiring coverage for orthoses, including medically necessary
activity–specific orthoses, by the Maryland Medical Assistance Program and commercial
health insurance plans.

(b) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Health Care Commission and
the Maryland Department of Health shall report the findings of the review required under
subsection (a) of this section, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
to the Senate Finance Committee, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the House
Health and Government Operations Committee, and the House Appropriations Committee.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
apply to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the
State on or after January 1, 2025.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
January 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9