START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 835 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 835 
(Calvert County Delegation) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Calvert County - Procurement - Local Preference 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Board of County Commissioners of Calvert County to enact an 
ordinance, following specified procedures, that gives a percentage preference to a resident 
business that submits a responsive bid or offer that exceeds the lowest responsive bid or 
offer by a nonresident business. With the preference, if the bid or offer by the resident 
business exceeds the bid or offer of the nonresident business by less than a specified 
percentage, the resident bidder or offeror may be awarded the contract. “Resident business” 
means a business whose principal office, as defined, is in Calvert County. A “nonresident 
business” means a business whose principal office is outside the county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to Calvert County. 
  
Local Effect:  Calvert County did not submit a response in time for consideration for 
this fiscal and policy note. However, the bill is not expected to have a direct effect on 
Calvert County as it is only authorizing in nature. If the Board of County Commissioners 
enacts an ordinance, procurement costs for Calvert County increase to the extent that it 
awards contracts to resident businesses that do not submit the lowest bid or proposal price. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In enacting an ordinance under the bill, the Board of 
County Commissioners must first hold a public hearing and wait until 10 days have passed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 835/ Page 2 
after the hearing before adopting the ordinance. The board must publish notice of the public 
hearing and a summary of the ordinance in at least one newspaper in general circulation in 
the county once each week for two successive weeks. A copy of the ordinance must be 
filed with the clerk of the court of the county, as specified, and the ordinance may not take 
effect until a copy has been filed and a fair summary of the ordinance has been published, 
as described above. An ordinance enacted in this manner is admissible as evidence in any 
court proceeding on certification by the clerk of the court of the county. 
 
Current Law:  In general, Calvert County contracts for supplies or services involving at 
least $30,000 must be awarded by formal bidding procedures. Contracts must be awarded 
(1) at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of County Commissioners or by an 
official authorized to contract for the county and (2) to the lowest responsible bidder or the 
most responsible offeror, as specified. 
 
If another county or state in which a nonresident bidder has its principal office gives a 
preference to resident bidders, Calvert County must give a preference to a resident bidder 
over a nonresident bidder that is equal to the preference given by the other county or state. 
This is referred to as a reciprocal preference. Any increase in which a preference is given 
may not exceed $25,000. 
 
Small Business Effect:  If the Calvert County Board of County Commissioners elects to 
enact a preference for resident businesses, small businesses located in Calvert County 
benefit to the extent they participate in county procurement. However, small businesses in 
other counties that want to do business with Calvert County are disadvantaged. 
 
Moreover, reciprocal preferences like the one that Calvert County has are common in state 
and local procurement law (Maryland has a reciprocal preference that applies to other 
states). To the extent that other counties or nearby states have reciprocal preferences in 
their procurement codes, any preference for resident businesses enacted by Calvert County 
likely triggers those preferences in other jurisdictions. Thus, small businesses in 
Calvert County that want to do business in other jurisdictions are likely disadvantaged. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1177 of 2023 and HB 913 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 835/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3