START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 846 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 846 
(The Speaker)(By Request - State Treasurer) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Investment Portfolio and Local Government Investment Guidelines - 
Investment Standards 
 
 
This emergency bill repeals provisions relating to the type of asset classes that the 
State Treasurer may invest and reinvest specified unexpended or surplus funds and requires 
the State Treasurer to adopt regulations that specify the asset classes in which the 
State Treasurer may invest or reinvest funds according to the State investment policy. The 
bill specifies that these investments must be made in accordance with the limitations for 
the asset classes and thresholds established in regulations adopted by the State Treasurer. 
The bill requires the State Treasurer to consult with local governmental entities prior to 
adopting regulations that would alter the types of investments in which these entities may 
invest public money. Following the adoption of regulations amending the local investment 
guidelines under the bill, the State Treasurer must notify in writing the governing body of 
each local governmental entity required to have a local investment policy under § 17-205 of 
the Local Government Article. The State Treasurer must also provide the local government 
with an opportunity to review, revise, and report any changes in the local investment 
policies, as appropriate. The State Treasurer must adopt regulations under the bill by 
December 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. The 
State Treasurer’s Office can adopt regulations and notify local governments of the changes 
to the State investment policy with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 846/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes the State Treasurer to retain investments made prior to 
the effective date of the bill until the investments have reached their maturity dates. The 
bill authorizes the State Treasurer to continue investing or reinvesting surplus funds in 
compliance with the current State investment policy until the effective date of the 
regulations amending the State investment policy are adopted by the State Treasurer. 
 
The bill also authorizes specified local governmental entities to continue investing or 
reinvesting surplus funds in compliance with the current local government investment 
guidelines until the effective date of the regulations amending the local government 
investment guidelines are adopted by the State Treasurer. 
 
Current Law:  The State Treasurer may invest or reinvest unexpended or surplus money 
in:   
 
 
an obligation for which the United States has pledged its faith and credit for the 
payment of the principal and interest; 

an obligation that a federal agency or a federal instrumentality has issued in 
accordance with an act of Congress; 
 
an obligation issued and unconditionally guaranteed by a supranational issuer; 

a repurchase agreement collateralized in an amount not less than 102% of the 
principal amount by an obligation of the United States, its agencies, or 
instrumentalities; 

bankers’ acceptances guaranteed by a financial institution with a short-term debt 
rating in the highest letter and numerical rating by at least one nationally recognized 
statistical rating organization as designated by either the U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) or the State Treasurer; 

with respect to amounts treated by the Internal Revenue Service as bond sale 
proceeds only, bonds, notes, or other obligations of investment grade in the highest 
quality letter and numerical rating by at least one nationally recognized statistical 
rating organization as designated by the SEC issued by or on behalf of this or any 
other state or any agency, department, county, municipal or public corporation, 
special district, authority, or political subdivision thereof, or in any fund or trust that 
invests only in securities of the type described in this item; 
 
commercial paper that has received the highest letter and numerical rating by at least 
two nationally recognized statistical rating organizations as designated by the SEC; 

money market mutual funds with certain restrictions; and 

any investment portfolio created under the Maryland Local Government Investment 
Pool. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 846/ Page 3 
The State Treasurer is required to report to the General Assembly annually by January 3 on 
investment activities. At a minimum, the report must contain the following information for 
general fund investments and all other investments:   
 
 
the inventory of investments with maturity dates and the book and market value as 
of June 30; 
 
the earned net income; 
 
the percentage share of each category of investment in the portfolio; and 
 
sales of investments prior to the maturity date. 
 
The State Treasurer is required to make investments with care, skill, prudence, and 
diligence with due regard for minimizing risk while maximizing return. The State Treasurer 
must use competitive purchasing practices except when impractical. Investments must 
reasonably match the State’s cash flow so that sufficient funds are available to pay 
obligations as they become due. The State Treasurer must also maintain a reasonable 
amount of cash on hand for unanticipated needs. Investments must be made accordance 
with a written investment policy, and they must be made so that securities and collateral 
may be priced on a market-to-market basis. The State Treasurer must also avoid the 
enhancement of his/her personal financial position and avoid enhancing the personal 
financial positions of employees who are responsible for managing investments with State 
funds. 
 
The State Treasurer must attempt to use minority business enterprises for brokerage and 
investment management services for its investments to the greatest extent feasible. Local 
governments are required to establish and follow an investment policy for specified public 
funds that is consistent with guidelines established by the State Treasurer. For this 
requirement, local government includes Baltimore City, counties, municipalities, 
community colleges, the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission, public corporations, 
and authorities of the State that issue debt. Investments by a board of education and a 
library board must comply with the respective county local investment policy. The public 
funds subject to the required policy do not include revenues held as part of a pension fund, 
other postemployment fund, or trust fund account. Borrowing of funds for the express 
purpose of investing those funds is prohibited.  
 
The Maryland Code of Regulations (COMAR) 25.03.03.03 requires that a local 
government investment policy meets or exceeds standards published by two nationally 
recognized financial organizations that are recognized by the State Treasurer:  the 
Association of Public Treasurers of the United States and Canada; and the Government 
Finance Officers Association. COMAR 25.03.03.04 requires that local government units 
invest in only those types of securities authorized by State Finance and Procurement Article 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 846/ Page 4 
§ 6-222(b), Local Government Article § 6-222, and the State investment policy adopted by 
the State Treasurer through regulations. 
 
Chapters 115 and 116 of 2023 
 
Chapters 115 and 116 of 2023 required the State Treasurer to adopt regulations establishing 
a State investment policy specifying thresholds for maximum investment in each asset class 
in which the State Treasurer is authorized to invest or reinvest unexpended or surplus 
money. The Acts also repealed the maximum threshold of 10% of total investments for 
investments the State Treasurer makes in the commercial paper asset class.  
 
Chapters 115 and 116 required the State Treasurer to notify in writing the chief executive 
and governing body of each local governmental unit required to have a local investment 
policy under § 17-205 of the Local Government Article prior to the effective date of the 
Acts. The State Treasurer was also required to provide the local government with an 
opportunity to review, revise, and report any changes in the local investment policies, as 
appropriate. 
 
Background:  Under Maryland regulations adopted by the State Treasurer in accordance 
with Chapters 115 and 116, COMAR 25.03.04.01 provides that the purpose of Chapter .04 
is to ensure prudent investment of public money in a manner that complies with applicable 
laws. 
 
COMAR 25.03.04.02 defines terms used in the chapter. “Financial officer” has 
two meanings depending on whether it is used in reference to the State or to a local 
government unit. For the State, “financial officer” means the State’s Chief Investment 
Officer or another person authorized by the State Treasurer to invest unexpended or surplus 
money of which the Treasurer has custody. For a local government unit, “financial officer” 
means the State Treasurer or any other financial officer of a local government unit who is 
responsible for the investment of public money. 
 
COMAR 25.03.04.03 requires a financial officer to make investments in a manner that is 
prudent, practical, and compliant with applicable laws and policies. A financial officer 
must avoid enriching both (1) their own personal wealth or (2) the personal financial 
position of employees who have responsibilities for the investment of public money. 
  
COMAR 25.03.04.04 provides maximum percentages of an overall investment portfolio 
of public money that a financial officer may invest in certain asset classes. Under this 
regulation, a financial officer may invest 100% of an investment portfolio in obligation 
bonds from the U.S. government, obligation bonds from a federal entity issued in 
accordance with an act of Congress, or any investment portfolio created under the 
Maryland Local Government Investment Pool. Other asset classes have a variety of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 846/ Page 5 
maximum permissible percentages. For example, investments in money market mutual 
funds are capped at 50% while investments in commercial paper from highly rated entities 
are capped at 35%. Some of the percentage limits in this regulation set lower limits for 
investing in any single entity within an investment class. 
 
COMAR 25.03.04.05 requires a financial officer to prioritize investing in securities with a 
high credit quality and marketability. Regulation .05 also prohibits a financial officer from 
investing in assets below a certain credit grade. The regulation also provides an emergency 
exception:  in the event of a catastrophe that could dramatically shift credit ratings of any 
assets in the State investment portfolio, the State Treasurer may make investment decisions 
and approve requests from a local government unit to make investment decisions 
inconsistent with these regulations. 
 
COMAR 25.03.04.06 authorizes the State Treasurer to adopt additional requirements for 
the State investment portfolio and for local governmental unit investment policies. If the 
State Treasurer implements additional requirements for local government units, the State 
Treasurer must (1) notify the local government units of the requirements and (2) post the 
new requirements on the office website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 776 (The President)(By Request - State Treasurer) - Budget 
and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5