START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 685

Chapter 685

(House Bill 839)

AN ACT concerning

Carroll County – Contracts and Purchasing

FOR the purpose of increasing to a certain amount the cost of a public work or improvement
or the purchase price of supplies or equipment for which the County Commissioners
of Carroll County may enter into a contract; requiring that when the cost of a public
work or improvement or the purchase price of supplies or equipment in Carroll
County exceeds a certain amount under certain conditions, the ~~Chief~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Bureau~~
~~of~~ ~~Purchasing~~ Procurement Officer for the County Commissioner shall advertise for
bids for a certain amount of time in a media accessible to the general public; and
generally relating to contracts and purchases in Carroll County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Carroll County
Section 3–401
Article 7 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2014 Edition and January 2023 Supplement, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 7 – Carroll County

3–401.

(a) In contracting for any necessary public work or improvement or for the
purchase of supplies and equipment needed at any time by the several departments of the
County, the County Commissioners of Carroll County may enter into contracts for public
work or improvement and may purchase supplies and equipment on an order passed by the
County Commissioners provided that the cost of the public work or improvement or the
purchase price of the supplies and equipment does not exceed [$25,000.00] $50,000.00.

(b) When the cost of any project for public work or improvement, or the purchase
price of any supplies and equipment exceeds [$25,000.00] $50,000.00, except in
emergencies or when there is a sole source of supply, the ~~Chief~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Bureau~~ ~~of~~ ~~Purchasing~~
PROCUREMENT OFFICER for the County Commissioner shall provide public notice for at
least one week in a media accessible to the general public including, but not limited to a
newspaper circulated in Carroll County and an internet web site, for bids to perform the
public work or improvement or to furnish the supplies and equipment. The public notice
shall state the date, time and place of opening of the bids.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 685 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The bids shall be opened in the presence of an employee designated by the
County Commissioners of Carroll County.

(d) The County Commissioners of Carroll County shall award the contract to the
lowest responsible bidder whose bid is considered reasonable, or in their discretion, may
reject any and all bids.

(e) The County Commissioners may authorize nonprofit entities that are funded
by the County or eligible to receive county funds, to participate in county procurement
contracts.

(f) The County Commissioners may authorize the ~~Chief~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Bureau~~ ~~of~~
Purchasing PROCUREMENT OFFICER to participate in cooperative or piggyback
purchasing with other governmental agencies or associations, provided the public notice for
the bid is in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the soliciting agency or
association.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2