START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 810 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 810 
(The Speaker) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Law - Rapid-Fire Activator - Switch/Auto-Sear 
 
 
This bill (1) alters the defined term “rapid fire trigger activator” to be “rapid fire activator” 
and (2) expands the definition of “rapid fire activator” to include a “switch/auto-sear” for 
purposes of existing prohibitions and penalties. “Switch/auto-sear” means a device that 
applies force to a firearm’s trigger bar to prevent it from limiting the weapon to firing only 
one round each time the trigger is depressed. Nothing in the provisions pertaining to rapid 
fire activators under § 4-305.1 of the Criminal Law Article is intended to prohibit the 
otherwise lawful possession of a part or combination of parts by (1) a police officer or other 
person employed by a law enforcement agency under circumstances in which the officer 
or other person possesses the part or parts in accordance with authorization given by the 
law enforcement agency or (2) a person who has registered a machine gun with the 
Secretary of State Police, as specified, if the part or parts are possessed for use in only, and 
necessary for the proper function of, a machine gun that is currently registered by the 
person, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to 
the bill’s expanded application of existing penalty provisions. The Judiciary and other 
affected State agencies can implement the bill’s provisions with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues and expenditures due to the 
bill’s expanded application of existing penalty provisions. Affected local agencies can 
implement the bill’s provisions with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 810/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Regulation of Firearms – In General 
 
Title 5 of the Public Safety Article regulates firearms and handguns in the State. A 
regulated firearm is any handgun or any of the 45 assault weapons (or copies) identified in 
that title. The Firearm Safety Act of 2013 (Chapter 427) modified and expanded the 
regulation of firearms, firearms dealers, and ammunition in Maryland and made changes 
to related mental health restrictions on the possession of firearms. Among other things, the 
Act extended the scope of assault pistol prohibitions to all assault weapons, created a new 
licensing scheme for handguns under the authority of the Department of State Police 
(DSP), and imposed restrictions on the capacity of detachable magazines and ammunition. 
 
Assault Weapons and Rapid Fire Trigger Activators 
 
Among its many provisions, the Firearm Safety Act of 2013 created a definition of “assault 
weapon,” encompassing assault pistols, assault long guns, and copycat weapons. The Act 
applied existing prohibitions relating to assault pistols to all assault weapons. With 
specified exceptions, transporting, possessing, selling, offering to sell, transferring, 
purchasing, or receiving any assault weapon is prohibited. A violator is guilty of a 
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to three years and/or a $5,000 maximum 
fine. 
 
A person who lawfully possessed an assault pistol before June 1, 1994, and who registered 
the pistol with DSP before August 1, 1994, may continue to possess and transport the 
assault pistol. A person who lawfully possessed, had a purchase order for, or completed an 
application to purchase an assault long gun or a copycat weapon before October 1, 2013, 
is allowed to continue to possess and transport the weapon. A licensed firearms dealer may 
continue to possess, sell, offer for sale, or transfer an assault long gun or a copycat weapon 
that the dealer lawfully possessed on or before October 1, 2013. Chapter 427 also clarified 
when the inheritance of a prohibited assault weapon is permitted. Chapter 252 of 2018 
added rapid fire trigger activators to the provisions relating to assault weapons and allows 
a person to continue to possess a rapid fire trigger activator if, among other things, they 
possessed the device and applied for authorization to possess the device from the federal 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives before October 1, 2018. 
 
A person who uses an assault weapon, a rapid fire trigger activator, or a magazine that has 
a capacity of more than 10 rounds of ammunition in the commission of a felony or a crime 
of violence (as defined in § 5-101 of the Public Safety Article) is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and, in addition to any other sentence imposed for the felony or crime of violence, must be 
sentenced as follows:   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 810/ Page 3 
 
for a first violation, a nonsuspendable, nonparolable, mandatory minimum sentence 
of 5 years with a maximum imprisonment of 20 years; and 
 
for each subsequent violation, a mandatory minimum sentence of 10 years with a 
maximum imprisonment of 20 years (the sentence imposed must be consecutive to 
and not concurrent with any other sentence imposed for the underlying felony or 
crime of violence). 
 
A person may not manufacture, sell, offer for sale, purchase, receive, or transfer a 
detachable magazine that has a capacity of more than 10 rounds of ammunition for a 
firearm. In addition, a person may not (1) transport a rapid fire trigger activator into the 
State or (2) manufacture, possess, sell, offer to sell, transfer, purchase, or receive a rapid 
fire trigger activator. A violator of either provision is guilty of a misdemeanor and on 
conviction is subject to maximum penalties of imprisonment for three years and/or a 
$5,000 fine. 
 
“Rapid fire trigger activator” means any device, including a removable manual or 
power-driven activating device, constructed so that, when installed in or attached to a 
firearm (1) the rate at which the trigger is activated increases or (2) the rate of fire increases. 
“Rapid fire trigger activator” includes a bump stock, trigger crank, hellfire trigger, binary 
trigger system, burst trigger system, or a copy or a similar device, regardless of the producer 
or manufacturer, but does not include a semiautomatic replacement trigger that improves 
the performance and functionality over the stock trigger. 
 
Machine Guns 
 
Title 4 of the Criminal Law Article contains provisions relating to the use or possession of 
a firearm, including prohibitions pertaining to machine guns. Among other restrictions, the 
Uniform Machine Gun Act requires a person who acquires a machine gun to register the 
machine gun with the Secretary of State Police within 24 hours after acquiring the machine 
gun and in each succeeding year during the month of May. In addition, the Act prohibits a 
person from using or possessing a machine gun in the commission or attempted 
commission of a crime of violence (as defined in § 4-401 of the Criminal Law Article). 
Violators are guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 20 years. The Act 
also prohibits a person from possessing or using a machine gun for an offensive or 
aggressive purpose. Possession or use of a machine gun is presumed to be for an offensive 
or aggressive purpose if, among other things, the machine gun is in the possession of, or 
used by an unnaturalized foreign-born person or a person who has been convicted of a 
crime of violence in any state or federal court of the United States. Violators are guilty of 
a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for up to 10 years. “Machine gun” means a 
loaded or unloaded weapon that is capable of automatically discharging more than one shot 
or bullet from a magazine by a single function of the firing device. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 810/ Page 4 
Background:  In general, a switch/auto sear, also referred to as a “Glock switch,” is a 
small device that converts a semiautomatic firearm into a machine gun. The devices are 
illegal under federal law, which defines a machine gun to include any part designed and 
intended to convert a weapon into a machine gun. According to news reports, as of early 
February 2024, Baltimore County had three cases where one or more guns had a 
switch/auto sear. Authorities also believe that an October 2023 mass shooting at 
Morgan State University involved a gun equipped with a switch/auto sear. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; City of 
College Park; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Health; 
WBAL TV; United States Attorney’s Office – Southern District of Indiana; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4