START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 860 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 860 
(Delegates Allen and Boafo) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Housing and Community Development - Community Action Boards 
 
 
This bill requires that a community action board meet the requirements for a tripartite board 
under provisions of federal law governing the federal Community Services Block Grant 
(CSBG) Program. The bill also repeals existing provisions governing the composition of 
community action boards under State law.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Federal Community Services Block Grant Program and Tripartite Boards 
 
Generally, CSBG, funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is 
administered by the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) for 
the State. Funds are allocated to 17 community action agencies (CAAs) and 
1 limited-purposes agency, which serves all areas of the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 860/ Page 2 
DHCD distributed $8.3 million in federal funds as grants to CAAs in fiscal 2023 to provide 
a range of services involving affordable housing, job training and employment counseling, 
Head Start and Early Head Start child education programs, services for disabled 
individuals, youth and senior citizens programs, emergency assistance, and nutritional 
services. 
 
Under federal law governing CSBG, in order for a private, nonprofit entity to be eligible 
to receive funds, it must administer the program through a tripartite board that fully 
participates in the development, planning, implantation, and evaluation of the program to 
serve low-income communities. Generally, the board must be composed so that 
(1) one-third of the members are elected public officials, or their representatives; (2) at 
least one-third of the members are persons chosen through a democratic process to assure 
that the members are representative of low-income individuals and families served by 
CSBG; and (3) the remainder are officials or members of specified industries from the 
community served. 
 
In order for a public organization to be considered an eligible entity for CSBG, the entity 
must also administer CSBG through a tripartite board, which must have members selected 
by the organization and must be composed to assure that at least one-third of the members 
are persons chosen in accordance with democratic selection procedures adequate to assure 
that the members (1) are representative of low-income individuals and families in the 
neighborhood served; (2) reside in the neighborhood served; and (3) are able to participate 
actively in the development, planning, implementation, and evaluation of programs funded 
under CSBG. Alternatively, a public organization may administer CSBG through another 
mechanism specified by the state to assure decision making and participation by 
low-income individuals, as specified. 
 
State Provisions Regarding Community Action Agencies and Boards 
 
CAAs must administer their programs through community action boards. A community 
action board consists of at least 15 members, of whom (1) one-third are elected public 
officials currently holding office, or their designees; (2) at least one-third are chosen by a 
democratic selection method designed to assure that they will represent low-income 
persons in the community; and (3) the others are officials or members of business, industry, 
labor, religious, welfare, education, or other major groups and interests in the community. 
A member chosen to represent a geographic area must reside in the area, and the members 
who are not elected officials may not serve for more than five years consecutively or more 
than a total of ten years.   
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 860/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; City of Annapolis; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3