START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 808 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 808 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Alcoholic Beverages – Retail Delivery – Local Delivery Service Permit 
 
 
This bill establishes a local delivery service permit that authorizes the holder to deliver 
alcoholic beverages from a retail license holder authorized to deliver alcoholic beverages 
to an individual in the jurisdiction where the retail license holder is located, as specified. 
The annual fee for the delivery service permit is $1,000, which is collected by the local 
licensing board. The bill also modifies general provisions related to the retail delivery of 
alcoholic beverages, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State revenues or expenditures. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues increase by $1,000 for each local delivery 
service permit issued under the bill, beginning in FY 2025. In addition, local revenues may 
increase to the extent a local jurisdiction receives fine revenues under the bill. It is assumed 
that local boards can handle monitoring and enforcement activities with existing budgeted 
resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Local Delivery Service Permit  
 
The bill establishes a local delivery service permit in jurisdictions where a local licensing 
board has adopted regulations authorizing the delivery of alcoholic beverages by a 
third party contractor, an independent contractor, or an agent. The permit authorizes the 
holder to deliver alcoholic beverages from a retail license holder authorized to deliver 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 808/ Page 2 
alcoholic beverages under State law to an individual in a jurisdiction where the retail 
license holder is located. 
 
A local delivery service permit holder may use employees or contractors who are at least 
21 years old to deliver alcoholic beverages and may facilitate orders via telephone, Internet, 
or other electronic means. The purchaser or receiver of alcoholic beverages under the bill 
must be at least 21 years old and provide valid identification as proof of age on receipt of 
the alcoholic beverages.  
 
Alcoholic beverages sold for off-premises delivery under the bill must be provided in the 
manufacturer's original sealed container and sold only during the hours the retail license 
holder is open for in-store purchases. 
 
A local delivery service permit holder is subject to the following penalties for violations 
under the bill: 
 
 
for a first violation, a fine of $1,000;  
 
for a second violation, a fine of $3,000 and a suspension of the local delivery service 
permit for 30 days;  
 
for a third violation, a fine of $6,000 and a suspension of the local delivery service 
permit for 60 days; and  
 
for any subsequent violation, revocation of the local delivery service permit. 
 
The holder of a local delivery service permit may not (1) sell alcoholic beverages or 
(2) store alcoholic beverages for delivery. A person must apply to the local licensing board 
for a local delivery service permit before contracting to deliver alcoholic beverages for a 
retail license holder. 
 
If a retail license holder contracts with a local delivery service permit holder to deliver 
alcoholic beverages, the retail license holder and the local delivery service permit holder 
must establish a method to ensure that the retail license holder retains control over sales to 
and payments made from a purchaser for the alcoholic beverages. 
 
The local board may establish regulations for (1) the application requirements for the local 
delivery service permit and (2) additional requirements for holders of the local delivery 
service permit who deliver alcoholic beverages on behalf of a retail license holder.   
 
The bill authorizes the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission to adopt regulations 
to enforce the bill.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 808/ Page 3 
Current Law:  Generally, State law regulates specific activities of alcoholic beverage 
license holders including (1) the storage of alcoholic beverages; (2) the certification of 
license holders; and (3) the conduct of license holders. Statue also regulates the delivery of 
alcoholic beverages within the State.  
 
Under current law, retail delivery to a purchaser of alcoholic beverages is generally 
prohibited. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local licensing boards are responsible for issuing a local delivery 
service permit under the bill. For each local delivery service permit issued by a local board, 
local permit fee revenues increase by $1,000, beginning fiscal 2025. In addition, local 
revenues may increase to the extent a local jurisdiction receives fine revenues under the 
bill. It is assumed that local boards can handle any monitoring and enforcement activities 
with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that can utilize the local delivery service permit 
established under the bill may experience an increase in sales from alcoholic beverages 
deliveries. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 787 and SB 815 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 456 (Senator A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3