START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 807 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 807 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources – Submerged Aquatic Vegetation Surveys 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “aerial survey” for purposes of surveying submerged 
aquatic vegetation (SAV) to include any other survey that (1) encompasses the distribution 
of SAV in the Chesapeake Bay, the Atlantic Coastal Bays, or both; (2) uses a methodology 
approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Chesapeake Bay Program 
(CBP); and (3) is approved by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The bill 
renames that term to instead be the “SAV survey,” updates the provisions related to the 
current SAV survey compiled by the Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences (VIMS), and 
makes conforming changes. DNR must study and report on the implications and feasibility 
of using alternative methods other than an aerial survey to delineate SAV protection zones. 
By December 1, 2025, DNR must submit the report to the General Assembly. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DNR can complete the required study with existing budgeted resources. The 
bill does not affect DNR expenditures unless the department chooses to use additional 
methods to survey SAV. As discussed below, if DNR chooses to do so, general fund 
expenditures increase by an unknown amount, depending on the scope of any additional 
surveys and their associated costs. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 807/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required report must:   
 
 
analyze the current benefits and drawbacks of using an aerial survey to delineate 
SAV protection zones; 
 
analyze the implications and feasibility of using alternative methods or technologies 
for delineating SAV protection zones; 
 
analyze whether alternative methods or technologies may be used more frequently 
than every three years to delineate SAV protection zones; and 
 
analyze the benefits and drawbacks of increasing the look-back period in 
§ 4-1006.1(c) of the Natural Resources Article (that subsection references both a 
three-year and a six-year lookback period). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Submerged Aquatic Vegetation 
 
“SAV protection zone” means an area delineated by DNR for the protection from uprooting 
and the restoration of SAV. A person may not use a hydraulic clam dredge, a traditional 
bottom dredge, or a shinnecock rake in an SAV protection zone. Except in limited specific 
regions, a previously delineated SAV protection zone can be reopened to the use of the 
above tools if aerial surveys have not shown any SAV in the area during the past three years 
or have shown SAV density of less than 10% during each of the past six years. 
 
In 2004 and every three years thereafter, DNR must update the delineations of SAV 
protection zones that were completed in 2001. The updated delineations must include areas 
where SAV has been mapped by aerial surveys during at least one of the previous 
three years. “Aerial survey” means the annual aerial survey compiled by VIMS for the 
annual Bay-wide SAV Mapping Program. 
 
To the extent possible, DNR must adjust SAV protection zones so that delineations are 
geographically manageable, utilizing straight lines and existing points of reference. To the 
extent possible, such an adjustment must result in no net loss or gain of protected area and, 
to prevent that outcome, may exclude small areas of vegetated bottom or include small 
areas of unvegetated bottom. 
 
DNR must utilize buoys or other visible landmarks as appropriate to mark SAV protection 
zones, may make revisions to the delineations of SAV protection zones at any time if 
determined to be necessary, and must publish delineations and revisions of SAV protection 
zones. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 807/ Page 3 
These provisions may not be construed to affect the authority of DNR to adopt any 
additional measures that it determines are necessary to protect SAV beds in the waters of 
the State. 
 
Chesapeake Bay Program 
 
CBP is a regional partnership focused on the restoration of the Chesapeake Bay. It is 
managed by EPA, and its principal partners include Maryland, Delaware, New York, 
Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia, the District of Columbia, the Chesapeake Bay 
Commission, and EPA. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The VIMS survey is the oldest Bay-wide SAV survey in existence 
and has been conducted annually since 1984. The survey is used by Maryland, Virginia, 
and numerous federal agencies for SAV criteria assessments, tracking restoration goals, 
and assessing impacts to SAV habitat. The survey is funded through a combination of 
federal, state (Maryland and Virginia), and private funds. DNR contributes approximately 
$75,000 annually, and the Maryland Department of the Environment also contributes. By 
contracting with VIMS, there are consistent standard operating procedures and guidelines 
for the acquisition of aerial and satellite imagery, photo interpretation and SAV bed 
delineation and bed density estimates, as well as quality assurance and quality control 
compliance. The VIMS survey covers both the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Coastal 
Bays. 
 
Both DNR and the Department of Legislative Services interpret the bill to allow, but not 
require, DNR to use a different method other than the aerial VIMS survey for SAV 
mapping. The VIMS survey is (1) jointly funded; (2) comes with a quality assurance 
program; and (3) relied on by DNR for multiple purposes, such as SAV restoration goals, 
but also water clarity attainment. Based on the clear utility and value to DNR, this analysis 
assumes that DNR does not replace the VIMS survey for its SAV mapping purposes, nor 
does it use an additional survey method, despite having the option to do so. 
 
If, however, DNR were to use a different method in addition to the VIMS survey, general 
fund expenditures for DNR increase by an amount necessary to contract with an entity to 
conduct the survey. DNR cannot provide an estimate of what an additional SAV survey 
might cost, which also depends on the geographic scope of the survey, but advises that the 
VIMS survey costs approximately $780,000 annually in total. As noted above, the VIMS 
survey is jointly funded and covers both the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Coastal Bays. 
 
DNR advises that it can complete the required study with existing staff who will be 
reprioritized from other programmatic duties. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 807/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1140 (Senator Mautz) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 11, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4