START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 874 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 874 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Long-Term Care Administrators - Requirements for Assisted 
Living Managers 
 
   
This bill extends the date, from October 1, 2024, to July 1, 2026, by which individuals must 
be licensed by the State Board of Long-Term Care Administrators before practicing as an 
assisted living manager in the State. An assisted living manager employed by an assisted 
living program that is licensed for four or fewer beds must comply with specified manager 
training course requirements by June 30, 2026, and may not be found in violation of such 
requirements before July 1, 2026. By October 1, 2024, October 1, 2025, and October 1, 2026, 
the board must submit specified reports to specified committees of the General Assembly on 
the implementation of licensure requirements for assisted living managers. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Board of Long-Term Care Administrators can complete the 
required reports using existed budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, assisted living is regulated by the State 
and generally does not have specific federal requirements. In Maryland, assisted living 
programs are licensed by the Office of Health Care Quality in the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH). 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 874/ Page 2 
State Board of Long-Term Care Administrators Membership 
 
Under current law, the State Board of Long-Term Care Administrators is the licensing 
authority for nursing home and assisted living administrators in the State. The board 
comprises 18 members, including 5 members who must be individuals who (1) before 
October 1, 2024, have completed a specified manager training course (or are exempt from 
the requirement) and have been actively employed by an assisted living program and (2) on 
or after October 1, 2024, must be licensed assisted living managers.  
 
The bill specifies that as soon as practicable, five board members must be assisted living 
managers who have completed a specified manager training course (or are exempt from 
the requirement) and been actively employed by an assisted living program. By 
July 1, 2026, these five members must be licensed assisted living managers.  
 
The bill also extends the terms of the initial assisted living manager members appointed to 
the board as mandated by Chapters 689 and 690 of 2022. Instead, the board positions expire 
as follows:  two members in 2026; two members in 2027; and one member in 2028. 
 
Licensure of Assisted Living Managers 
 
Chapters 689 and 690 required that an individual be licensed by the board to practice as an 
assisted living manager in the State beginning October 1, 2024. To qualify for an assisted 
living manager license, an applicant must (1) be of good moral character and at least 21 years 
old; (2) meet the education requirements under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.07.14); 
and (3) complete an assisted living manager training course, as specified, including the 
successful passing of the course examination, or be exempt from the training requirement.  
 
The bill extends the licensure requirement date to July 1, 2026, and clarifies that individuals 
who have been employed in the State as an assisted living manager and have worked at an 
assisted living program that is licensed for five or more beds as of June 30, 2024, are 
deemed to have satisfied the qualifications for licensure.  
 
Designating an Alternate Assisted Living Manager  
 
Current law requires that, if a licensed assisted living manager leaves or is removed, the 
owner of the assisted living program (or designee) must immediately (1) designate a 
licensed assisted living manager to serve in that capacity and notify the board or (2) appoint 
an alternate assisted living manager or a nonlicensed individual to serve in the capacity of 
interim assisted living manager. An appointed alternate or nonlicensed individual may 
serve as interim assisted living manager if the individual has enrolled in a manager training 
course that the individual expects to complete within six months and the individual has 
provided required notice to the board.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 874/ Page 3 
The bill removes authorization for an appointed alternate assisted living manager or 
nonlicensed individual to serve in that capacity if the individual has enrolled in a manager 
training course. 
 
Practicing Without a License  
 
Under current law, an individual may not practice, attempt to practice, or offer to practice 
as an assisted living manager in the State unless licensed by the board. The bill clarifies 
that, if an individual violates this requirement on or before June 30, 2027, the board must 
provide the individual with written notice and a 60-day period to comply with the licensure 
requirement before imposing a fine. 
 
Assisted Living Manager Training Course 
 
Under current law, an assisted living manager who is employed by an assisted living 
program must have completed a manager training course that is approved by MDH and 
includes an examination. Exhibit 1 details the training course requirements under current 
law compared with those under the bill. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Assisted Living Manager Training Course Requirements 
 
Current Law 
Under SB 613/HB 874 of 2024 
 
Consist of at least 80 hours 
 
Consist of at least 80 hours 
 
Require attendance or participation at 
training programs that provide for 
direct interaction between faculty and 
participants 
 
Provide the training through in-person 
courses, virtual training methods, or a 
combination of both 
 
Authorize a maximum of 25 hours of 
training through internet courses, 
correspondence courses, tapes, or other 
training methods that do not require 
direct interaction between faculty and 
participants  
 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 874/ Page 4 
Required Report 
 
The bill requires the board, by October 1, 2024, to submit a report to the 
Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee 
on the implementation of licensure requirements for assisted living managers, including:  
 
 
dates by which the board intends to begin receiving applications for assisted living 
managers and begin issuing licenses; 
 
the status of the appointment of assisted living managers to the board;  
 
the number of personnel employed by the board and the status of filling any vacant 
board positions necessary to implement assisted living manager licensure 
requirements;  
 
the ability of the board’s software platform to accept applications for licensure as 
assisted living managers and issue the licenses, including a timeline and update on 
implementation of any necessary information technology system updates;  
 
the timeframe for informing and steps that have been and will be taken to inform 
assisted living managers of the licensure requirement; and  
 
any other policies that the board anticipates adopting to implement licensure 
requirements for assisted living managers. 
 
By October 1, 2025, and October 1, 2026, the board must submit a report to the 
aforementioned committees that includes any updates to the information outlined above, 
including an explanation for any change in dates or timeframes.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Assisted living programs, the vast majority of which are small 
businesses, gain additional time to ensure that their assisted living managers comply with 
licensure requirements. Facilities with four or fewer beds must ensure their assisted living 
program manager completes the required manager training course by June 30, 2026. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that, as of June 2023, there were at least 
1,721 assisted living programs in the State, of which approximately 77% were licensed for 
nine or fewer beds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 613 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 874/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland Department of 
Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5