START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 795

Chapter 795

(House Bill 887)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Department of Health – Health Commissions and Maryland Insurance
Administration – Study

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to contract with an
independent consultant to conduct a certain study of the Health Services Cost
Review Commission, the Maryland Health Care Commission, the Maryland
Insurance Administration, and the Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission; and generally relating to a study of State health commissions and the
Maryland Insurance Administration.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) The Maryland Department of Health shall contract with an independent
consultant to study the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), the Maryland
Health Care Commission (MHCC), the Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission (MCHRC), and the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA).

(b) In conducting the study required under subsection (a) of this section, the
independent contractor shall:

(1) examine overlap of the statutory and regulatory duties performed by
HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA;

(2) identify statutory or regulatory duties performed by HSCRC, MHCC,
MCHRC, and MIA that may be more appropriately performed by the Department or
another commission or agency;

(3) identify whether and how HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA could be
streamlined to reduce overlap of duties;

(4) identify whether and how the functions of HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC,
and MIA could be better aligned to improve effectiveness and efficiency;

(5) examine the alignment of the statutory or regulatory duties performed
by HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA with the Maryland Total Cost of Care model and
the State’s participation in the Advancing All–Payer Health Equity Approaches and
Development (AHEAD) model; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 795 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) recommend any changes in HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA
administrative structure that may improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
commission or agency.

(c) The independent consultant hired under subsection (a) of this section shall
seek input from the Department, HSCRC, MHCC, MCHRC, and MIA in conducting the
study.

(d) On or before January 1, 2026, the Department shall report to the Governor
and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the Senate Finance
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee on the results
of the study conducted under subsection (a) of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2