START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 877 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 877 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Board of Public Works - Transparency Data Dashboard 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of the Comptroller to develop and maintain on the Board of 
Public Works’ (BPW) website a procurement transparency dashboard that must (1) be 
public, interactive, and searchable and (2) include specified information related to State 
procurement – such as BPW meeting announcements, agendas, and related materials, 
including contract spending amounts, and State procurement preference programs, as 
specified. Beginning in fiscal 2025, the Governor must include an appropriation in the 
annual budget bill for (1) at least one full-time position in the Comptroller’s Office to 
develop and maintain the dashboard and (2) software necessary to develop and maintain 
the dashboard. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $170,500 in FY 2025 to develop and 
maintain the dashboard; out-year costs reflect annualization, ongoing operating costs, and 
inflation. FY 2025 expenditures are discretionary. General fund expenditures are mitigated 
to the extent the Comptroller can cover some of the software and development costs with 
existing resources. No effect on revenues. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2026.   
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
170,500 
183,200 
186,900 
190,700 
194,700 
Net Effect 
($170,500) 
($183,200) 
($186,900) 
($190,700) 
($194,700)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 877/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 590 of 2017 created the Office of the Chief Procurement Officer 
(OCPO) within the Department of General Services (DGS). OCPO maintains the Maryland 
Procurement website, which includes information on State procurement policies and 
procedures as well as all procurement preference programs, including the Minority 
Business Enterprise Program, Small Business Reserve Program, and the Veteran-owned 
Small Business Enterprise program.  
 
BPW consists of the Governor, Treasurer, and Comptroller, and is authorized by State 
procurement law to control procurement by State procurement units. However, the board 
does not have jurisdiction over (1) capital expenditures by the Maryland Department of 
Transportation or the Maryland Transportation Authority related to roads, bridges, or 
highways or (2) procurements by DGS valued at less than $1.0 million for cybersecurity. 
In general, BPW meets biweekly to review and approve contracts, except commodities 
contracts, exceeding $200,000 in value. BPW’s website includes information on all 
BPW meetings, including meeting agendas, board actions, meeting minutes, approved 
contracts, and archived video footage of each meeting. However, the agendas are not 
searchable by item. 
 
Chapter 659 of 2008, the Maryland Funding Accountability and Transparency Act, created 
the Maryland Transparency Portal, a searchable website that includes all State payments 
of at least $25,000, sortable by payee, agency making the payment, and zip code of the 
payee. Originally containing only contract payments, the website was expanded in 
fiscal 2010 and 2011 to include grant and loan payments, respectively.       
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires an appropriation in fiscal 2025 sufficient to employ 
at least one full-time information technology (IT) administrator and for related software 
costs. However, the General Assembly cannot mandate funding in the following fiscal year, 
so funding for fiscal 2025 is discretionary.  
 
The Office of the Comptroller advises that it requires the position mandated by the bill to 
oversee the development of the dashboard and to maintain it once it is operational. It also 
estimates the software and related IT costs of developing and maintaining the transparency 
dashboard to be $100,000 annually. 
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $170,544 in fiscal 2025, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring one IT administrator to oversee the development of the dashboard and 
then maintain it. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses, including software and programming costs of $100,000 annually. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 877/ Page 3 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$63,288 
Software and Programming 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
7,256 
Total FY 2025 Expenditures 
$170,544 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
The Office of the Comptroller advises that it may be able to cover a portion, but not all, of 
the IT costs with existing resources. To the extent that it has resources available to cover 
some costs, general fund expenditures are mitigated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 703 (Senators Hayes and Charles) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of General Services; Board of 
Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3