START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 576

Chapter 576

(House Bill 812)

AN ACT concerning

Tri–County Council for Southern Maryland – Southern Maryland Agricultural
Development Commission – Funding

FOR the purpose of altering the amount of an appropriation that the Governor is required
to include in the annual budget bill each year for the Tri–County Council for
Southern Maryland; repealing the termination of certain provisions of law that
require the Governor to include the appropriation in the annual budget bill each year
and the Council to use the appropriation to fund the activities of the Southern
Maryland Agricultural Development Commission; and generally relating to the
Tri–County Council for Southern Maryland and the Southern Maryland Agricultural
Development Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 13–601(a) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 13–611(b)(3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 187 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

13–601.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “Council” means the Tri–County Council for Southern Maryland.

13–611.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 576 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (3) (i) The Governor shall include in the State budget for the following
fiscal year an appropriation to partially support the Council.

(ii) 1. For fiscal year 2024 and each fiscal year thereafter, the
Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of [$900,000]
$1,000,000 to the Council from the Cigarette Restitution Fund established under § 7–317
of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

2. THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL
BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION EQUAL TO 5% OF THE AMOUNT ALLOCATED TO
THE STATE FOR THAT FISCAL YEAR UNDER THE MASTER SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT
AS DEFINED IN § 16–402 OF THE BUSINESS REGULATION ARTICLE TO THE COUNCIL
FROM THE CIGARETTE RESTITUTION FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–317 OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

[2.] 3.The Council shall use funds appropriated from the
Cigarette Restitution Fund for the purpose of funding the activities of the Southern
Maryland Agricultural Development Commission.

[3.] 4.The appropriation required under subsubparagraph 1 of
this subparagraph shall be in addition to, and may not supplant, any funding appropriated
to the Council.

Chapter 187 of the Acts of 2022

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2022. [It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of June 30, 2025,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2