START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 839 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 839 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Carroll County - Contracts and Purchasing 
 
 
This bill raises the contract value threshold, from $25,000 to $50,000, above which the 
County Commissioners of Carroll County need to give advance public notice and use 
competitive bidding to purchase supplies and equipment or contract for a public work or 
improvement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill applies only to Carroll County. 
  
Local Effect:  No direct effect on Carroll County finances, but the county likely 
experiences administrative efficiencies in conducting small procurements. No effect on 
revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The County Commissioners of Carroll County may enter into a contract 
for any necessary public work or improvement or for the purchase of supplies and 
equipment that does not exceed $25,000 only on an order passed by the county 
commissioners. 
 
If the cost of a project or a purchase of supplies or equipment exceeds $25,000, except in 
emergencies or when there is a sole source of supply, the Chief of the Bureau of Purchasing 
must provide public notice for at least one week, as specified. The public notice must state 
the date, time, and place of the opening of the bids. Bids must be opened in the presence 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 839/ Page 2 
of an employee designated by the commissioners, and the commissioners must award the 
contract to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid is considered reasonable, or they may 
reject any and all bids. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 897 and HB 1285 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 437 (Carroll County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2