START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 827 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 827 
(Delegate Qi, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Insurance Administration – Professional Employer Organizations – 
Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) to study professional 
employer organizations (PEOs) in the State. By December 31, 2024, MIA must report its 
findings to the House Health and Government Operations Committee and the Senate 
Finance Committee. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MIA can conduct the required study using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study, MIA must (1) identify and compare the regulation 
of PEOs under federal and State law and in other states; (2) review the history of PEO 
activities in the State and elsewhere and changes to the PEO industry over time; (3) review 
PEO health plans and plan benefit designs; (4) review requirements that businesses must 
meet to participate in PEO arrangements and access PEO health plans; (5) examine the 
regulatory structures for health insurance and PEOs in other states and under federal law 
that allow individuals who are co-employed through a PEO arrangement and have a 
workplace employer that is a small employer to participate in the PEO’s large group plan; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 827/ Page 2 
and (6) address any potential impacts of proposed statutory changes in the State relating to 
the offering of health coverage by PEOs on the small group market. 
 
Current Law:  PEOs are not regulated under Maryland law. 
 
Additional Comments:  A PEO provides outsourced human resource management 
services to companies that do not have the resources or expertise to establish their own 
human resource departments. A PEO operates by establishing and maintaining a long-term 
employer relationship with a client’s employees through co-employment agreements. The 
agreement contractually confers certain employer rights, responsibilities, and risks on the 
PEO that enable the PEO to pay wages and employment taxes and premiums out of its own 
accounts on behalf of the client. However, under the agreements, a PEO typically reserves 
the right of direction and control over covered employees, and retains the right to hire, 
reassign, and fire covered employees. This gives the PEO an opportunity to manage the 
risks it assumes through the co-employment agreement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 821 (Senator Feldman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2