START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 882 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 882 
(Delegate Rosenberg) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation - Sale of Motor Fuel - Pricing Signage (Gas Price Clarity 
Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a specified sign at all retail service stations to prominently display the credit 
and debit price (if higher than the cash price) or the credit and debit price and the cash price 
for a whole measurement unit of regular gasoline sold on the premises. All numerals on the 
sign must be the same size. An exemption from the existing signage requirement for retail 
service station dealers who operate with up to three dispensing units and six combined 
nozzles is repealed, thus making the new requirement apply to all retail service station 
dealers. The bill also makes a conforming change to a provision related to optional signage 
for diesel and other motor fuel products. Finally, the bill specifies that provisions governing 
signage at retail service stations supersede any inconsistent local law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Comptroller can enforce the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
Imposition of existing penalty provisions is not expected to materially affect State finances 
or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Imposition of existing penalty provisions is not expected to materially affect 
local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. There may be limited one-time costs for retail service 
stations to comply with the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 882/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Retail service stations (i.e., retail businesses where motor fuel is sold) must 
meet various registration, inspection, and signage requirements. Failure to comply with 
provisions related to the inspection and sale of motor fuel is a misdemeanor and is subject 
to a maximum penalty of a $5,000 fine and/or one year imprisonment. 
 
A sign or other means on or near a retail outlet that advertises the retail price of motor fuel 
may list the price and each tax separately if the listing of the total of the price and all taxes 
is the same size as the separate listing of the price. Even so, the sign must list the total of 
the price and all taxes by numerals of uniform size, subject to additional specified 
requirements. 
 
A retail service station dealer who operates more than three dispensing units that combined 
have more than six nozzles must also keep a sign on the premises that, in addition to 
meeting other specified requirements, (1) states the lowest price for a whole measurement 
unit of regular gasoline sold on the premises; (2) states the unit of measurement used; and 
(3) is readable by passing motorists. The required sign may also state the lowest price for 
a whole measurement unit of diesel and other motor fuel products sold on the premises. 
 
If a new or additional sign is required to comply with this requirement, the supplier of the 
gasoline must provide the sign and numerals without cost to the retail service station dealer. 
 
Generally, signs regulated by the above requirements (or other State law or by federal law) 
may be regulated by the local zoning authority and must be consistent with the local law, 
ordinance, or regulation governing signs. However, a sign required at a service station 
pursuant to the requirements above (or any other State or federal law) is exempt from the 
provisions of a local law, ordinance, or regulation for the purpose of determining (1) the 
total number of signs permitted and (2) the area of signs permitted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 178 of 2023 and SB 322 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 651 (Senator Kagan) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 882/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3