START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

Chapter 539

(House Bill 864)

AN ACT concerning

Energy Efficiency and Conservation Plans

FOR the purpose of requiring each electric company, each gas company, and the
Department of Housing and Community Development to develop a certain plan for
achieving certain energy efficiency, conservation, and greenhouse gas emissions
reduction targets through certain programs and services and superseding certain
existing energy efficiency and conservation goals; requiring the Public Service
Commission to encourage and promote the efficient use and conservation of energy
in support of certain greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals and targets in a
certain manner, including by requiring municipal electric or gas utilities and ~~small~~
~~rural~~ certain electric cooperatives to include certain programs or services as part of
their service to their customers as directed by the Commission; requiring the
Commission to require certain electric companies and certain gas companies to
include a certain disclosure on customer bills; requiring the Commission to establish
and determine certain greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets; requiring certain
contractors used for certain programs under this Act to meet certain job
requirements; requiring the Department of Housing and Community Development
to develop a plan to coordinate and leverage funding sources to support certain
energy efficiency and other home upgrades; requiring the Department of the
Environment to prepare and submit to the Commission a certain analysis; requiring
each electric company and each gas company to promote certain rebates, tax credits,
and incentives; requiring the certification agency designated by the Board of Public
Works and the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs,
in consultation with the Department of Housing and Community Development, the
Office of the Attorney General, and the General Assembly to study certain energy
efficiency and conservation services and submit its findings on or before a certain
date; requiring the Commission to establish a certain working group to study and
make recommendations on extending certain program assistance to certain
moderate–income households; and generally relating to the efficient use and
conservation of energy in support of greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals and
targets.

BY repealing
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–211 and 7–211.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–211.2
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

to be Section 7–315
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
The new part designation “Part I. In General” to immediately precede Section 7–201;
and Section 7–220 through 7–228 to be under the new part “Part II. Energy
Efficiency and Conservation Plans”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Corporations and Associations
Section 5–637(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–510.3(j)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–20B–05(f)(4)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 7–211 and 7–211.1 of Article – Public Utilities of the Annotated Code of
Maryland be repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 7–211.2 of Article
– Public Utilities of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–315.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the new part designation
“Part I. In General” be added to immediately precede Section 7–201 of Article – Public
Utilities of the Annotated Code of Maryland.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Corporations and Associations

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

5–637.

(b) A member–regulated cooperative is subject to the following provisions of the
Public Utilities Article:

(1) § 5–103;

(2) § 5–201;

(3) § 5–202;

(4) § 5–303;

(5) § 5–304;

(6) § 5–306;

(7) § 7–103;

(8) § 7–104;

(9) § 7–203;

(10) § 7–207;

(11) TITLE 7, SUBTITLE 2, PART II;

(12) § 7–302;

[(12)] (13) Title 7, Subtitle 5, Part I and Part II;

[(13)] (14) Title 7, Subtitle 7; and

[(14)] (15) § 13–101.

Article – Public Utilities

7–218. RESERVED.

7–219. RESERVED.

PART II. ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION PLANS.

7–220.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BEHIND–THE–METER PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM THAT IMPACTS
THE CUSTOMER SIDE OF THE UTILITY METER.

(C) “BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION” MEANS THE REPLACEMENT OF THE
DIRECT USE OF FOSSIL FUELS IN BUILDINGS WITH THE USE OF ELECTRICITY IN A
MANNER THAT:

(1) REDUCES OVERALL LIFETIME GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS;

(2) REDUCES CUSTOMERS’ ENERGY COSTS; OR

(3) ENABLES BETTER MANAGEMENT OF THE ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.

(D) “CARBON DIOXIDE EQUIVALENT” MEANS THE MEASUREMENT OF A
GIVEN WEIGHT OF A GREENHOUSE GAS THAT HAS THE SAME GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL, MEASURED OVER A SPECIFIC PERIOD OF TIME, AS 1 METRIC TON OF
CARBON DIOXIDE.

(E) “DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM ESTABLISHED BY
AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER, OR A THIRD PARTY THAT
PROMOTES CHANGES IN ELECTRIC USAGE BY CUSTOMERS FROM THEIR NORMAL
CONSUMPTION PATTERNS IN RESPONSE TO:

(1) CHANGES IN THE PRICE OF ELECTRICITY OVER TIME; OR

(2) INCENTIVES DESIGNED TO:

(I) INDUCE LOWER ELECTRICITY USE AT TIMES OF HIGH
WHOLESALE MARKET PRICES; OR

(II) ENSURE SYSTEM RELIABILITY.

(F) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.

(G) “ENERGY EFFICIENCY” MEANS THE USE OF LESS ENERGY TO PERFORM
THE SAME TASK OR PRODUCE THE SAME RESULT.

(H) “FRONT–OF–METER COMMUNITY PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM THAT:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

(1) IS SEPARATE FROM FRONT–OF–METER UTILITY PROGRAMS;

(2) IMPACTS THE UTILITY SIDE OF THE METER; AND

(3) DIRECTLY BENEFITS A SET OF CUSTOMERS.

(I) “FRONT–OF–METER UTILITY PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM THAT
IMPACTS THE UTILITY SIDE OF A METER AND BENEFITS ALL UTILITY CUSTOMERS.

(J) “GREENHOUSE GAS” INCLUDES:

(1) CARBON DIOXIDE;

(2) METHANE;

(3) NITROUS OXIDE;

(4) HYDROFLUOROCARBONS;

(5) PERFLUOROCARBONS; AND

(6) SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE.

(K) “GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION” MEANS A REDUCTION IN
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS, MEASURED IN METRIC TONS OF CARBON DIOXIDE
EQUIVALENTS, INCLUDING:

(1) GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FROM THE GENERATION OF
ELECTRICITY DELIVERED TO AND CONSUMED IN THE STATE; AND

(2) LINE LOSSES FROM THE TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION OF
ELECTRICITY, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE ELECTRICITY IS GENERATED IN THE
STATE OR IMPORTED.

(L) “LOW–INCOME PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM THAT DELIVERS ENERGY
EFFICIENCY, CONSERVATION, AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
MEASURES TO REDUCE UTILITY EXPENSES FOR BUILDING OWNERS, MANAGERS, AND
TENANTS OF HOUSING WITH RESIDENTS WHO QUALIFY FOR THE DEPARTMENT’S
LOW–INCOME ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS, INCLUDING:

(1) THE EMPOWER MARYLAND LIMITED INCOME ENERGY
EFFICIENCY PROGRAM;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE MULTIFAMILY ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND HOUSING
AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM; AND

(3) THE WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.

(M) “LOW–INCOME RESIDENTIAL” MEANS A COMMUNITY, BUILDING, OR
HOUSEHOLD WITH RESIDENTS THAT:

(1) HAVE INCOMES BELOW 250% OF THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL
AS DETERMINED BY THE FEDERAL CENSUS; OR

(2) MEET THE ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA APPROVED BY THE
COMMISSION FOR LOW–INCOME PROGRAMS.

(N) “MIDSIZE ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE” MEANS AN ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE, INCLUDING A MEMBER–REGULATED COOPERATIVE, THAT:

(1) SERVES FEWER THAN 75,000 CUSTOMERS IN ITS DISTRIBUTION
TERRITORY; BUT

(2) IS NOT A SMALL RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE.

(N) (O) “NONENERGY PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM WITH GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION BENEFITS THAT ARE PRIMARILY
NONENERGY–BASED.

(O) (P) “PLAN” MEANS ANY COMBINATION OF BEHIND–THE–METER
PROGRAMS, FRONT–OF–METER COMMUNITY PROGRAMS, FRONT–OF–METER
UTILITY PROGRAMS, OR NONENERGY PROGRAMS THAT:

(1) ACHIEVE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS THROUGH
ENERGY EFFICIENCY, CONSERVATION, DEMAND RESPONSE, AND BENEFICIAL
ELECTRIFICATION; AND

(2) INCLUDE A COST RECOVERY PROPOSAL.

(P) (Q) “TASK FORCE” MEANS THE GREEN AND HEALTHY TASK FORCE
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–315 OF THIS TITLE.

7–221.

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS AND DECLARES THAT ENERGY EFFICIENCY
IS:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

(1) AMONG THE LEAST EXPENSIVE WAYS TO MEET THE ENERGY
DEMANDS OF THE STATE;

(2) A MEANS OF AFFORDABLE, RELIABLE, AND CLEAN ENERGY FOR
CONSUMERS OF MARYLAND; AND

(3) ONE METHOD TO ACHIEVE MARYLAND’S CLIMATE COMMITMENTS
FOR REDUCING STATEWIDE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS, INCLUDING THOSE
SPECIFIED IN REQUIRED UNDER TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE ENVIRONMENT
ARTICLE.

7–222.

(A) SUBJECT TO REVIEW AND APPROVAL BY THE COMMISSION, EACH
ELECTRIC COMPANY, EACH GAS COMPANY OTHER THAN A GAS COMPANY SUBJECT
TO § 4–207(A) OF THIS ARTICLE, AND THE DEPARTMENT, AND, IF REQUIRED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, EACH MIDSIZE ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE SHALL DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT PROGRAMS AND SERVICES IN
ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 7–223, 7–224, AND 7–225 OF THIS SUBTITLE TO ENCOURAGE
AND PROMOTE THE EFFICIENT USE AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY, DEMAND
RESPONSE, AND BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION BY CONSUMERS, ELECTRIC
COMPANIES, GAS COMPANIES, AND THE DEPARTMENT IN SUPPORT OF THE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION GOALS AND TARGETS ~~SPECIFIED~~ ~~IN~~
REQUIRED UNDER TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE.

(B) AS DIRECTED BY THE COMMISSION, EACH GAS COMPANY SUBJECT TO §
4–207(A) OF THIS ARTICLE, EACH MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC OR GAS UTILITY, AND EACH
SMALL RURAL ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, AND, IF REQUIRED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, EACH MIDSIZE ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE SHALL
INCLUDE ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION, DEMAND RESPONSE, AND
BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMS OR SERVICES AS PART OF THEIR
SERVICE TO THEIR CUSTOMERS.

(C) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, EACH MIDSIZE
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO EITHER SUBSECTION (A) OR
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) EACH MIDSIZE ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE SHALL OFFER PROGRAMS
AND SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH:

(I) SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION THROUGH DECEMBER 31,
2026; AND

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) ON OR AFTER JANUARY 1, 2027, AND AS THE COMMISSION
DIRECTS, EITHER SUBSECTION (A) OR SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) NOT LATER THAN OCTOBER 1, 2025, THE COMMISSION SHALL
DETERMINE IF IT IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST FOR A MIDSIZE ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE TO OFFER PROGRAMS AND SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS IN ACCORDANCE
WITH SUBSECTION (A) OR SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION STARTING JANUARY 1,
2027, AND FOR ALL SUBSEQUENT YEARS.

(4) EACH MIDSIZE ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE SHALL PROVIDE THE
FOLLOWING INFORMATION TO THE COMMISSION TO ASSIST IN MAKING A
DETERMINATION UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION:

(I) ANTICIPATED COSTS AND BILL IMPACTS;

(II) A DESCRIPTION OF THE ANTICIPATED PROGRAM
OFFERINGS;

(III) THE ANTICIPATED COST–EFFECTIVENESS OF THE
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL SECTOR SUBPORTFOLIOS BASED ON
THE COST–EFFECTIVENESS TESTS IN § 7–225(D)(3)(I) OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(IV) THE ANTICIPATED ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS; AND

(V) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THE COMMISSION REQUIRES.

(5) THE INFORMATION PROVIDED TO THE COMMISSION UNDER
PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE BASED ON A PLAN TO OFFER
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES TO CUSTOMERS THAT COMPLIES WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION FOR THE 3–YEAR PROGRAM CYCLE STARTING JANUARY 1, 2027.

(6) WHEN MAKING A PUBLIC INTEREST DETERMINATION UNDER
PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION THE COMMISSION, AT A MINIMUM, SHALL
CONSIDER THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 7–225(D)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT ARE
CONSIDERED WHEN APPROVING A PLAN OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY THAT IS SUBJECT
TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

(7) STARTING OCTOBER 1, 2025, IF THE COMMISSION DETERMINES
THAT IT IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST FOR A MIDSIZE ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE TO BE
SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE MIDSIZE ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE SHALL COMPLY WITH ALL REQUIREMENTS OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR PROGRAM CYCLES STARTING ON
AND AFTER JANUARY 1, 2027.

(8) ON OR BEFORE MARCH 1 EACH YEAR, STARTING IN 2026, EACH
MIDSIZE ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE DIRECTED BY THE COMMISSION TO INCLUDE
PROGRAMS OR SERVICES UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION SHALL SUBMIT
TO THE COMMISSION A REPORT QUANTIFYING THE GAINS IN ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND REDUCTIONS IN GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS ACHIEVED DURING THE
PREVIOUS YEAR.

(C) (D) THE COMMISSION SHALL ENCOURAGE AND PROMOTE THE
EFFICIENT USE AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY IN SUPPORT OF THE GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION GOALS AND TARGETS ~~SPECIFIED~~ ~~IN~~ REQUIRED UNDER
TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE, ESTABLISHED BY THE
COMMISSION UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE, AND SPECIFIED IN § 7–224(A)(2)
OF THIS SUBTITLE BY:

(1) REQUIRING EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND GAS COMPANY TO
ESTABLISH ANY PROGRAM OR SERVICE THAT THE COMMISSION DETERMINES TO BE
APPROPRIATE AND COST–EFFECTIVE;

(2) ADOPTING RATE–MAKING POLICIES THAT PROVIDE, THROUGH A
SURCHARGE LINE ITEM ON CUSTOMER BILLS:

(I) FULL COST RECOVERY OF REASONABLY INCURRED COSTS
FOR PROGRAMS AND SERVICES ESTABLISHED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
INCLUDING FULL RECOVERY ON A CURRENT BASIS ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2028;

(II) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2032, THE ELIMINATION OF
ANY UNPAID COSTS AND UNAMORTIZED COSTS THAT:

1. A. EXISTED ON DECEMBER 31, 2024; OR

B. WERE INCURRED BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2028; AND

2. WERE ACCRUED FOR THE PURPOSE OF ACHIEVING
STATUTORY TARGETS FOR ANNUAL INCREMENTAL GROSS ENERGY SAVINGS;

(III) COMPENSATION FOR ANY UNPAID COSTS AND
UNAMORTIZED COSTS UNDER ITEM (II) OF THIS ITEM AT NOT MORE THAN EACH
ELECTRIC COMPANY’S AND EACH GAS COMPANY’S AVERAGE COST OF OUTSTANDING
DEBT; AND

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) REASONABLE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE INCENTIVES AND
PENALTIES FOR INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANIES AND GAS COMPANIES, AS
APPROPRIATE; AND

(3) ENSURING THAT ADOPTION OF ELECTRIC CUSTOMER CHOICE
UNDER SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS TITLE AND GAS CUSTOMER CHOICE UNDER SUBTITLE 6
OF THIS TITLE DOES NOT ADVERSELY IMPACT THESE GOALS AND TARGETS.

(E) THE COMMISSION SHALL, BY REGULATION OR ORDER, REQUIRE EACH
ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH GAS COMPANY SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION THAT HAS SUBMITTED TO THE COMMISSION, ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2024,
A PLAN FOR ACHIEVING ELECTRICITY OR GAS SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION
TARGETS TO DISCLOSE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION IN A FORM AND FORMAT
READILY UNDERSTANDABLE TO THE AVERAGE CUSTOMER:

(1) THAT THE SURCHARGE IMPOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION INCLUDES THE COST OF PAYING DOWN THE
UNPAID COSTS AND UNAMORTIZED COSTS THAT WERE ACCRUED OVER TIME BY
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES REQUIRED BY THE COMMISSION DATING BACK TO 2008;
AND

(2) THE PERIOD OF TIME THAT THE SURCHARGE WILL INCLUDE
EXCESS CHARGES TO PAY DOWN THE UNPAID COSTS AND UNAMORTIZED COSTS.

7–223.

(A) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, AND ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1
EVERY 3 YEARS, STARTING IN 2027, THE COMMISSION SHALL, BY REGULATION OR
ORDER, REQUIRE EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH GAS COMPANY SUBJECT TO
§ 7–222(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT A PLAN THAT:

(1) COVERS EACH APPROPRIATE RATEPAYER CLASS CLASSES;

(2) STARTING IN 2027, COVERS A 3–YEAR PROGRAM CYCLE; AND

(3) ACHIEVES THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
TARGET ESTABLISHED FOR THE ELECTRIC COMPANY OR GAS COMPANY UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION THROUGH COST–EFFECTIVE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND CONSERVATION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES, DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS
AND SERVICES, AND BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES.

(B) (1) FOR 2025 AND 2026, AND FOR EACH 3–YEAR PROGRAM CYCLE
STARTING IN 2027, THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH A GREENHOUSE GAS

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGET FOR EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH GAS
COMPANY SUBJECT TO § 7–222(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE AS PROVIDED IN THIS
SUBSECTION.

(2) WHEN ESTABLISHING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
TARGETS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL MEASURE THE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FROM ELECTRICITY AND GAS, AND THE INTENSITIES
OF THOSE EMISSIONS, USING CURRENT DATA OBTAINED FROM PJM
INTERCONNECTION ON MARGINAL GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS RATES FROM THE
PREVIOUS YEAR AND PROJECTIONS FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
ENVIRONMENT.

(3) AS A BASELINE FOR DETERMINING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTIONS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL USE THE
~~GREENHOUSE~~ ~~GAS~~ ~~EMISSIONS~~ ~~RESULTING~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DIRECT~~ ~~CONSUMPTION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~GAS~~
AND ELECTRICITY IN MARYLAND BUILDINGS IN 2020, AS DETERMINED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT.

(4) FOR THE PERIOD 2025–2033, THE COMMISSION SHALL
~~DETERMINE~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OVERALL~~ ~~STATEWIDE~~ ~~GREENHOUSE~~ ~~GAS~~ ~~EMISSIONS~~ ~~REDUCTION~~
TARGET BASED ON AN AVERAGE ANNUAL REDUCTION OF AT LEAST 1.8% OF THE
BASELINE DETERMINED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(3) THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE MEASURED:

(I) IN METRIC TONS; AND

(II) RELATIVE TO THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ELECTRIC COMPANY’S OR GAS COMPANY’S
WEATHER–NORMALIZED GROSS RETAIL SALES AND LOSSES IN A BASELINE YEAR, AS
DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(4) BY THE DATES SPECIFIED IN § 7–225(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE
COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
TARGETS FOR EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY PLAN THAT WILL ACHIEVE AT LEAST THE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION EQUIVALENT, MEASURED ON A
LIFECYCLE BASIS USING THE EMISSION INTENSITIES UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF
THIS SUBSECTION, OF THE FOLLOWING ANNUAL ELECTRICITY SAVINGS
PERCENTAGES, CALCULATED AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE ELECTRIC COMPANY’S 2016
WEATHER–NORMALIZED GROSS RETAIL SALES AND ELECTRICITY LOSSES:

(I) 2.0% IN 2024;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) 2.25% EACH YEAR IN 2025 AND 2026; AND

(III) 2.5% EACH YEAR IN 2027 AND AFTER.

(5) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, AND ON OR BEFORE JANUARY
1 EVERY 3 YEARS, STARTING IN 2027, THE COMMISSION SHALL ESTABLISH
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS FOR EACH GAS COMPANY PLAN
THAT WILL ACHIEVE AT LEAST THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
EQUIVALENT, MEASURED ON A LIFECYCLE BASIS USING THE EMISSION INTENSITIES
UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, OF THE GAS SAVINGS TARGETS
ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION ACHIEVED BY THE GAS COMPANY FOR THE
2021–2023 PROGRAM CYCLE.

(6) THE COMMISSION SHALL TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION THE MOST
RECENT FINAL PLAN ADOPTED UNDER § 2–1205 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE
WHEN ESTABLISHING THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(7) FOR 2025 AND 2026:

(I) THE COMMISSION SHALL, AFTER MAKING APPROPRIATE
FINDINGS, DETERMINE WHETHER EXISTING ELECTRIC COMPANY AND GAS COMPANY
PLANS MUST BE MODIFIED TO COMPLY WITH § 7–225(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) ELECTRIC COMPANIES AND GAS COMPANIES:

1. SHALL PROVIDE INFORMATION AS REQUIRED BY THE
COMMISSION TO ASSIST IN MAKING THE DETERMINATION UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH; AND

2. ARE ONLY REQUIRED TO FILE NEW PLANS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION IF DIRECTED BY THE COMMISSION.

(C) THE COMMISSION MAY GIVE PRIORITY TO LONG–LIVED GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION MEASURES IN THE PLANS BY ESTABLISHING A MINIMUM
WEIGHTED AVERAGE MEASURE LIFE FOR THE PLAN OF EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY
AND GAS COMPANY.

(D) CONTRIBUTIONS TO GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION GOALS
AND TARGETS IN A PLAN OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY OR A GAS COMPANY:

(1) MAY, NOTWITHSTANDING § 7–222(C)(2) § 7–222(D)(2) OF THIS
SUBTITLE, INCLUDE RECOVERY OF THE REASONABLE AND PRUDENT COSTS FROM

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

PROGRAMS THAT ARE NOT BEHIND–THE–METER PROGRAMS IN A BASE RATE
PROCEEDING, SUBJECT TO COMMISSION APPROVAL; AND

(2) MAY NOT INCLUDE THE INCREASED ADOPTION OF ELECTRIC
VEHICLES.

(E) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2025, AT LEAST 80% OF THE GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS COUNTED TOWARD EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY’S AND EACH
GAS COMPANY’S GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS ESTABLISHED
UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL COME FROM BEHIND–THE–METER PROGRAMS, WHICH
MAY INCLUDE DEPLOYMENT OF ENERGY STORAGE FACILITIES.

7–224.

(A) (1) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2025, AND ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1
EVERY 3 YEARS THEREAFTER, STARTING IN 2027, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
PROCURE OR PROVIDE TO LOW– AND MODERATE–INCOME LOW–INCOME
INDIVIDUALS ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES,
DEMAND RESPONSE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES, AND BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION
PROGRAMS AND SERVICES THAT ACHIEVE THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTION TARGETS ESTABLISHED FOR THE DEPARTMENT UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)
OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(2) FOR THE PERIOD 2025–2033, THE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE ON A
TRAJECTORY TO ACHIEVE GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTIONS AFTER 2027 OF AT LEAST
0.9% OF THE BASELINE DETERMINED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) (I) WHEN ESTABLISHING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTION TARGETS UNDER THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL MEASURE
THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FROM ELECTRICITY USING CURRENT DATA AND
PROJECTIONS FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT.

(II) THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE MEASURED IN METRIC TONS.

(3) (4) THE GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTIONS ACHIEVED TO MEET
THE TARGETS ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
COUNT TOWARD THE ACHIEVEMENT OF THE GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION TARGET
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(5) THE TARGET GREENHOUSE GAS SAVINGS SHALL BE ACHIEVED
BASED ON THE 3–YEAR AVERAGE OF THE DEPARTMENT’S PLAN SUBMITTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.
– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) FOR 2025 AND 2026:

(I) THE COMMISSION SHALL, AFTER MAKING APPROPRIATE
FINDINGS, DETERMINE WHETHER THE DEPARTMENT’S EXISTING 2024–2026 PLAN
MUST BE MODIFIED TO COMPLY WITH:

1. THE TARGETS ESTABLISHED IN THIS SUBSECTION;
AND

2. § 7–225(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) THE DEPARTMENT:

1. SHALL PROVIDE INFORMATION AS REQUIRED BY THE
COMMISSION TO ASSIST IN MAKING THE DETERMINATION IN ITEM (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH; AND

2. IS ONLY REQUIRED TO FILE NEW PLANS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION AND § 7–225 OF THIS
SUBTITLE IF DIRECTED BY THE COMMISSION.

(B) AS A BASELINE FOR DETERMINING GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTION TARGETS UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL USE THE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS RESULTING FROM THE DIRECT CONSUMPTION OF GAS
AND ELECTRICITY BY LOW– AND MODERATE–INCOME LOW–INCOME RESIDENTIAL
HOUSEHOLDS IN 2020 2016, AS DETERMINED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
ENVIRONMENT.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT MAY PROCURE OR PROVIDE SAVINGS THAT
ARE ACHIEVED THROUGH FUNDING SOURCES THAT MEET THE STANDARDS OF
PROGRAM FUNDING THROUGH UTILITY RATES OR THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
ENERGY.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY USE THE SAVINGS ACHIEVED THROUGH
ALL FUNDING SOURCES TOWARD CALCULATING THE TARGETED GREENHOUSE GAS
REDUCTIONS IF THE FUNDING SOURCES MEET THE STANDARDS OF PROGRAMS
FUNDED THROUGH:

(I) A SURCHARGE UNDER § 7–222 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(II) THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

(D) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 IF DIRECTED BY THE COMMISSION IN
2024, AND ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 EVERY 3 YEARS, BEGINNING STARTING IN
2024 2026, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT ITS PLANS FOR ANY PROGRAMS OR
SERVICES PROCURED OR PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO
THE COMMISSION FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL UNDER § 7–225 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) FOR WEATHERIZATION OF LEASED OR RENTED RESIDENCES, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ENSURE THAT:

(1) THE BENEFITS OF WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE, INCLUDING
UTILITY BILL REDUCTION AND PRESERVATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING STOCK,
ACCRUE PRIMARILY TO LOW–INCOME TENANTS OCCUPYING A LEASED OR RENTED
RESIDENCE; AND

(2) THE RENT ON THE RESIDENCE IS NOT INCREASED AND THE
TENANT IS NOT EVICTED AS A RESULT OF WEATHERIZATION PROVIDED UNDER THIS
SECTION.

(F) THE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION MAY NOT USE THERMAL INSULATING MATERIALS FOR BUILDING
ELEMENTS, INCLUDING WALLS, FLOORS, CEILINGS, ATTICS, AND ROOF INSULATION,
THAT CONTAIN FORMALDEHYDE IF THE FORMALDEHYDE:

(1) WAS INTENTIONALLY ADDED; OR

(2) IS PRESENT IN THE PRODUCT AT GREATER THAN 0.1% BY WEIGHT.

(G) THE DEPARTMENT’S APPROVED CONTRACTORS USED FOR THE
PROGRAMS UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL MEET THE FOLLOWING JOB
REQUIREMENTS:

(1) PAY AT LEAST 150% OF THE STATE MINIMUM WAGE;

(2) PROVIDE CAREER ADVANCEMENT TRAINING;

(3) AFFORD EMPLOYEES THE RIGHT TO BARGAIN COLLECTIVELY FOR
WAGES AND BENEFITS;

(4) PROVIDE PAID LEAVE;

(5) BE CONSIDERED COVERED EMPLOYMENT FOR PURPOSES OF
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BENEFITS IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 8 OF THE
LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE;

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) ENTITLE THE EMPLOYEE TO WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS
IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 9 OF THE LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT ARTICLE;

(7) BE COMPLIANT WITH FEDERAL AND STATE WAGE AND HOUR LAWS
FOR THE PREVIOUS 3 YEARS;

(8) OFFER EMPLOYER–PROVIDED HEALTH INSURANCE BENEFITS
WITH MONTHLY PREMIUMS THAT DO NOT EXCEED 8.5% OF THE EMPLOYEE’S NET
MONTHLY EARNINGS; AND

(9) OFFER RETIREMENT BENEFITS.

(H) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP A PLAN TO COORDINATE
FUNDING SOURCES AND LEVERAGE THE GREATEST FUNDING POSSIBLE TO SUPPORT
A WHOLE HOME APPROACH BY ADDRESSING:

(I) HEALTH AND SAFETY UPGRADES;

(II) WEATHERIZATION;

(III) ENERGY EFFICIENCY; AND

(IV) OTHER GENERAL MAINTENANCE FOR LOW–INCOME
HOUSING.

(2) THE PLAN SHALL COORDINATE FUNDING AMONG:

(I) THE STRATEGIC ENERGY INVESTMENT FUND;

(II) FEDERAL WEATHERIZATION ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS;

(III) RATEPAYER CONTRIBUTIONS TO:

1. THE EMPOWER MARYLAND LIMITED INCOME
ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROGRAM; AND

2. THE MULTIFAMILY ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY PROGRAM;

(IV) THE MARYLAND AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND;

(V) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS, INCLUDING:

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

1. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANTS;

2. THE HOME INVESTMENT PARTNERSHIP GRANTS
PROGRAM; AND

3. LEAD HAZARD CONTROL AND HEALTHY HOMES
GRANTS;

(VI) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE PROGRAMS,
INCLUDING THE HOME REPAIR PROGRAM;

(VII) THE HEALTHY HOMES FOR HEALTHY KIDS PROGRAM;

(VIII) THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND CONSERVATION BLOCK
GRANT PROGRAM;

(IX) STATE APPROPRIATIONS;

(X) FUNDS FROM THE FEDERAL INFLATION REDUCTION ACT OF
2022; AND

(XI) ANY OTHER SOURCE OF FUNDING THAT THE DEPARTMENT
OR THE TASK FORCE IDENTIFIES.

(3) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ENSURE, FOR ANY WHOLE HOME
RETROFITS ASSOCIATED WITH WEATHERIZATION PROVIDED OR DEVELOPED UNDER
THE PLAN, THAT:

(I) THERE IS A SINGLE POINT OF CONTACT FOR LOW– AND
MODERATE–INCOME LOW–INCOME RESIDENTIAL HOUSEHOLDS; AND

(II) SERVICES ARE OFFERED IN ANY LANGUAGE NEEDED BY THE
LOW– AND MODERATE–INCOME LOW–INCOME RESIDENTIAL HOUSEHOLDS.

(4) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLABORATE WITH THE MEMBERS OF
THE TASK FORCE AND IDENTIFY OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES TO DEVELOP THE
PLAN.

(5) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
SUBMIT THE PLAN TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE DEPARTMENT, THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, AND
OTHER STATE UNITS SHALL APPLY FOR ALL FEDERAL FUNDING THAT MAY BECOME
AVAILABLE TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(J) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLABORATE WITH THE MEMBERS OF
THE TASK FORCE TO DEVELOP A PLAN, INCLUDING A BUDGET, A TIMELINE, AND
POTENTIAL FUNDING SOURCES, TO PROVIDE ENERGY EFFICIENCY RETROFITS TO
ALL LOW–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS BY 2032.

(2) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT, IN
COLLABORATION WITH THE TASK FORCE, SHALL SUBMIT THE PLAN TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

7–225.

(A) AS SOON AS POSSIBLE IN 2024, AND AT LEAST 8 MONTHS BEFORE THE
FILING DEADLINE FOR PLANS AFTER 2024, THE COMMISSION SHALL ISSUE AN
ORDER THAT FULLY ALLOCATES AMONG ELECTRIC COMPANIES, GAS COMPANIES,
AND THE DEPARTMENT THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF THE OVERALL STATEWIDE
DETERMINES THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION ~~TARGET~~ ~~DETERMINED~~
TARGETS REQUIRED UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND THE GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS SPECIFIED IN REQUIRED UNDER § 7–224(A)(2) OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 IF DIRECTED BY THE COMMISSION
IN 2024, AND ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 EVERY 3 YEARS, BEGINNING STARTING IN 2024
2026, EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH GAS COMPANY SUBJECT TO § 7–222(A)
OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT SUBMITTED A PLAN FOR ACHIEVING ELECTRICITY SAVINGS
AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGETS TO THE COMMISSION BEFORE JULY 1, 2024,
AND THE DEPARTMENT, SHALL CONSULT WITH THE TECHNICAL STAFF OF THE
COMMISSION, THE OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL, THE MARYLAND ENERGY
ADMINISTRATION, AND THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT REGARDING THE
DESIGN AND ADEQUACY OF ITS PLANS FOR ACHIEVING THE GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER §
7–223(A) § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND SPECIFIED IN § 7–224(A)(2) OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(II) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, AND ON OR BEFORE JULY
1 EVERY 3 YEARS, BEGINNING STARTING IN 2027 2026, EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY
AND EACH GAS COMPANY SUBJECT TO § 7–222(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT DID NOT
SUBMIT A PLAN FOR ACHIEVING ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

TARGETS TO THE COMMISSION BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, SHALL COMPLY WITH THE
CONSULTING REQUIREMENTS UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY, AND EACH GAS COMPANY, AND THE
DEPARTMENT SUBJECT TO § 7–222(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL PROVIDE THE
TECHNICAL STAFF OF THE COMMISSION, THE OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL, THE
MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, AND THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
ENVIRONMENT WITH ANY ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REGARDING ITS PLAN, AS
REQUESTED.

(C) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 IF DIRECTED BY THE
COMMISSION IN 2024, AND ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1 EVERY 3 YEARS,
BEGINNING STARTING IN 2024 2026, EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH GAS
COMPANY SUBJECT TO § 7–222(A) OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT SUBMITTED A PLAN FOR
ACHIEVING ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGETS TO THE
COMMISSION BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, AND THE DEPARTMENT, SHALL SUBMIT ITS
PLAN TO THE COMMISSION.

(II) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND ON OR BEFORE
SEPTEMBER 1 EVERY 3 YEARS, BEGINNING STARTING IN 2027 2026, EACH ELECTRIC
COMPANY AND EACH GAS COMPANY THAT DID NOT SUBMIT A PLAN FOR ACHIEVING
ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGETS TO THE COMMISSION
BEFORE JULY 1, 2024, SHALL SUBMIT ITS PLAN TO THE COMMISSION.

(2) EACH PLAN SHALL DETAIL A PROPOSAL FOR ACHIEVING
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS FOR 3 SUBSEQUENT CALENDAR
YEARS.

(3) (I) EACH PLAN SHALL:

1. INCLUDE:

A. A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROGRAMS AND
SERVICES;

B. ANTICIPATED COSTS;

C. PROJECTED BENEFITS, INCLUDING GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTIONS, ELECTRICITY SAVINGS, AND GAS SAVINGS; AND

D. ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUESTED BY THE
COMMISSION; AND

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. ADDRESS RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND
INDUSTRIAL SECTORS AS APPROPRIATE, INCLUDING LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES
AND LOW– TO MODERATE–INCOME COMMUNITIES.

(II) A PLAN OF THE DEPARTMENT SHALL INCLUDE:

1. A DEFINITION OF “LOW– OR MODERATE–INCOME
LOW–INCOME INDIVIDUAL” TO BE USED IN THE PROCUREMENT OR PROVISION OF
ENERGY EFFICIENCY, CONSERVATION, AND GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTION PROGRAMS AND SERVICES;

2. A DESCRIPTION OF THE STEPS PROPOSED TO ENSURE
INSULATION MATERIALS MEET THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER § 7–224 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

3. A PROPOSED AVERAGE LIFETIME MEASURE
THRESHOLD THAT:

A. ENCOURAGES THE DELIVERY OF INSULATION AND
WEATHERIZATION MEASURES; AND

B. IS DEVELOPED THROUGH A STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT PROCESS.

(III) A PLAN OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL INCLUDE THE
PROVISION OR PROCUREMENT OF PROGRAMS AND SERVICES FOR RESIDENTIAL
BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION.

(D) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL REVIEW THE PLAN OF EACH ELECTRIC
COMPANY, EACH GAS COMPANY, AND THE DEPARTMENT TO DETERMINE WHETHER
THE PLAN IS ADEQUATE AND COST–EFFECTIVE IN ACHIEVING THE GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER §
7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND SPECIFIED IN § 7–224(A)(2) §§ 7–223(B) AND
7–224(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER ANY WRITTEN FINDINGS
PROVIDED BY THE MARYLAND ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, THE DEPARTMENT OF
THE ENVIRONMENT, AND THE OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL REGARDING THE
DESIGN AND ADEQUACY OF THE PLAN.

(3) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IN
APPROVING, MODIFYING, OR DENYING THE PLAN OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY OR A
GAS COMPANY, THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER:

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

(I) THE COST–EFFECTIVENESS OF THE RESIDENTIAL,
COMMERCIAL, AND INDUSTRIAL SECTOR SUBPORTFOLIOS BY USING:

1. THE PRIMARY STATE JURISDICTION–SPECIFIC TEST,
AS DEVELOPED, UPDATED, OR APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION, TO DETERMINE THE
COST–EFFECTIVENESS OF A PROGRAM OR SERVICE PROSPECTIVELY, INCLUDING
CONSIDERATION OF:

A. PARTICIPANT NONENERGY BENEFITS;

B. UTILITY NONENERGY BENEFITS; AND

C. SOCIETAL NONENERGY BENEFITS; AND

2. A TOTAL RESOURCE COST TEST TO COMPARE THE
ELECTRICITY SAVINGS AND DEMAND REDUCTION TARGETS OF THE PROGRAM OR
SERVICE WITH THE RESULTS OF SIMILAR PROGRAMS OR SERVICES IMPLEMENTED
IN OTHER JURISDICTIONS, INCLUDING:

A. PARTICIPANT NONENERGY BENEFITS; AND

B. UTILITY NONENERGY BENEFITS;

(II) THE IMPACT ON RATES OF EACH RATEPAYER CLASS;

(III) THE IMPACT ON JOBS;

(IV) THE IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT; AND

(V) THE IMPACT ON THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
REDUCTION TARGETS SPECIFIED IN TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE ENVIRONMENT
ARTICLE, ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE,
AND SPECIFIED IN § 7–224(A)(2) §§ 7–223(B) AND 7–224(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) NONENERGY BENEFITS CONSIDERED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE QUANTIFIABLE AND DIRECTLY RELATED TO A
PROGRAM OR SERVICE.

(5) (I) IN APPROVING, MODIFYING, OR DENYING THE PLAN OF THE
DEPARTMENT, THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER:

1. SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE COST–EFFECTIVENESS OF THE PLAN BY USING THE PRIMARY

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

STATE JURISDICTION–SPECIFIC TEST, AS DEVELOPED, UPDATED, OR APPROVED BY
THE COMMISSION;

2. THE IMPACT ON RATES OF EACH RATEPAYER CLASS;

3. THE IMPACT ON JOBS;

4. THE IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT; AND

5. THE IMPACT ON THE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
TARGETS SPECIFIED IN TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE,
ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE, AND
SPECIFIED IN § 7–224(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(II) THE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES OFFERED BY THE
DEPARTMENT ARE NOT REQUIRED TO BE COST–EFFECTIVE.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT SHALL PREPARE AND
SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSION AN ANALYSIS REGARDING THE ADEQUACY OF THE
PLAN IN SUPPORTING THE STATE’S GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION
GOALS SPECIFIED IN TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 12 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE,
ESTABLISHED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE, AND
SPECIFIED IN REQUIRED UNDER § 7–224(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–226.

(A) (1) EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY, EACH GAS COMPANY, AND THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE TO THE COMMISSION EVERY 6 MONTHS AN UPDATE
ON PLAN IMPLEMENTATION AND PROGRESS MADE TOWARD ACHIEVING THE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS REDUCTION TARGETS ESTABLISHED BY THE
COMMISSION UNDER § 7–223(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND SPECIFIED IN REQUIRED
UNDER § 7–224(A)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE COMMISSION SHALL MONITOR AND ANALYZE THE IMPACT OF
EACH PROGRAM AND SERVICE TO ENSURE THAT THE OUTCOME OF EACH PROGRAM
AND SERVICE PROVIDES THE BEST POSSIBLE RESULTS.

(3) IN MONITORING AND ANALYZING THE IMPACT OF A PROGRAM OR
SERVICE UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IF THE COMMISSION FINDS
THAT THE OUTCOME OF THE PROGRAM OR SERVICE MAY NOT BE PROVIDING THE
BEST POSSIBLE RESULTS, THE COMMISSION SHALL DIRECT THE ELECTRIC
COMPANY, THE GAS COMPANY, OR THE DEPARTMENT TO INCLUDE IN ITS NEXT

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

UPDATE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SPECIFIC MEASURES TO
ADDRESS THE FINDINGS.

(B) (1) AT LEAST ONCE EACH YEAR, EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH
GAS COMPANY SHALL NOTIFY AFFECTED CUSTOMERS OF THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND CONSERVATION AND GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION CHARGES IMPOSED AND
BENEFITS CONFERRED.

(2) THE NOTICE SHALL BE PROVIDED BY PUBLICATION ON THE
COMPANY’S WEBSITE AND INCLUSION WITH BILLING INFORMATION SUCH AS A BILL
INSERT OR BILL MESSAGE.

(C) ON OR BEFORE MAY 1 EACH YEAR, THE COMMISSION SHALL REPORT,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) THE STATUS OF PROGRAMS AND SERVICES APPROVED UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING AN EVALUATION OF THE IMPACT OF THE PROGRAMS
AND SERVICES THAT ARE DIRECTED TO LOW–INCOME COMMUNITIES, LOW– TO
MODERATE–INCOME COMMUNITIES TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, AND OTHER
PARTICULAR CLASSES OF RATEPAYERS;

(2) A RECOMMENDATION FOR THE APPROPRIATE FUNDING LEVEL TO
ADEQUATELY FUND THESE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES;

(3) THE PER CAPITA ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION AND THE WINTER
AND SUMMER PEAK DEMAND FOR THE PREVIOUS CALENDAR YEAR; AND

(4) BEGINNING IN 2026, PROGRESS MADE TOWARD REDUCING
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 7–223 AND 7–224 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

7–227.

(A) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER LAW, THE COMMISSION MAY NOT
REQUIRE OR ALLOW AN ELECTRIC COMPANY OR A GAS COMPANY TO REQUIRE A
CUSTOMER TO AUTHORIZE THE ELECTRIC COMPANY OR GAS COMPANY TO CONTROL
THE AMOUNT OF THE CUSTOMER’S ELECTRICITY USAGE OR GAS USAGE.

(B) A CUSTOMER MAY PROVIDE CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A PROGRAM
OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY OR A GAS COMPANY THAT PROVIDES DIRECT LOAD
CONTROL OR OTHER UTILITY MANIPULATION OF A CUSTOMER’S ELECTRICITY OR
GAS USAGE.

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

7–228.

(A) EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY AND EACH GAS COMPANY SHALL PROMOTE
THE AVAILABILITY OF FEDERAL AND STATE REBATES, TAX CREDITS, AND
INCENTIVES THAT CAN BE USED TO SUPPORT ENERGY EFFICIENCY INVESTMENTS,
ENERGY EFFICIENT AND NON–FOSSIL–FUEL–POWERED APPLIANCES AND COOKING
EQUIPMENT, BREAKER BOX UPGRADES, AND PORTABLE HEATING AND COOLING
EQUIPMENT.

(B) THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

7–510.3.

(j) (2) A community choice aggregator, in consultation with all
investor–owned electric companies whose service territories include all or part of the county
and the Department of Housing and Community Development, may promote energy
efficiency programs that are:

(i) offered by the investor–owned electric companies; or

(ii) filed by the investor–owned electric companies with the
Commission for its approval in accordance with [§ 7–211] SUBTITLE 2, PART II of this
title.

Article – State Government

9–20B–05.

(f) The Administration shall use the Fund:

(4) to provide rate relief by offsetting electricity rates of residential
customers, including an offset of surcharges imposed on ratepayers under [§ 7–211] TITLE
7, SUBTITLE 2, PART II of the Public Utilities Article;

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The certification agency designated by the Board of Public Works under §
14–303(b) of the State Finance and Procurement Article and the Governor’s Office of Small,
Minority, and Women Business Affairs, in consultation with the Department of Housing
and Community Development, the Office of the Attorney General, and the General
Assembly, shall initiate a study regarding the energy efficiency and conservation services
used by the Department of Housing and Community Development to evaluate whether the
enactment of remedial measures to assist minority and women–owned businesses in the
energy efficiency and conservation services industry and market would comply with the

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 539

U.S. Supreme Court decision in City of Richmond v. J. A. Croson Co., 488 U.S. 469 (1989),
and any subsequent federal or constitutional requirements.

(b) The certification agency and the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and
Women Business Affairs shall submit the findings of the study required under subsection
(a) of this section to the Legislative Policy Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, on or before December 31, 2026, so that the General Assembly
may review the findings before the 2027 legislative session.

SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Public Service Commission shall establish a working group on the
EmPOWER Maryland Program and moderate–income households.

(b) The purpose of the working group is to study and make recommendations to
the Public Service Commission and the General Assembly on coordination of activities and
benefits under the EmPOWER Maryland Program between utility companies subject to
this Act and the Department of Housing and Community Development so that
moderate–income households may obtain the most efficient and cost–effective assistance
under the Program.

(c) The study and recommendations shall include:

(1) development of a practical definition of “moderate–income” for use in
assessing the scope of available activities, potentially beneficial extensions of activities, and
associated costs under the EmPOWER Maryland Program;

(2) an assessment of existing utility–based activities funded by the
Program and available to moderate–income households;

(3) proposals for extending utility–based activities and coordinating those
activities with corresponding activities of the Department of Housing and Community
Development with respect to low–income households under the Program;

(4) an assessment of benefits and costs associated with extending and
expanding activities under item (3) of this subsection;

(5) identification of areas of potential overlap between utility–based and
Department–based activities that may be harmonized to avoid duplicating efforts and
promote more efficient means to provide assistance to moderate–income households; and

(6) identification and development of regulatory and legislative changes
needed to implement recommended coordination, extension, and expansion of Program
activities to benefit moderate–income households.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 539 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) On or before July 1, 2025, the Commission shall report to the Governor and,
in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly on the
results of the working group study and recommendations.

SECTION ~~6.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the publisher of the
Annotated Code of Maryland, in consultation with and subject to the approval of the
Department of Legislative Services, shall correct, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, cross–references and terminology rendered incorrect by this Act. The
publisher shall adequately describe any correction that is made in an editor’s note following
the section affected.

SECTION ~~7.~~ 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26