START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 811 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 811 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Financial Well-Being Pilot Program - Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Financial Well-Being Pilot Program at the University of Maryland, 
College Park Campus (UMCP) and Morgan State University (MSU). The program’s 
purpose is to provide comprehensive financial guidance, support, and coaching to help 
students (1) facing significant personal financial burdens, complex student loan debts, or 
high levels of financial anxiety or (2) lacking in financial literacy knowledge or skills. The 
program must be jointly administered by the Maryland Higher Education Commission 
(MHEC), UMCP and MSU. By August 1, 2024, MSU and UMCP must each hire 
one full-time financial well-being coach to provide personalized financial coaching 
services to students who may benefit from such services. Additionally, UMCP and MSU 
must create a system to identify students for the program. The bill requires interim and 
final reports from UMCP, MSU, and MHEC on the program’s status and effectiveness. 
This bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates July 31, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  In total, UMCP and MSU higher education expenditures increase by an 
estimated $315,500 in FY 2025 for contractual staff and to develop a system to identify 
students who may benefit from financial coaching services. Future years reflect 
annualization, the elimination of one-time costs, and the termination of contractual staff in 
FY 2028. MHEC can produce the required reports using existing resources. Revenues are 
not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
315,500 
208,900 
218,000 
18,200 
0 
Net Effect 
($315,500) 
($208,900) 
($218,000) 
($18,200) 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 811/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Students Who May Benefit from Financial Coaching Services  
 
“Students who may benefit from financial coaching services” is defined as students who:  
(1) are dealing with significant personal financial burdens or complex student loan debts; 
(2) are experiencing high levels of anxiety due to personal financial burdens; or (3) lack 
financial literacy knowledge or skills.  
 
Financial Well-being Coach  
 
A financial well-being coach must assist students with their financial literacy as specified. 
While providing specified support services, the coach must focus on (1) the behavioral and 
emotional aspects of personal finances and (2) how a student can successfully achieve 
personal financial goals and establish healthy habits. A financial well-being coach must 
carry a caseload comparable to that of an academic advisor at the institution. Each student 
must be surveyed before and after financial coaching services to evaluate the effectiveness 
of the services. At the end of the pilot program, the coach must create a document with best 
practices, processes, and guidance that other institutions of higher education can use to 
create a financial well-being coaching program. 
 
A financial well-being coach may provide financial coaching services to students in group 
and individual coaching settings as well as during drop-in advisory hours. When scheduling 
individual coaching sessions, certain students, as specified, must be prioritized. 
 
Reporting Requirements  
 
By June 1, 2025, UMCP and MSU must submit an interim report to MHEC on the status 
and effectiveness of the pilot program, followed by a final report by June 1, 2026. 
Similarly, MHEC must submit an interim report to each institution of higher education, the 
Governor, and the General Assembly on the operation of the pilot program by July 1, 2025, 
followed by a final report on the operation and results by July 1, 2026. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 811/ Page 3 
Current Law:  Institutions of higher education are not required to provide comprehensive 
financial guidance, support, and coaching to help students who may benefit from financial 
coaching services.  
 
State Expenditures:  In total, USM and MSU higher education expenditures increase by 
an estimated $315,494 in fiscal 2025. This estimate reflects hiring two coaches, as required, 
on August 1, 2024, to assist students with financial literacy, produce the required reports, 
and develop a best practices document and $50,000 in one-time costs to develop a system 
to identify students for the program (as required by the bill). This estimate is based on 
UMCP estimated costs of $100,000 annually to hire a financial well-being coach and 
another $100,000 annually to develop and implement a system to identify students. 
Additionally, while MSU anticipates increased expenditures to implement the bill, specific 
details regarding these additional costs were not provided. The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) advises that a system for identifying students can likely be developed for 
$50,000 in one-time costs for each institution.  
 
Contractual Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$200,615 
One-time Development Costs 
100,000 
Operating Expenses 
14,879 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$315,494 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, the elimination of system 
development costs in fiscal 2026, and the elimination of the contractual positions when the 
bill terminates on July 31, 2027 (fiscal 2028). 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
MHEC can produce the required reports using existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill is unclear as to the intended duration of the pilot program, 
given the requirement for a final report after the second year of implementation but a 
termination date more than a year later. DLS assumes financial well-being coaching 
continues to be provided for a third year without a related reporting requirement and that 
the contractual coaches remain available until termination of the bill. Otherwise, 
contractual services and the related costs terminate in fiscal 2027 rather than fiscal 2028. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 811/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4