START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 838 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 838 
(Prince George's County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Prince George's County Family Child Care Home Expansion Grant Program - 
Establishment  
PG 505-24 
 
 
This bill establishes the Prince George’s County Family Child Care Home Expansion Grant 
Program, administered by the Prince George’s County Public School System (PGCPS), to 
increase the number of registered family child care providers, family child care homes, and 
large family child care homes in low-income communities in the county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances or operations. 
 
Local Effect:  PGCPS expenditures may be significantly affected, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. Although the bill benefits nonprofits in  
Prince George’s County, nonprofits are not considered small businesses for purposes of 
fiscal and policy notes. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  To carry out the program, PGCPS must award grants to nonprofit 
organizations in the county to provide training and financial assistance to individuals 
intending to become family child care providers that operate family child care homes and 
large family child care homes in low-income communities. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 838/ Page 2 
To be eligible for a grant, an applicant must demonstrate (in an application process 
developed by PGCPS) that the applicant:  
 
 
is a nonprofit organization with experience in providing child care support services 
to individuals (including offering training and technical assistance to become a 
registered family child care provider); and 
 
will provide child care support services to individuals who (1) intend on becoming 
registered family child care providers that will operate registered family child care 
homes or large family child care homes; (2) live in a low-income community in the 
county, as determined by PGCPS; (3) have a gross household income that does not 
exceed 50% of the statewide median income for a household of like size; and 
(4) own or rent as their primary residence the dwelling that will be used as the family 
child care home or large family child care home. 
 
A grant awarded under the bill may be used to offer services to the individuals noted above 
by: 
 
 
providing multilingual outreach and translation services to recruit and train 
individuals to become registered family child care providers; 
 
providing technical assistance and start-up assistance for recruited individuals as 
they navigate the Maryland State Department of Education’s process to become a 
registered family child care provider, which includes assistance in meeting building 
code requirements and inspection expenses to establish registered family child care 
homes and large family child care homes; 
 
assisting newly registered and established family child care providers through 
technical assistance to achieve quality benchmarks; and 
 
assisting individuals with obtaining background checks to become registered family 
child care providers. 
 
Current Law:  Subject to limited exception, family child care homes and large family 
child care homes may not operate in the State unless they are registered. The State Board 
of Education is required to adopt regulations that relate to the registration of family child 
care homes and large family child care homes. A family child care home is a residence in 
which family child care is provided for up to 8 children. A large family child care home is 
a residence in which family child care is provided for at least 9 children, but not more than 
12 children.  
 
Local Expenditures:  PGCPS advises that the bill may cause significant operational and 
funding difficulties. Under the bill, PGCPS must, among other things, award grants to 
nonprofit organizations to provide training and financial assistance to individuals intending 
to become family child providers. PGCPS indicates that it is not equipped to administer 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 838/ Page 3 
grants in the manner required by the bill. As a result, significant administrative and other 
start-up costs are likely incurred to establish the program beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
The exact cost to establish the grant program depends on several factors (e.g., the total 
amount of funding available to be awarded, the number of applications, etc.) that cannot 
be reliably predicted without experience under the bill. However, for illustrative purposes 
only, PGCPS advises that six additional positions may needed in order to operate such a 
program. In fiscal 2025, administrative costs only could total approximately $965,400; by 
fiscal 2029, administrative costs increase to $1.2 million. This estimate assumes that 
funding is made available to issue grants totaling $600,000 in fiscal 2025 and that available 
grant funding increases over time. In total (taking into account both administrative costs 
and the grant awards), PGCPS expenditures could increase by as much as $1.6 million in 
fiscal 2025 and by $2.0 million by fiscal 2029. 
 
Although the aforementioned costs represent a preliminary estimate as provided by 
PGCPS, the Department of Legislative Services advises that a more modest grant program 
could likely be implemented that would still meet the bill’s requirements yet incur 
significantly less costs than those reflected above. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - April 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 6, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3