START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 966 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 966 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Law Enforcement Officers' Pension System - Reemployment as Sheriff 
 
 
This bill requires the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) 
to temporarily suspend the retirement allowance of a retiree of the Law Enforcement 
Officers’ Pension System (LEOPS) who is elected as a sheriff within one year of retiring 
from LEOPS. The retiree’s allowance is reinstated when the retiree ceases serving as 
sheriff. While the allowance is suspended, the retiree’s family is still entitled to survivor 
benefits under current law. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and applies only 
prospectively to an individual who retires on or after that date.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in a limited number of cases, it has no 
discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in a limited number of cases, it has no 
discernible effect on local pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The SRPS Board must give notice before suspending a retiree’s allowance 
under the bill. After receiving satisfactory documentation that the retiree is no longer 
serving as a sheriff, the board must reinstate the allowance with accumulated cost-of-living 
adjustments from the date the allowance was suspended. The allowance must be reinstated 
on the first day of the month following the month in which the retiree ceased serving as 
sheriff.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 966/ Page 2 
Current Law:  In general, a retiree who receives a retirement benefit from SRPS may be 
reemployed, except that the retiree may not be reemployed by the State or any participating 
SRPS employer within 45 days of retiring. In most cases, a retiree who is rehired by the 
same employer for whom the retiree worked at the time of retirement is subject to an 
earnings cap. The purpose of the cap, which is the member’s average final compensation 
at the time of retirement, is to ensure that a retiree does not earn more in retirement than 
the retiree earned as an active member with the same employer. If the sum of a retiree’s 
earnings and initial retirement allowance exceeds the earnings cap, the retiree is subject to 
a dollar-for-dollar offset of the retirement benefit for any amount that exceeds the cap. For 
a member who retires directly from State service, the State is regarded as a single employer, 
so reemployment with any State agency activates the benefit reduction. 
 
LEOPS retirees who are rehired by their previous employer are not subject to an earnings 
limitation, but they are subject to the 45-day waiting period before being reemployed. In 
general, elected sheriffs may choose to be members of the Employees’ Pension System; 
however, elected sheriffs in counties that participate in LEOPS as participating 
governmental units (PGUs) may instead choose membership in LEOPS. Also, if a member 
of LEOPS becomes sheriff of a county that is a LEOPS PGU, the sheriff must remain a 
member of LEOPS. As the bill applies to any LEOPS retiree, it potentially affects retirees 
previously employed by the State or by a PGU that participates in LEOPS who are elected 
sheriff within one year of retirement.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 706 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2