START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 953 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 953 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange - State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance 
Subsidies Pilot Program - Amount of Annual Subsidies 
 
 
This emergency bill alters the amount of funds that the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange 
(MHBE) may designate for annual subsidies under the State-Based Young Adult Health 
Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program. For calendar 2024 and 2025, MHBE may designate up 
to $20.0 million, plus any unspent funds designated for such subsidies in a previous 
calendar year, to be used for the pilot program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHBE special fund expenditures may increase in FY 2025 and 2026 to the 
extent unspent funds from prior years are used to provide subsidies; however, there is no 
net increase in spending above the initial allocation to the pilot program. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MHBE was created during the 2011 session to provide a marketplace for 
individuals and small businesses to purchase affordable health coverage. Through the 
Maryland Health Connection, Maryland residents can shop for health insurance plans, 
compare rates, and determine their eligibility for federal advanced premium tax credits, 
cost-sharing reduction plans, and public assistance programs such as Medicaid. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 953/ Page 2 
The MHBE Fund generally provides funding for the operation and administration of 
MHBE, the State Reinsurance Program, and the State-Based Young Adult Health 
Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program. The fund may also be used for other specified 
appropriations, including $15.0 million in fiscal 2023 through 2025 to the Maryland Health 
Equity Resource Community Reserve Fund. The MHBE Board must maintain a separate 
account within the fund for the State-Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot 
Program. 
 
Chapters 777 and 778 of 2021 required MHBE to establish and implement the State-Based 
Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program for calendar 2022 and 2023 to help 
make health insurance more affordable for uninsured young adults. Subject to available 
funds, MHBE was authorized to designate funds from the MHBE Fund, in fiscal 2022 
through 2024, to be used for the pilot program so that no more than $20.0 million in annual 
subsidies may be provided in calendar 2022 and 2023. 
 
Chapters 256 and 257 of 2023 extended the termination date of the program by 
two additional years to June 30, 2026, and authorized MHBE to designate funds from the 
MHBE Fund in fiscal 2025 and 2026 to provide up to $20.0 million in annual subsidies to 
young adults under the pilot program. 
 
For calendar 2024, young adults ages 18 to 37 with incomes up to 400% of the federal 
poverty level are eligible for State premium assistance subsidies. Subsidies are allocated to 
reduce the maximum expected premium contribution of individuals ages 18 to 33 by 2.5% 
each year and individuals ages 34 to 38 by 0.5% each year. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHBE advises that the program underspent allocated funds by 
$12.9 million during its first two calendar years of operation ($6.1 million in calendar 2022, 
and $6.8 million in calendar 2023). For calendar 2024, the program has experienced higher 
than projected enrollment following the resumption of Medicaid redeterminations and a 
strong open enrollment season. If the program remains open to new enrollees throughout 
calendar 2024, program expenditures are estimated to total $22.5 million. To manage 
within the current funding limits (no more than $20.0 million in subsidies annually), 
MHBE would likely close the program to new enrollment or make a mid-year reduction in 
subsidy amounts. 
 
The bill authorizes MHBE to use any unspent funds designated for prior years of the 
program for subsidies in calendar 2024 and 2025. Thus, approximately $12.9 million would 
be available from calendar 2022 and 2023 to provide subsidies in calendar 2024 and 2025. 
To the extent these funds are used under the bill, MHBE special fund expenditures increase 
in fiscal 2025 and/or 2026. However, there is no net increase in expenditures for the 
program beyond the funding initially allocated for the pilot program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 953/ Page 3 
In the absence of the bill, unspent funds would remain in the MHBE Fund, which is a 
special nonlapsing fund, and be available for the State Reinsurance Program or other 
authorized uses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 701 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3