START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 505

Chapter 505

(House Bill 914)

AN ACT concerning

Winery and Vineyard Economic Development Grant Program – Modifications

FOR the purpose of altering procedures for the claiming and awarding of grants under the
Winery and Vineyard Economic Development Grant Program; and generally relating
to the Winery and Vineyard Economic Development Grant Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–2003(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

5–2003.

(b) (1) [By September 15 of the calendar year in which the qualified capital
expenses are paid or incurred, an] AN individual or a corporation WHO PAID OR
INCURRED QUALIFIED CAPITAL EXPENSES DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING
CALENDAR YEAR may submit an application to the Department for a grant authorized
under this section.

(2) (i) For any fiscal year, the total amount of grants approved by the
Department under this section may not exceed the total appropriation for the Program for
that fiscal year.

(ii) If the total amount of grants applied for under this section
exceeds the maximum specified under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the Department
shall approve a grant for each applicant in an amount equal to the product of multiplying
the amount applied for by the applicant times a fraction:

1. the numerator of which is the maximum specified under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph; and

2. the denominator of which is the total of all grants applied
for by all applicants for that calendar year.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 505 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) [On or before December 15 each year, the] THE Department shall
award the grants authorized under this section to each eligible applicant.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2