START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 938 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 938 
(Delegate Crosby, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State–Owned Nursing Homes – Deficiencies, Citations, and Fines – Reporting 
Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the department charged with oversight of a State-owned nursing home 
operated by a contractor to provide notice of a deficiency or enforcement action by a 
monitoring agency. Notice must be provided to the Governor, specified members of the 
General Assembly, and the local governing body of the county in which the nursing home 
is located within 15 days after the final survey finding. Within 30 days after the contactor’s 
final acceptance of a plan of correction or completion of an informal dispute resolution, the 
department charged with oversight of the nursing home must provide the Governor and 
specified members of the General Assembly with a statement of the deficiencies, the plan 
of correction or results of the informal dispute resolution, and all communications from the 
monitoring agency regarding survey activities. The bill also expands the definition of 
“monitoring agency” to include the Maryland Department of Labor, a local health 
department, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, or the federal Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 938/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
State-owned Nursing Home Requirements 
 
Chapter 106 of 2023 (an emergency bill) required a contractor operating a State-owned 
nursing home to promptly provide notice of a deficiency or enforcement action by a 
monitoring agency to (1) the Governor; (2) the State agency overseeing the nursing home; 
and (3) the Senate Finance Committee, the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee, and the members of the General Assembly who represent the district in which 
the nursing home is located. Within 30 days after receiving a citation or fine from a 
monitoring agency, the contractor must also provide a statement of the deficiencies found 
by the monitoring agency, a plan of correction, and all communications from the 
monitoring agency regarding survey activities conducted at the nursing home. 
 
By January 1 each year, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must report to the 
Governor and the General Assembly on all federal and State survey activities conducted 
and enforcement actions imposed during the immediately preceding 12-month period at 
each State-owned nursing home that is operated by a contractor. 
 
Office of Health Care Quality 
 
The Office of Health Care Quality (OHCQ) generally makes an unannounced site visit and 
conducts a full survey of each licensed nursing home at least once per year. After a nursing 
home complaint alleging actual harm, OHCQ must initiate an investigation within 
10 business days. If MDH receives a complaint alleging immediate jeopardy to a resident, 
it must make every effort to investigate the complaint within 24 hours, and no later than 
48 hours, after receiving the complaint. 
 
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home 
 
The Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) manages one veterans home, 
Charlotte Hall Veterans Home (CHVH) in St. Mary’s County. CHVH provides assisted 
living and skilled nursing care for eligible veterans and their spouses who are either unable 
to care for themselves because of a disability or advancing age, or who have requirements 
for nursing home care. Clinical care and health care management at CHVH are provided 
by a private contractor but are overseen by MDVA staff. The facility is Medicare and 
Medicaid certified and is inspected annually. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 938/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that there were 225 licensed nursing homes in the 
State in fiscal 2023, and only one State-owned nursing home was operated by a contractor:  
CHVH in St. Mary’s County. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 712 (Senator Bailey) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Veterans Affairs; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3