START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 175

Chapter 175

(House Bill 901)

AN ACT concerning

Higher Education – Part–Time Senatorial and Delegate Scholarships –
Alterations

FOR the purpose of allowing an applicant of a part–time senatorial or delegate scholarship
with a documented disability to request from the Maryland Higher Education
Commission a waiver from the requirement to carry a certain number of semester
hours each semester; and generally relating to part–time senatorial and delegate
scholarships.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–401 and 18–501(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 18–406 and 18–504
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

18–401.

There is a program of senatorial scholarships in this State that are awarded under
this subtitle.

18–406.

(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, each recipient of a senatorial
scholarship may hold the scholarship for 4 undergraduate academic years, subject to §
18–406.1 of this subtitle, and 4 graduate academic years if the recipient:

(1) Is a full–time student;

(2) Continues to be eligible for in–State tuition under this article; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 175 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) Continues to be a student at the institution and takes at least 12
semester hours of courses as an undergraduate or 9 semester hours of courses as a graduate
student each semester leading to a degree.

(b) A recipient of an undergraduate or graduate senatorial scholarship may hold
the scholarship, appropriately prorated, for 8 academic years if the recipient:

(1) Is a part–time student;

(2) Continues to be eligible for in–State tuition under this article; and

(3) Continues to be a student at the institution and takes at least 6
semester hours of courses each semester leading to a degree.

(c) Any recipient of a senatorial scholarship may use up to one–half of the yearly
award for summer school.

(d) A recipient of a senatorial scholarship who is enrolled in a terminal certificate
program as provided in § 18–402(a)(1) of this subtitle may hold the scholarship for 2 years
if the recipient is a full–time student and otherwise meets the conditions of subsection (a)
of this section, or may hold the scholarship for 4 years if the recipient is a part–time student
and otherwise meets the conditions of subsection (b) of this section.

(e) A recipient of a senatorial scholarship who is currently enrolled, or was
enrolled within the last 2 years, in a certificate or license program, course, or sequence of
courses at a community college that leads to certification or licensure, as provided in §
18–402(a)(3) of this subtitle, may use the scholarship to reimburse educational expenses as
defined by the Office under § 18–405(b)(2) of this subtitle.

(f) Each recipient of a senatorial scholarship who is enrolled in a private
postsecondary proprietary institution that is accredited by a national accrediting
association approved by the United States Department of Education:

(1) May hold the scholarship for the completion of one program if the
student otherwise meets the conditions of subsection (a)(1) and (2) of this section; and

(2) Shall complete the program within the length of time prescribed by the
institution for the completion of the program.

(g) A recipient of a senatorial scholarship who is an individual who is on active
duty with the United States military and otherwise meets the conditions of subsection (a)
or (b) of this section may be domiciled in this State rather than eligible for in–State tuition
under this article.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 175

(H) ON REQUEST FROM AN APPLICANT OF THE SCHOLARSHIP WITH A
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY, THE MARYLAND HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION MAY
WAIVE THE REQUIREMENT IN SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS SECTION.

18–501.

(a) There is a program of Delegate Scholarships in this State that are awarded
under this subtitle.

18–504.

(a) A Delegate may award two part–time scholarships for each full–time
scholarship available.

(b) A part–time scholarship may not be for more than twice as many years as a
full–time scholarship.

(c) Each recipient of a part–time scholarship shall carry at least 6 semester hours
of courses each semester in a program leading to a degree.

(D) ON REQUEST FROM AN APPLICANT OF THE SCHOLARSHIP WITH A
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY, THE MARYLAND HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION MAY
WAIVE THE REQUIREMENT IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3