START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 984

Chapter 984

(House Bill 975)

AN ACT concerning

Somerset County – Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Medical Services

FOR the purpose of authorizing the County Commissioners of Somerset County to enact
local laws and adopt other measures to manage, direct, and regulate fire, rescue, and
emergency medical services in the County; authorizing the County Commissioners
to authorize or create an entity or a body to administer the County’s affairs in the
County relating to fire, rescue, and emergency medical services; requiring the
County Commissioners to establish an Emergency Services Advisory Council to
make certain recommendations under certain circumstances; and generally relating
to fire, rescue, and emergency medical services in Somerset County.

BY adding to
The Public Local Laws of Somerset County
Section 4–301 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 3. Fire, Rescue, and Emergency
Medical Services” and the amended title “Title 4. Emergency Services”
Article 20 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2015 Edition, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 20 – Somerset County

Title 4. [Fire Departments and Fire Marshal] EMERGENCY SERVICES.

SUBTITLE 3. FIRE, RESCUE, AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.

4–301.

(A) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS MAY ENACT LOCAL LAWS AND ADOPT
OTHER MEASURES NECESSARY TO ADEQUATELY AND APPROPRIATELY MANAGE,
DIRECT, AND REGULATE FIRE, RESCUE, AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES IN
THE COUNTY.

(B) (1) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS MAY AUTHORIZE OR CREATE AN
ENTITY OR A BODY TO ADMINISTER THE COUNTY’S AFFAIRS RELATING TO FIRE,
RESCUE, AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AND ASSOCIATED ACTIVITIES WHILE
MAINTAINING THE VOLUNTEER EMERGENCY SERVICES.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 984 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IF THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS AUTHORIZE OR CREATE AN
ENTITY OR A BODY UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COUNTY
COMMISSIONERS SHALL ESTABLISH AN EMERGENCY SERVICES ADVISORY
COUNCIL TO PROVIDE THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS WITH RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING THE OPERATIONS OF FIRE SUPPRESSION, EMERGENCY MEDICAL, AND
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SERVICES IN THE COUNTY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2