START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 482

Chapter 482

(House Bill 996)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Consumer Council – Name Change ~~and~~ ~~Other~~
~~Modifications~~

FOR the purpose of changing the name of the Consumer Council in the Division of
Consumer Protection in the Office of the Attorney General to the Consumer
Protection Commission; ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~to~~ ~~receive~~
~~certain~~ ~~per~~ ~~diem~~ ~~compensation;~~ and generally relating to consumer protection.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–202 and 13–205(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–201.

(a) There is a Division of Consumer Protection in the Office of the Attorney
General.

(b) The Division shall administer this subtitle.

13–202.

(a) (1) There is a Consumer [Council] PROTECTION COMMISSION in the
Division.

(2) The [Council] COMMISSION shall advise the Division on general goals
for the development of programs, undertake studies and issue reports, and foster
cooperation among federal, State, and local agencies and private groups.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 482 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) The [Council] COMMISSION consists of:

(i) The Division Chief; and

(ii) Nine members appointed by the Governor with the advice and
consent of the Senate.

(2) The members appointed by the Governor shall be divided into three
categories, as follows:

(i) Three members to represent consumer groups or interests;

(ii) Three members to represent business groups or interests; and

(iii) Three members to represent the public sector.

(3) (I) The term of membership is six years, except that, of the original
appointees, one of each category shall serve a six–year term, one of each category shall
serve a four–year term, and one of each category shall serve a two–year term.

(II) A member serves until his successor is appointed and qualified.

(III) An appointment to a vacancy in an unexpired term is limited to
the remainder of that term.

(4) The members [shall serve without compensation] MAY RECEIVE PER
DIEM COMPENSATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET, but shall be
reimbursed for all expenses reasonably incurred.

(5) The [Council] COMMISSION shall elect annually a [chairman] CHAIR
from among its members and appoint a secretary.

13–205.

(a) (1) After obtaining the advice of the Consumer [Council] PROTECTION
COMMISSION and holding a public hearing, the Division may adopt reasonable rules,
regulations, and standards appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this subtitle, including
rules, regulations, or standards which further define specific unfair or deceptive trade
practices.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2