START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 701

Chapter 701

(House Bill 928)

AN ACT concerning

Washington County – Procurement – Vehicles

FOR the purpose of authorizing the County Commissioners of Washington County to enter
into a certain contract for the purchase of one or more vehicles without advertising
for bids if the amount involved in the contract does not exceed a certain amount; and
generally relating to procurement in Washington County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Washington County
Section 1–106(a)
Article 22 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2019 Edition)

BY adding to
The Public Local Laws of Washington County
Section 1–106(f)
Article 22 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2019 Edition)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 22 – Washington County

1–106.

(a) (1) Except as provided in this subtitle the County Commissioners or any
employee of the county may not enter into any contract of sale or purchase or any contract
for any county work, project, or other expenditure to which the county is a party where the
amount involved in the contract exceeds $50,000 without advertising for bids at least 1
week before the bid by publication in at least one newspaper that is published in the county
or through electronic media.

(2) Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this subsection and regardless of
whether the total cumulative procurement exceeds $50,000, if a contract is for an
indeterminate amount of goods or services procured on an as–needed basis over a period of
time, the County Commissioners or an employee of the County may, without advertising
for bids, enter into a contract of purchase or a contract for a county work project or other
expenditure to which the county is a party.

(F) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION, THE COUNTY
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 701 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

COMMISSIONERS OR AN EMPLOYEE OF THE COUNTY MAY ENTER INTO A CONTRACT
FOR THE PURCHASE OF ONE OR MORE VEHICLES WITHOUT ADVERTISING FOR BIDS
IF THE AMOUNT INVOLVED IN THE CONTRACT DOES NOT EXCEED $100,000.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2