START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 188

Chapter 188

(House Bill 945)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Initial Teacher Certification – Requirements

FOR the purpose of repealing a provision of law that requires a teacher preparation
program to require a student to pass a certain assessment as a graduation
requirement; altering the requirements for initial teacher certification; ~~repealing~~
~~certain~~ ~~certification~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~to~~ ~~pass~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~literacy~~ ~~test,~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~skills~~
~~assessment,~~ ~~and~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~reading~~ ~~mastery~~ ~~test;~~ ~~requiring,~~ ~~rather~~ ~~than~~ ~~authorizing,~~
~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Superintendent~~ ~~of~~ ~~Schools~~ ~~to~~ ~~pursue~~ ~~and~~ ~~make~~ ~~certain~~ ~~reciprocal~~ ~~educator~~
~~credentialing~~ ~~agreements~~ ~~with~~ ~~other~~ ~~states;~~ authorizing a local school system to
establish a comprehensive induction program to aid in meeting a certain
requirement for initial teacher certification; altering the qualification requirements
for a teacher who holds a professional license or certificate from another state; and
generally relating to initial teacher certification.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–121(a), 6–125, 6–126, and 6–705
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

6–121.

(a) A teacher preparation program shall:

(1) Include the following components of instruction:

(i) Basic research skills and methods and training on the routine
evaluation and use of research and data to improve student performance;

(ii) Differentiation of instruction and demonstration of cultural
competence for students of diverse racial, ethnic, linguistic, and economic backgrounds with
different learning abilities;

(iii) Implementation of restorative approaches for student behaviors;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 188 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) Identifying and assessing, in the context of the classroom, typical
student learning deficits and techniques to remedy learning deficits;

(v) Recognizing and effectively using high quality instructional
materials, including digital resources and computer technology;

(vi) Core academic subjects that teachers will be teaching;

(vii) Methods and techniques for identifying and addressing the social
and emotional needs of students, including trauma–informed approaches to pedagogy;

(viii) Skills and techniques for effective classroom management; and

(ix) Training in the skills and techniques for teaching effectively in a
virtual learning environment, including the use of online curriculum;

(2) Require program participants to demonstrate competency in each of the
components required under paragraph (1) of this subsection; AND

(3) Provide training in the knowledge and skills required to understand
and teach the Maryland curriculum frameworks[; and

(4) On or after July 1, 2025, require passing a nationally recognized,
portfolio–based assessment of teaching ability as a requirement for graduation].

6–125.

(a) (1) The Department shall determine whether the Basic Literacy Skills test
[required] APPROVED for initial teacher certification is at least as rigorous as the similar
examination administered by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts SUFFICIENTLY
RIGOROUS.

(2) If the Department determines the Basic Literacy Skills test is
insufficient under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Department shall develop a new
literacy examination of sufficient rigor.

(3) The Department may not limit the number of times an individual may
take the literacy examination developed under this subsection in order to pass.

(b) (1) (i) Beginning after the implementation of the literacy examination
under subsection (a) of this section, the Department shall develop and administer
challenging, subject–specific examinations tailored to the subjects and grade level at which
teachers will teach.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 188

(ii) Subject–specific examinations shall be ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~as~~ ~~rigorous~~ ~~as~~
similar examinations administered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts RIGOROUS,
AS DEFINED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(iii) The Department may not limit the number of times an individual
may take a subject–specific examination to pass the examination.

(2) Before a subject–specific examination developed under paragraph (1) of
this subsection is administered, the Department shall develop standards for the
subject–specific examination and submit the standards to each Department–approved
teacher preparation program 1 year before the first year in which the examination is
expected to be administered.

(3) A teacher preparation program with standards for a subject–specific
examination developed by the Department under paragraph (2) of this subsection shall
incorporate the standards into the curriculum of the teacher preparation program in a
timely manner.

6–126.

(a) (1) This subsection applies to individuals who have graduated from a
teacher preparation program [approved by the Department] or an alternative teacher
preparation program.

(2) Beginning on July 1, 2025, to qualify for an initial certificate an
individual shall:

(i) PASS THE SUBJECT–SPECIFIC EXAMINATIONS UNDER §
6–125 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(II) MEET ONE OF THE FOLLOWING QUALIFICATIONS:

1. Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, pass a
nationally recognized, portfolio–based assessment of teaching ability; OR

2. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
COMPLETE A RIGOROUS LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM TEACHER INDUCTION PROGRAM
THAT LASTS FOR THE LESSER OF:

A. 3 YEARS; OR

B. THE AMOUNT OF TIME A TEACHER MAY HOLD A
CONDITIONAL TEACHER CERTIFICATE;

(III) MEET ONE OF THE FOLLOWING QUALIFICATIONS:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 188 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. PASS A BASIC LITERACY SKILLS ASSESSMENT
APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER § 6–125 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

3. 2. HOLD A DEGREE FROM A REGIONALLY ACCREDITED
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION AND HAVE EARNED A MINIMUM OVERALL CUMULATIVE
GRADE POINT AVERAGE OF 3.0 ON A 4.0 SCALE OR ITS EQUIVALENT ON THE MOST
RECENTLY EARNED DEGREE; OR

4. 3. SUBMIT DOCUMENTATION SATISFACTORY TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF SATISFACTORY HAVING RECEIVED EFFECTIVE EVALUATIONS
FROM A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM ~~FROM~~ ~~COMPLETION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~RIGOROUS~~ ~~TEACHER~~
INDUCTION PROGRAM FOR THE LESSER OF:

A. 3 YEARS; OR

B. THE AMOUNT OF TIME A TEACHER MAY HOLD A
CONDITIONAL TEACHER CERTIFICATE FOR 3 YEARS; AND

[(ii) (IV) Pass a rigorous State–specific examination of mastery of
reading instruction and content for the grade level the individual will be teaching; and]

(iii) (V) Satisfactorily complete any other requirements
established by the State Board.

(3) An individual who graduates from a teacher preparation program in
the State who passed a nationally recognized, portfolio–based assessment [as a
requirement to graduate under § 6–121 of this subtitle] may not be required to take the
assessment more than one time.

(4) (I) IN ORDER TO SATISFY THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH
(2)(II)2 OF THIS SUBSECTION, A CANDIDATE FOR AN INITIAL TEACHER CERTIFICATE
SHALL SUBMIT DOCUMENTATION TO THE DEPARTMENT THAT THE CANDIDATE HAS
COMPLETED A RIGOROUS COMPREHENSIVE INDUCTION PROGRAM, ESTABLISHED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 6–117 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THAT MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS
OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(II) THE COMPREHENSIVE INDUCTION PROGRAM SHALL BE
DEVELOPED BY A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM, EITHER INDEPENDENTLY OR
COLLABORATIVELY WITH OTHER LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS.

(III) BEFORE ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE INDUCTION
PROGRAM, ONE OR MORE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS SHALL SUBMIT A PLAN FOR THE

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 188

PROGRAM TO THE DEPARTMENT AND THE ACCOUNTABILITY AND
IMPLEMENTATION BOARD.

(IV) THE COMPREHENSIVE INDUCTION PROGRAM SHALL
INCLUDE A LOCALLY DEVELOPED PORTFOLIO COMPONENT THAT IS ALIGNED WITH
THE INTERSTATE TEACHER ASSESSMENT AND SUPPORT CONSORTIUM
STANDARDS.

(V) A TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM OR AN ALTERNATIVE
TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM MAY USE THE LOCALLY DEVELOPED PORTFOLIO
COMPONENT UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (IV) OF THIS PARAGRAPH AS MEETING A
PORTION OF THE COURSEWORK REQUIREMENTS OF THE PROGRAM.

(VI) A CANDIDATE WHO SATISFACTORILY COMPLETES A
COMPREHENSIVE INDUCTION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
PARAGRAPH MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO PASS A NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED,
PORTFOLIO–BASED ASSESSMENT OF TEACHING ABILITY.

(b) In addition to any other requirements established by the State Board, to
qualify for a certificate in the State, a teacher who [graduated from an institution of higher
education in another state or] holds a professional license or certificate from another state
shall:

(1) [Pass an examination of teaching ability within 18 months of being
hired by a local school system] MEET THE REQUIREMENTS FOR AN INITIAL TEACHER
CERTIFICATE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION; or;

(2) Hold an active National Board Certification from the National Board
for Professional Teaching Standards; OR

(3) COMPLETE A COMPREHENSIVE INDUCTION PROGRAM IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (A)(4) OF THIS SECTION.

(c) (1) The Department, after a reasonable period of review and assessment,
shall determine whether one of the assessments of teaching skill [required] APPROVED for
initial teacher certification under this section more adequately measures the skills and
knowledge required of a highly qualified teacher.

(2) If the Department makes a determination under paragraph (1) of this
subsection that requires a revision to the statutory requirements for initial teacher
certification, the Department shall, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, submit a report to the General Assembly on or before the next September 1 on its
recommendations for revising the qualifications for initial teacher [licensure]
CERTIFICATION.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 188 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) (1) The Department shall actively monitor and assess, during their
implementation and development, new teacher standards and assessments produced under
this section for any negative impact on the diversity of teacher candidates passing the
initial teacher certification assessments.

(2) The Department shall report the results of its monitoring and
assessment to the Accountability and Implementation Board established under § 5–402 of
this article.

6–705.

(a) IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT THE PROCESS FOR
INITIAL CERTIFICATION OF QUALIFIED TEACHERS AND OTHER SCHOOL PERSONNEL
EDUCATED OR CREDENTIALED IN OTHER STATES BE EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE TO
ENCOURAGE MORE TEACHERS AND OTHER SCHOOL PERSONNEL TO LIVE AND WORK
IN THE STATE.

(B) Subject to the rules and regulations that are implemented according to §
6–704 of this subtitle, the State Superintendent [may] SHALL PURSUE AND make an
agreement with the appropriate educational authority of any other state THAT HAS
~~SUBSTANTIALLY~~ ~~EQUIVALENT~~ ~~CREDENTIALING~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~
REQUIRED BY THIS TITLE to provide for reciprocity in the certification of teachers.

[(b)] (C) Subject to the regulations of the Board, the State Superintendent may
accept the accreditation for certification purposes of a program for teacher preparation if:

(1) The accreditation is granted by a recognized national accrediting
agency; and

(2) The institution preparing the teachers is in another state.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6