START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 903 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 903 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Education - Access to Attorneys, Advocates, and Consultants for Special 
Education Program and Fund - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Access to Attorneys, Advocates, and Consultants for Special 
Education (AAACSE) Program administered by the Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service 
(MVLS) and the AAACSE Fund, administered by the Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE). The AAACSE Program directs resources and services to eligible 
students to provide access to legal, advocacy, and consultant services. Eligible students are 
those with a disability whose parent has (1) a household income not more than 150% of 
the MVLS guidelines and (2) made at least one attempt to resolve a disagreement with a 
public agency regarding the child’s special education services or program. Beginning in 
fiscal 2026, the Governor must include $1.0 million to the AAACSE Fund in the annual 
budget bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2025; first-year expenditures reflect contingent funding provided in the State budget as 
passed by the General Assembly, and out-year costs reflect the mandated appropriation. 
Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. This bill establishes a 
mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
GF Expenditure 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
SF Expenditure 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
$1.00 
Net Effect 
($1.00) 
($1.00) 
($1.00) 
($1.00) 
($1.00)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent that the bill results in more families initiating due process 
complaints, local school systems may incur additional costs to handle the increase. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 903/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
AAACSE Fund 
 
MVLS may use the AAACSE Fund only for (1) services provided to eligible students by 
attorneys, advocates, and consultants; (2) development and distribution of written 
informational materials for parents; (3) outreach and education activities; and (4) MSDE’s 
and MVLS’s administrative expenses. Excluding expenditures for administering the 
AAACSE Program, from the annual appropriation, it is the intent of the General Assembly 
that approximately 25% of the annual appropriation be used to provide representation to 
eligible students in due process hearings and 75% be used to provide consultation, 
representation, or advocacy of eligible students. 
 
AAACSE Program 
 
The AAACSE Program may serve only eligible students who meet at least one of a set of 
specified criteria. The bill requires MVLS to carry out specified actions in administering 
the AAACSE Program, including, in consultation with specified entities, developing and 
providing, or authorizing other nonprofit organizations to provide, training for advocates 
and consultants on State and federal special education law and procedures. An advocate or 
consultant may not participate in, or receive payment under, the AAACSE Program 
without completing the training. 
 
A qualified attorney, advocate, or a consultant who is included on the referral list 
maintained by MVLS may receive the individual’s customary rate, up to $200 per hour, to 
provide services under the AAACSE Program. Funds received by a qualified attorney, 
advocate, or a consultant under the AAACSE Program do not need to be repaid to MVLS 
unless the eligible student is the prevailing party in a proceeding and fees have been 
awarded to the student. An eligible student may not receive more than $20,000 in lifetime 
services under the program. MVLS may adopt policies and procedures to carry out 
provisions of the bill. 
 
Notification Requirements 
 
At the initial evaluation meeting for the purpose of discussing the identification, evaluation, 
educational program, or the provision of a free appropriate public education of a child with 
a disability, the parents of the child must be provided written information about the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 903/ Page 3 
AAACSE Program. If during an individualized education program (IEP) team meeting, a 
parent disagrees with the child’s IEP or the special education services provided to the child, 
the IEP team must provide the parent with written information about the AAACSE 
Program. Except in cases of extenuating circumstances, five days prior to a scheduled IEP 
meeting, parents must be provided notification of the right of the parent to be accompanied 
to the meeting by any individual who has knowledge or expertise regarding the student, 
and written information about the AAACSE Program.  
 
If a parent files a due process complaint against a public agency concerning the 
identification, evaluation, or educational placement of a student or the provision of a free 
appropriate public education, MSDE must notify the parent about the AAACSE Program 
prior to mediation. Before conducting a due process hearing, a public agency must notify 
the parent about the AAACSE Program. Similarly, all public agencies must include 
information about the AAACSE Program in the parent’s rights documents distributed to 
families in the IEP meetings and before mediation or due process hearings.  
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
A public agency must annually, for specified proceedings, collect specified information 
about the nature of the dispute and the involved student. MSDE must compile this 
information annually and submit a report to the General Assembly annually by 
November 1. MVLS must annually collect specified data related to money disbursed from 
and returned to the AAACSE Fund and annually report the compiled data to the 
General Assembly by October 1. 
 
Current Law/Background:  The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act 
(IDEA) requires that a child with disabilities be provided a free appropriate public 
education in the least restrictive environment from birth through the end of the school year 
in which the student turns 21 year old, in accordance with an individualized family service 
plan (IFSP) or IEP specific to the individual needs of the child. An IFSP is for children 
with disabilities from birth up to age 3, and up to age 5 under Maryland’s Extended IFSP 
Option if a parent chooses the option. An IEP is for students with disabilities age 3 
through 21. Local school systems are required to make a free appropriate public education 
available to students with disabilities from age 3 through 21. However, the State, under its 
supervisory authority required by IDEA, has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that 
this obligation is met. 
 
An IEP is a written statement for each child with a disability that, among other things, must 
indicate the present levels of academic achievement and functional performance of a child, 
measurable academic and functional goals for the child, how the child’s progress toward 
meeting these goals will be measured, and the special education and related services that 
are to be provided for the child. The parent of a child with a disability is a member of the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 903/ Page 4 
IEP team that is responsible for developing and reviewing a child’s IEP and for revisions 
to the IEP. 
 
At the initial evaluation meeting, the parents of a child with a disability must be provided 
certain information, including (1) in plain language, a verbal and written explanation of the 
parents’ rights and responsibilities in the process and a program procedural safeguards 
notice; (2) written information that the parents may use to contact early intervention and 
special education family support services and staff members within the local school system 
and a brief description of the services provided by staff members; and (3) written 
information on the Special Education Ombudsman and toll-free telephone number. If a 
parent’s native language is not English, the information must be provided in the parent’s 
native language. The parents may request this information at any subsequent meeting. If a 
child who has an IEP developed in another school system moves to a different local school 
system, the new school system must provide the information in the first communication 
regarding the child’s IEP. Failure to provide information does not constitute grounds for a 
due process complaint. 
 
“Public agency” means MSDE, a local school system, the Juvenile Services Education 
Program, or any State agency responsible for providing education to students with 
disabilities, including the Maryland School for the Blind and the Maryland School for the 
Deaf. 
 
A parent of a child with a disability or a public agency may request mediation to resolve 
any disagreement regarding the child’s special education services or program, including 
mediation to resolve a due process complaint filed by a parent against a public agency. A 
parent of a child with disabilities may file a due process complaint with Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH) and the public agency. Similarly, the public agency may 
file a due process complaint with OAH and the parent. OAH appoints an administrative 
law judge to conduct a due process hearing. The decision of the administrative law judge 
must be made on substantive grounds based on whether a child has received a free 
appropriate public education.  
 
Chapter 708 of 2023 authorizes a court to award reasonable attorney’s fees and related 
costs, including expert witness fees and costs, to the parent of a child with a disability, if 
the parent prevails in a proceeding that is held to resolve disputes about the identification, 
evaluation, or educational placements of children with disabilities or the provision of a free 
appropriate public education. However, such an award may not be made after the date a 
written offer of settlement is made to the parent, under certain conditions, unless the parent 
was substantially justified in rejecting the settlement offer. 
 
According to its website, MVLS directly helps Marylanders facing legal challenges, while 
also fighting to change systems that harm people living in or near poverty. MVLS 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 903/ Page 5 
accomplishes this through pro bono representation, community engagement, and 
legislative and administrative advocacy. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025, reflecting $1.0 million in general funds provided for the 
AAACSE Program in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly contingent 
on this legislation, and according to the bill’s mandated appropriations to the 
AAACSE Fund. Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by $1.0 million each 
beginning in fiscal 2026, assuming that the full appropriation is expended each year to 
provide services to eligible students.  
 
One-time administrative costs for MSDE amounting to $78,000 include costs for 
(1) changes to the MSDE on-line data management system, (2) updates to the Maryland 
Special Education Procedural Safeguards and Special Education Parent Information Series 
publications and translation of these into 26 languages, and (3) guidance and training for 
IEP teams in implementing the bill’s requirements. It is assumed these costs are incurred 
in fiscal 2025, in anticipation of the AAACSE Program commencing in fiscal 2026, and 
are covered by the $1.0 million in general funds provided in the fiscal 2025 State budget. 
MSDE can otherwise administer the fund with existing resources. 
 
To the extent that the bill results in more families initiating due process complaints, MSDE 
may require additional staff in the future to handle the increase. Other State-level public 
agencies can handle the bill’s provisions with existing resources. OAH does not anticipate 
increased expenditures under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide relevant legal and consulting 
services may benefit.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 797 (Senator Hester, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Department of Education; Maryland School for the Deaf; Baltimore County Public 
Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Maryland Volunteer Lawyers Service; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 903/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2024 
 
an/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6