START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 998 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 998 
(Delegates Adams and Fisher) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Labor – Unemployment Insurance – Study on Actively 
Seeking Work Requirements 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) to conduct a study on the 
actively seeking work requirements of the unemployment insurance (UI) system in the 
State and other states to evaluate the effects of “ghosting” on those requirements. “Ghost” 
means the failure of a claimant for UI benefits who is scheduled for a job interview with 
an employer to attend the interview or maintain contact with the employer after the 
interview is scheduled. By December 1, 2024, MDL must report its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDL can complete the required study with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study must: 
 
 
examine the actively seeking work requirements of other states to determine (1) the 
ways in which those requirements are different from those in the State and (2) how 
those requirements are verified to ensure a claimant remains eligible for UI benefits; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 998/ Page 2 
 
determine whether MDL, using existing resources, is able to perform periodic 
verification of the information reported by claimants to satisfy the claimant’s 
actively seeking work requirement; 
 
evaluate and explain why the online BEACON system for claimants and employers 
does not or cannot allow an employer to input information about a claimant’s 
actively seeking work requirement, including (1) confirmation that a claimant 
contacted an employer for work and (2) a report of ghosting; 
 
determine whether it is feasible to remove requirements for employers to input 
certain information in the BEACON system, such as a claimant’s Social Security 
number, for purposes of reporting incidents of ghosting; and 
 
examine any other factors relevant to reporting ghosting or verifying whether a 
claimant meets the actively seeking work requirement. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, to be eligible for UI benefits, an individual must be able to 
work, available for work, and actively seeking work. In determining whether an individual 
actively is seeking work, the Secretary of Labor must consider (1) whether the individual 
has made an effort that is reasonable and that would be expected of an unemployed 
individual who honestly is looking for work and (2) the extent of the effort in relation to 
the labor market conditions in the area in which the individual is seeking work. 
 
For additional general information about the State UI program, see the Appendix – 
Unemployment Insurance. 
 
Additional Comments:  Under current MDL requirements, a claimant must complete at 
least three valid reemployment activities per benefit week (unless under a special 
exemption) to satisfy the actively seeking work requirement. At least one of the three valid 
reemployment activities must be a job contact. Job contacts include submitting a job 
application, making contact with a potential employer, and attending a job interview. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 846 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 998/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 998/ Page 4 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. State 
UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly; however, Chapter 39 of 2021 
allowed employers with fewer than 50 employees to defer 2021 State UI tax payments or 
reimbursements until January 31, 2022, and authorized the Secretary of Labor to offer a 
similar deferment in 2022. The Act, in conjunction with a 2020 executive order, also 
prevented UI claims made during the COVID-19 pandemic from increasing an employer’s 
taxes, although employers still paid broadly higher rates under Table F in 2021 and Table C 
in 2022 and 2023. With the UITF balance restored, the State is in Table A again in 2024.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 998/ Page 5 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from… 
Annual Tax Per Employee  
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
N/A 
$1,074.6 
N/A 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
967.2 
$1,074.6 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
859.7 
967.2 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
752.2 
859.7 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
644.8 
752.2 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
644.8 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2022 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with 
nonzero (.0001 to .0027) benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; 
compensation less than that amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C was in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. A preexisting State law requiring a federal solvency goal to be met prior 
to moving to a tax table with lower rates again applies beginning in 2024. The federal solvency goal, which is designed 
to ensure the State’s ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately $1.7 billion and 
varies with the total wages paid in the State and benefits paid during recessions. 
 
As of January 1, 2024, the trust fund balance was $1.9 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the first four 
of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit 
year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most recently 
completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 
 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 998/ Page 6 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MDL-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 
Broadly, the new laws (1) required Table C to apply in 2022 and 2023; (2) made 
administrative changes to assist employers in paying their taxes, specifically allowing them 
to defer payments under certain circumstances; (3) exempted certain UI benefit payments 
from being subject to the State income tax; (4) temporarily modified benefit calculations 
to assist claimants working on a part-time basis; (5) made system administrative changes 
that must be implemented by MDL; and (6) enhanced the State’s work sharing program, 
which allows an employee to continue working at reduced hours and obtain UI benefits 
under certain circumstances. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6