START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 861

Chapter 861

(House Bill 938)

AN ACT concerning

State–Owned Nursing Homes – Deficiencies, Citations, and Fines – Reporting
Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring the department charged with oversight of a State–owned
nursing home operated by a contractor, instead of the contractor, to provide notice of
certain deficiencies and enforcement actions to certain persons; requiring that the
notice be provided within a certain time period after a final survey finding; requiring
the department charged with oversight, rather than the contractor, to provide
certain information to certain persons within a certain time period after the
contractor’s final acceptance of a plan of correction or completion of an informal
dispute resolution, rather than after the contractor’s receipt of a citation or fine; and
generally relating to State–owned nursing homes.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–14C–01 and 19–14C–02
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–14C–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Deficiency” has the meaning stated in § 19–1401 of this title.

(c) “Monitoring agency” means:

(1) The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; [or]

(2) The Office of Health Care Quality within the Department;

(3) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR;

(4) A LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 861 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; OR

(6) THE FEDERAL OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION.

(d) “Nursing home” has the meaning stated in § 19–1401 of this title.

19–14C–02.

(a) (1) If a State–owned nursing home that is operated by a contractor receives
a deficiency from or is subject to an enforcement action by a monitoring agency, WITHIN
15 DAYS AFTER THE FINAL SURVEY FINDING, the [contractor promptly] DEPARTMENT
CHARGED WITH OVERSIGHT OF THE NURSING HOME shall provide notice of the
deficiency or enforcement action to:

(i) The Governor;

[(ii) The State agency overseeing the nursing home;] and

[(iii)] (II) In accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, the Senate Finance Committee, the House Health and Government Operations
Committee, and the members of the General Assembly who represent the district in which
the nursing home is located; AND

(III) THE LOCAL GOVERNING BODY OF THE COUNTY IN WHICH
THE NURSING HOME IS LOCATED.

(2) Within 30 days after [a State–owned nursing home that is operated by
a contractor receives a citation or fine from a monitoring agency, the contractor] THE
CONTRACTOR’S FINAL ACCEPTANCE OF A PLAN OF CORRECTION OR COMPLETION OF
AN INFORMAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION, THE DEPARTMENT CHARGED WITH
OVERSIGHT OF THE NURSING HOME shall provide to the Governor[, the State agency
overseeing the nursing home,] and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, the Senate Finance Committee, the House Health and Government Operations
Committee, and the members of the General Assembly who represent the district in which
the nursing home is located:

(i) A statement of the deficiencies found by the monitoring agency;

(ii) [A] THE plan of correction OR RESULTS OF THE INFORMAL
DISPUTE RESOLUTION; and

(iii) All communications from the monitoring agency regarding
survey activities conducted at the nursing home.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 861

(b) On or before January 1 each year, beginning in 2024, the Department shall
report to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
the General Assembly on all federal and State:

(1) Survey activities conducted during the immediately preceding
12–month period at each State–owned nursing home that is operated by a contractor; and

(2) Enforcement actions imposed during the immediately preceding
12–month period on each State–owned nursing home that is operated by a contractor.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3