START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 914 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 914 
(Delegates D. Jones and Pippy) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Winery and Vineyard Economic Development Grant Program - Modifications 
 
 
This bill removes the September 15 application deadline and December 15 grant award 
deadline under the Winery and Vineyard Economic Development Grant Program in the 
Department of Commerce. The bill also modifies the period during which qualified capital 
expenses must be paid or incurred for purposes of calculating the grant amount. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect general fund expenditures associated with 
the program, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. The bill makes the program moderately more flexible 
but does not affect overall funding for grants to small businesses. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 358 of 2022 established the Winery and Vineyard Economic 
Development Grant Program in Commerce. Under the program, Commerce must provide 
a grant to an individual or corporation for 25% of “qualified capital expenses” (as defined) 
made to either establish a new winery or vineyard or make capital improvements to an 
existing winery or a vineyard (as defined) in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 914/ Page 2 
By September 15 of the calendar year in which the qualified capital expenses are paid or 
incurred, an individual or a corporation may submit an application to Commerce for a 
grant. Commerce must award the grants by December 15 each year. 
 
For each fiscal year, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation 
of at least $1.0 million to Commerce to award grants under the program. The amount of 
grants annually approved by Commerce may not exceed the total appropriation for the 
program for that fiscal year. Fiscal 2024 is the first year of mandated funding. 
 
State Expenditures:  Commerce advises that, under the bill, the department intends to 
open applications early in the calendar year for expenses incurred in the previous 
calendar year and award grants before the end of the fiscal year. For example, fiscal 2025 
applications will be due in early calendar 2025, based on calendar 2024 expenses, and 
Commerce will award grants before June 30, 2025. The process then repeats in subsequent 
fiscal years. Commerce anticipates that the program will be at full capacity beginning in 
fiscal 2025, with or without the bill, so general fund expenditures are not anticipated to be 
affected by the changes to the eligibility period for qualifying expenses.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 746 (Senator Guzzone) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2