START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 969 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 969 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Death Certificates - Cause or Manner of Death Determinations - Requirements 
After Change or Correction (Katherine Morris Death Reclassification Act) 
 
 
This bill requires a medical examiner, if the cause or manner of death on a death certificate 
is amended or corrected to be undetermined or homicide, to provide notice to the 
State’s Attorney and local law enforcement where the body was found of the different 
finding or conclusion on the cause or manner of death. The medical examiner must also 
request that the Secretary of Health send the person in interest a new certified death 
certificate at no cost. An assistant State’s Attorney with knowledge of the case in which 
the victim’s cause or manner of death was amended or corrected must meet with a person 
in interest regarding their request that the Office of the State’s Attorney pursue an 
investigation into the circumstances of the victim’s death. A law enforcement agency, upon 
notification by a medical examiner that a death certificate has been amended or corrected 
to be undetermined or homicide, must (1) reopen or reinvestigate an investigation involving 
the death of a victim whose cause or manner of death was corrected and (2) keep the case 
open for at least 20 years after being notified. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements for the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) 
regarding notification and provision of amended certified death certificates can be absorbed 
with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Assuming a small number of instances in which the cause or manner of 
death is amended to be undetermined or homicide, State’s Attorney’s offices and local law 
enforcement agencies can handle any increased workload under the bill using existing 
resources, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 969/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An assistant State’s Attorney must meet with a person in interest within 
20 days after receiving a request from the person in interest to meet. At the meeting, the 
assistant State’s Attorney must explain the justification for not pursuing an investigation 
into the victim’s death despite the amendment or correction to the cause or manner of death 
on the victim’s death certificate. The meeting may be conducted in person, by telephone, 
or by other means mutually agreed upon.   
 
Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “person in interest” means the spouse, adult child, parent, adult sibling, grandparent, or 
guardian of the person of the deceased at the time of the deceased’s death.  
 
A “law enforcement agency” means a governmental police force, sheriff’s office, or 
security force or law enforcement organization of the State, a county, or a municipality that 
by statute, ordinance, or common law is authorized to enforce the general criminal laws of 
the State. It does not include specified members of the Maryland National Guard.  
 
Duties of a Medical Examiner 
 
A medical examiner must investigate a person’s death if it occurs by (1) violence; 
(2) suicide; (3) casualty; (4) suddenly, if the deceased was in apparent good health or 
unattended by a physician; or (5) in any suspicious or unusual manner. If one of those 
criteria are met, the police or sheriff must immediately notify the medical examiner and the 
State’s Attorney for the county where the body is found and give the known facts 
concerning the time, place, manner, and circumstances of the death.  
 
If a person’s cause of death is established to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, the 
medical examiner who investigates the case must file in the medical examiner’s office a 
report on the cause of death within 30 days after notification of the case. However, if the 
medical examiner investigating the case considers an autopsy necessary, an autopsy must 
be performed by the chief medical examiner or another specified individual.  
 
An individual who performs an autopsy must prepare detailed written findings during the 
autopsy. The original copy of such findings and the conclusions drawn from them must be 
filed in the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner (OCME), and a copy must be filed in the 
office of the medical examiner for the county where the death occurred. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 969/ Page 3 
Requesting Amendments or Changes to a Death Certificate 
 
With the exception of cases where the finding is homicide, a person in interest may request 
that the medical examiner correct findings and conclusions on the cause and manner of 
death recorded on a death certificate within 180 days after the medical examiner files the 
findings and conclusions.  
 
If the Chief Medical Examiner denies the request of a person in interest to correct the 
findings and conclusions on the cause or manner of death, the person in interest may appeal 
the denial to correct the cause and manner of death to the Secretary, who must then refer 
the matter to the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). A contested hearing before 
OAH must be a hearing on both (1) the denial of the request and (2) the establishment of 
the findings and conclusions on the cause and manner of death.  
 
Following a hearing, an administrative law judge (ALJ) must submit findings of fact to the 
Secretary. After a review of the ALJ’s findings, the Secretary, including a designee, must 
issue an order to either (1) adopt the findings of the ALJ or (2) reject the findings of the 
ALJ and affirm the findings of the medical examiner. If the ALJ’s findings are rejected, 
the person in interest may further appeal to a circuit court in an appropriate jurisdiction.  
 
If a final decision (by either the Secretary, including a designee, or the appropriate 
circuit court) establishes a different finding or conclusion on the cause or manner of death 
of a deceased than that recorded on the certificate of death, the medical examiner must 
amend the certificate to reflect the different finding or conclusion.  
 
Duties of a State’s Attorney 
 
Section 15-102 of the Criminal Procedure Article specifies that a State’s Attorney generally 
must, in the county served by the State’s Attorney, prosecute and defend on the part of the 
State all cases in which the State may be interested. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  According to OCME, the cause or manner of death was 
amended or corrected on a total of 11 death certificates statewide in 2022 and 2023. The 
cause or manner of death was not amended or corrected to homicide for any of those death 
certificates; however, for 6 of the death certificates, the cause or manner of death was 
amended to be undetermined.  
 
Given the small number of death certificates for which the cause or manner of death was 
amended or corrected over the past two calendar years, MDH advises that it can absorb the 
costs associated with issuing revised certified death certificates to persons in interest with 
existing budgeted resources.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 969/ Page 4 
Assuming the number of death certificates for which the cause or manner of death is 
amended to be undetermined or homicide does not increase significantly in future years, 
State’s Attorney’s offices can handle any additional workload with existing budgeted 
resources. Similarly, local police departments and other law enforcement agencies can 
likely absorb the limited number of investigations they have to reopen or reinvestigate as 
a result of the bill using existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of State Police; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4