START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 959 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 959 
(Delegate Bhandari, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Occupations - Certified Dialysis Technicians - Continuing Education 
Requirement 
 
   
This bill alters the continuing education requirement for certified dialysis technicians 
(CDTs) renewing their certification. The bill requires three hours of continuing education 
approved by the Maryland Board of Nursing (MBON) rather than a three-hour continuing 
education course approved by MBON. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances.      
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Certified dialysis technician” means an individual who has completed a 
MBON-approved dialysis technician program and is certified by MBON as a dialysis 
technician. To qualify for certification, an applicant must (1) submit the required 
application; (2) provide evidence of successful completion of an approved dialysis 
technician training program; (3) pay an application fee; (4) be of good moral character; and 
(5) be at least 18 years old. An applicant must also submit to a criminal history records 
check.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 959/ Page 2 
MBON must send a renewal notice at least three months before a certificate expires. CDTs 
may renew their certificate for an additional term if the CDT (1) is otherwise entitled to be 
certified; (2) submits a renewal application; (3) pays the renewal fee; (4) has completed 
16 hours of practice as a dialysis technician in the immediately preceding two-year period, 
a three-hour MBON-approved continuing education course, or an MBON-approved 
dialysis technician training program; and (5) has an active specified national certification.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2