START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 996 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 996 
(Delegate White Holland) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Consumer Council - Name Change 
 
 
This bill renames the Consumer Council in the Division of Consumer Protection in the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to the Consumer Protection Commission. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Consumer protection laws in Maryland are enforced generally by the 
Consumer Protection Division of OAG. Other agencies also have some responsibility for 
enforcing certain consumer protection laws. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division enforces the State consumer protection laws against 
those who commit unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices. An unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice includes (1) making false or misleading oral or written statements 
that have the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving or misleading consumers;  
(2) misrepresenting the quality, sponsorship, or nature of any consumer goods, realty, or 
services; (3) failing to state a material fact if the failure deceives or tends to deceive; and 
(4) advertising or offering consumer goods, realty, or services in a manner that does not 
conform with actual intent or form of sale. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 996/ Page 2 
Further, as part of the division, the Consumer Council advises the division, undertakes 
studies and reports, and fosters cooperation among federal, State, and local agencies and 
private groups. The council includes representatives of consumer interests, business 
interests, and the public. 
 
After obtaining the advice of the Consumer Council and holding a public hearing, the 
Consumer Protection Division may adopt reasonable rules, regulations, and standards, 
including those that define specific unfair or deceptive trade practices. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2