START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 918 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 918 
(The Speaker)(By Request - State Treasurer) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Treasurer and Comptroller - Membership Responsibilities 
 
 
This bill removes the State Treasurer from membership in (1) the Board of Trustees for the 
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation (MALPF); (2) the Maryland 
Commission on Climate Change (MCCC); and (3) the Coast Smart Council in the 
Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The bill adds the Comptroller, or the 
Comptroller’s designee, to membership in MCCC and the Coast Smart Council in DNR. 
The bill also makes corresponding changes related to the authority and duties associated 
with being a member of these boards, commissions, and/or councils. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances; 
however, the State Treasurer’s Office may experience administrative efficiencies to the 
extent the bill reduces the number of meetings the office is required to attend each year. 
The Comptroller’s Office can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  
 
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation  
 
The General Assembly created MALPF to preserve productive agricultural land and 
woodland, limit the extent of urban development, and protect agricultural land and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 918/ Page 2 
woodland as open space. The foundation, with the assistance and cooperation of 
landowners and local governments, purchases development rights easements as a means of 
protecting agricultural land and woodland production activities.  
 
Maryland Commission on Climate Change  
 
MCCC, originally created by executive order, was codified in statute pursuant to 
Chapter 429 of 2015 to advise the Governor and the General Assembly on ways to mitigate 
the causes of, prepare for, and adapt to the consequences of climate change. The 
commission is required to submit annual updates to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on the State’s efforts to mitigate the causes of, prepare for, and adapt to 
the consequences of climate change, including any future plans and recommendations for 
legislation. The Maryland Department of the Environment and DNR jointly staff the 
commission.  
 
Coast Smart Council  
 
In response to ongoing concern about the vulnerability of the State’s infrastructure 
investments 
to 
sea 
level 
rise 
and 
coastal 
flooding, 
in 
December 
2012, 
Governor Martin J. O’Malley issued the Climate Change and Coast Smart Construction 
executive order. Chapter 415 of 2014, generally codified the executive order and 
established a Coast Smart Council in DNR and required the council to develop specified 
“Coast Smart” siting and design criteria to address sea level rise and coastal flood impacts 
on capital projects.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 777 (The President)(By Request - State Treasurer) - Budget 
and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Environmental Service; 
Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 918/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3