START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 983 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 983 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Personnel - Maryland Department of Health - Pay Rates 
 
 
This bill includes employees in bargaining unit G who are classified as teachers or 
librarians in the requirements under current law that (1) the pay rate for specified 
employees at the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital (Perkins) – who are not receiving a forensic 
pay premium – be at least two grades higher than their pay rate effective June 30, 2020, 
and (2) the pay rate for specified employees in the Behavioral Health Administration 
(BHA) or the Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) be equal to the pay rate 
effective July 1, 2020, for similarly trained, qualified, or licensed employees at Perkins if 
the employees work at specified locations. These locations include (1) under current law, 
at a facility that had a forensic admission rate greater than 75% for the immediately 
preceding fiscal year or (2) additionally, under the bill, at the Regional Institutes for 
Children and Adolescents (RICAs) – Baltimore and Rockville. These pay requirements 
may not be construed to decrease the pay rate of any employee. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $87,900 and reimbursable 
funds increase by at least $13,600 beginning in FY 2025 to increase the salary of specified 
employees within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). Out-year expenditures 
reflect salary increases. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
87,900 
91,800 
95,800 
100,000 
104,400 
ReimB. Exp. 
13,600 
14,200 
14,800 
15,400 
16,100 
Net Effect 
($101,500) 
($105,900) 
($110,600) 
($115,500) 
($120,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
 
HB 983/ Page 2 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 576 of 2020 required the pay rate for specified employees at 
Perkins who were not receiving a forensic pay premium to be at least two grades higher 
than their pay rate effective June 30, 2020. The pay rate for specified employees in BHA 
or DDA were required to be equal to the pay rate effective July 1, 2020, for similarly 
trained, qualified, or licensed employees at Perkins if the employees worked at a facility 
that had a forensic admission rate greater than 75% for the immediately preceding 
fiscal year. The Act was not to be construed to decrease the pay rate of any employee. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill expands coverage of existing pay rate requirements for 
specified Perkins and BHA and DDA employees to include teachers and librarians who are 
in bargaining unit G or employees who work at the specified RICAs. MDH advises that 
the bill increases salaries for nine employees by approximately 10%. Thus, general fund 
expenditures increase by approximately $87,912 and reimbursable expenditures increase 
by $13,557 in fiscal 2025 to provide pay increases to nine eligible employees. Future years 
reflect annual salary increases.  
 
Additional Comments:  The bill requires pay rate increases for specified employees based 
on pay rates effective June 30, 2020, and for others the pay rates effective July 1, 2020. 
This analysis assumes that the bill is not construed to apply retroactively, but to the extent 
that it is, general fund and reimbursable fund expenditures may increase further. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1080 (Senator McCray, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Employee Relations Board; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
 
HB 983/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3