START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 777

Chapter 777

(House Bill 986)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Coverage for the Treatment of
Obesity – Required Study

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to study the impact of
requiring the Maryland Medical Assistance Program to provide comprehensive
coverage for the treatment of obesity; and generally relating to a study of coverage
for the treatment of obesity. ~~requiring,~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Medical~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~comprehensive~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~treatment~~ ~~of~~
~~obesity;~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~notice~~ ~~to~~ ~~Program~~
~~recipients~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~requirements;~~ ~~and~~ ~~generally~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Medical~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program~~ ~~and~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~treatment~~ ~~of~~ ~~obesity.~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~15–103(a)(1)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2023~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~15–103(a)(2)(xxi)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(xxii)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2023~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume)~~
~~(As~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Chapters~~ ~~504~~ ~~and~~ ~~505~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Acts~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~of~~ ~~2022)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~15–103(a)(2)(xxiii)~~ ~~and~~ ~~15–155~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2023~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity” includes
coverage for intensive behavioral therapy, bariatric surgery, and FDA–approved
antiobesity medication.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 777 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) “FDA–approved antiobesity medication” means any medication
approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration with an indication for chronic
weight management in patients with obesity.

(b) The Maryland Department of Health shall study the impact of requiring the
Maryland Medical Assistance Program to provide comprehensive coverage for the
treatment of obesity.

(c) In conducting the study, the Department shall:

(1) identify and compare the coverage for the treatment of obesity under
medical assistance programs and other public health programs in other states; and

(2) examine and estimate any potential savings that may result from
requiring comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity.

(d) On or before December 31, 2024, the Maryland Department of Health shall
report its findings to the House Health and Government Operations Committee and the
Senate Finance Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

~~SECTION~~ ~~1.~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~ENACTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ASSEMBLY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND,~~
~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~

~~15–103.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Secretary~~ ~~shall~~ ~~administer~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Assistance~~
~~Program.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Program:~~

~~(xxi)~~ ~~Beginning~~ ~~on~~ ~~January~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~provide~~ ~~gender–affirming~~
treatment in accordance with § 15–151 of this subtitle; [and]

~~(xxii)~~ ~~Beginning~~ ~~on~~ ~~July~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~provide,~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~
~~limitations~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~budget,~~ ~~and~~ ~~as~~ ~~permitted~~ ~~by~~ ~~federal~~ ~~law,~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~for~~ ~~biomarker~~
testing in accordance with § 15–859 of the Insurance Article; AND

(XXIII) BEGINNING ON JULY 1, 2025, SHALL PROVIDE
~~COMPREHENSIVE~~ ~~COVERAGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~OBESITY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ACCORDANCE~~
WITH § 15–155 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~15–155.~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 777

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “COMPREHENSIVE COVERAGE FOR THE TREATMENT OF OBESITY”
INCLUDES COVERAGE FOR INTENSIVE BEHAVIORAL THERAPY, BARIATRIC SURGERY,
AND FDA–APPROVED ANTIOBESITY MEDICATION.

(3) “FDA–APPROVED ANTIOBESITY MEDICATION” MEANS ANY
MEDICATION APPROVED BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION WITH
AN INDICATION FOR CHRONIC WEIGHT MANAGEMENT IN PATIENTS WITH OBESITY.

(B) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE COMPREHENSIVE COVERAGE FOR THE
TREATMENT OF OBESITY.

(C) COVERAGE CRITERIA FOR FDA–APPROVED ANTIOBESITY
~~MEDICATIONS~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~MORE~~ ~~RESTRICTIVE~~
THAN THE FDA–APPROVED ANTIOBESITY MEDICATION’S INDICATIONS FOR
~~TREATMENT.~~

(D) THE PROGRAM MAY UNDERTAKE UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT TO
~~DETERMINE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~NECESSITY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~APPROPRIATENESS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~OF~~
~~OBESITY~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SECTION~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DETERMINATIONS~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SAME~~
~~MANNER~~ ~~AS~~ ~~DETERMINATIONS~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~OTHER~~
ILLNESS, CONDITION, OR DISORDER COVERED BY THE PROGRAM.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE TO PROGRAM RECIPIENTS
OF THE COVERAGE REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~June~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025,~~
~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~shall~~ ~~provide~~ ~~notice~~ ~~to~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Assistance~~
~~Program~~ ~~recipients~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~coverage~~ ~~required~~ ~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~in~~ ~~writing,~~ ~~and~~ ~~prominently~~
~~positioned~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~literature~~ ~~or~~ ~~correspondence~~ ~~sent~~ ~~to~~ ~~Program~~ ~~recipients~~ ~~about~~ ~~coverage~~
~~available~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~Program~~ ~~in~~ ~~calendar~~ ~~year~~ ~~2025.~~

SECTION ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3