START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 206

Chapter 206

(House Bill 926)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Building Performance Standards – Local Requests for Guidance –
Religious Considerations

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Labor, on request of a local
jurisdiction and in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General, to provide
guidance for the implementation and enforcement of the Maryland Building
Performance Standards in relation to any religious observance, practice, or belief;
and generally relating to the Maryland Building Performance Standards.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 12–507
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

12–507.

(a) The Department may:

(1) develop a voluntary forum that may be used, on request of a local
jurisdiction, to resolve conflicts that involve the Standards; and

(2) adopt regulations to carry out this subtitle.

(b) The Department:

(1) shall notify each local jurisdiction of each change to the International
Building Code and the impact the change will have on the local amendments in that local
jurisdiction;

(2) in conjunction with the Maryland Building Officials Association and
other interested organizations, shall provide training for local building officials on the
Standards and certify the participation of local building officials in the training; [and]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 206 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) on request, shall provide a local jurisdiction with technical assistance
to implement and enforce the Standards; AND

(4) ON REQUEST BY A LOCAL JURISDICTION AND IN CONSULTATION
WITH THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, SHALL PROVIDE GUIDANCE FOR
THE IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE STANDARDS IN RELATION TO
ANY RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCE, PRACTICE, OR BELIEF.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2