START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 999 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 999 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Workgroup on Establishing a Science and Technology Best Practices and 
Innovation Network 
 
   
This bill establishes the Workgroup on Establishing a Science and Technology Best 
Practices and Innovation Network, staffed by the University of Maryland  
Baltimore County. The workgroup must study and make recommendations on topics 
related to the establishment of a network of experts in science, technology, and industry. 
A member of the workgroup may not receive compensation but is entitled to 
reimbursement for travel expenses. By December 1, 2024, the workgroup must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must:  
 
 
identify and analyze options for establishing and maintaining an open access 
science, technology, and innovation network or hub of citizen scientists and experts 
in science, technology, and industry to (1) facilitate noninstitutional voluntary 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 999/ Page 2 
collaboration; (2) facilitate the open exchange of ideas and nonproprietary 
state-of-the-art and evidence-based data and information; and (3) promote solution 
development and decision making based on sound science, innovation, and best 
practices; 
 
identify and evaluate methods for (1) establishing a digital or virtual referral 
network of experts in science, technology, and industry, including expansion of 
existing entities and networks; (2) registering expert participants; and (3) making 
network expertise available to the public; and 
 
make recommendations regarding the establishment of a science and technology 
best practices and innovation network. 
 
Current Law:  There is no current law that is directly relevant to the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Commerce; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2