START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 562

Chapter 562

(House Bill 992)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – Delegated Authorities – Well and Septic Program Permits

FOR the purpose of requiring a local health department or county government with certain
delegated authority to submit, on or before a certain date, a schedule of review times
for certain well and septic program permits to the Department of the Environment
for approval; requiring a local health department or county government to submit
well and septic program permit data to the Department for review at a certain
frequency under certain circumstances; and generally relating to local health
departments or county governments and well and septic program permits.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 9–1114
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

9–1114.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DELEGATED AUTHORITY” MEANS A LOCAL HEALTH
DEPARTMENT OR COUNTY GOVERNMENT TO WHICH THE DEPARTMENT HAS
DELEGATED AUTHORITY TO ADMINISTER A WELL AND SEPTIC PROGRAM.

(3) “WELL AND SEPTIC PROGRAM” MEANS A PROGRAM UNDER WHICH
A DELEGATED AUTHORITY ISSUES PERMITS FOR:

(I) THE INSTALLATION OF ON–SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SYSTEMS; AND

(II) THE CONSTRUCTION OF WELLS.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 562 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, A DELEGATED AUTHORITY SHALL
SUBMIT A SCHEDULE OF REVIEW TIMES FOR WELL AND SEPTIC PROGRAM PERMITS
TO THE DEPARTMENT FOR APPROVAL.

(C) BEGINNING 3 MONTHS AFTER THE SCHEDULE SUBMITTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IS APPROVED BY THE
DEPARTMENT, AND EVERY 3 MONTHS THEREAFTER, A DELEGATED AUTHORITY
SHALL SUBMIT WELL AND SEPTIC PROGRAM PERMIT DATA TO THE DEPARTMENT
FOR REVIEW.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2