START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 926 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 926 
(Delegate Griffith) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Building Performance Standards – Local Requests for Guidance – 
Religious Considerations 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), on request by a local 
jurisdiction and in consultation with the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), to provide 
guidance for the implementation and enforcement of the Maryland Building Performance 
Standards (MBPS) in relation to any religious observance, practice, or belief. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDL and OAG can handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDL currently incorporates by reference the International Building Code 
(IBC) (2021 Edition), including the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 
(2021 Edition), with modifications, as MBPS. In general, the standards apply to all 
buildings and structures within the State for which a building permit application is received 
by a local government. Chapter 38 of 2022 (the Climate Solutions Now Act) required MDL 
to adopt IECC (2018 Edition) by January 1, 2023, and to adopt each subsequent version of 
IECC within 18 months after it is issued. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 926/ Page 2 
Each local jurisdiction must implement and enforce the most current version of MPBS and 
any local amendments to MPBS. In addition, any modification to MBPS adopted by the 
State after December 31, 2009, must be implemented and enforced by a local jurisdiction 
no later than 12 months after the modifications are adopted by the State. 
 
MDL may develop a voluntary forum that may be used, on request of a local jurisdiction, 
to resolve conflicts that involve MBPS. In addition, MDL must (1) notify each local 
jurisdiction of each change to IBC and the impact the change will have on the local 
amendments in that local jurisdiction; (2) in conjunction with the Maryland Building 
Officials Association and other interested organizations, provide training for local building 
officials on MBPS and certify the participation of local building officials in the training; 
and (3) on request, provide a local jurisdiction with technical assistance to implement and 
enforce MBPS. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1033 (Senator Carter) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2