START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 590

Chapter 590

(House Bill 979)

AN ACT concerning

Agriculture – Invasive Plant Species – Regulation
(Biodiversity and Agriculture Protection Act)

FOR the purpose of altering the regulatory approach for controlling invasive plant species
in the State, including repealing certain provisions of law relating to a two–tiered
regulatory approach and requiring the Secretary of Agriculture to establish a certain
list of prohibited invasive plants by regulation in a certain manner on or before a
certain date; establishing certain protocols for assessing certain nonnative plants
and determining whether those plants are invasive or whether the plants may be
placed on a certain watch list; requiring the Invasive Plants Advisory Committee in
the Department of Agriculture to review certain invasive species assessments and
data to advise the Secretary in a certain manner; requiring the Committee to review
the qualifications of a qualified independent assessor; requiring the Secretary to
include on a certain consolidated list certain invasive plants classified as a prohibited
invasive plant in a certain manner; requiring the Department of Agriculture and the
Department of Natural Resources each to post on its website a certain consolidated
list and certain watch list; requiring the University of Maryland Extension to post a
link to certain lists on its website; requiring the Department of Agriculture to
distribute certain lists to certain nurseries, plant dealers, and plant brokers in a
certain manner; authorizing the State Highway Administration to conduct certain
activities related to controlling and disposing of invasive plant species under certain
circumstances and in a certain manner; and generally relating to the regulation of
invasive plant species.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Agriculture
Section 9.5–101, 9.5–205, 9.5–301, 9.5–302, and 9.5–303
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Agriculture
Section 9.5–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Agriculture
Section 9.5–301.1 and 9.5–301.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 590 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing
Article – Agriculture
Section 9.5–304
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

9.5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “CLASSIFY AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT” MEANS THE SECRETARY
IS INCLUDING AN INVASIVE PLANT ON THE CONSOLIDATED LIST OF MARYLAND
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 9.5–301 AND 9.5–301.1 OF THIS
TITLE.

(C) “Committee” means the Invasive Plants Advisory Committee.

(D) “CONSOLIDATED LIST OF MARYLAND INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES”
MEANS A LIST OF PLANT SPECIES CLASSIFIED AS PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANTS IN
ACCORDANCE WITH §§ 9.5–301 AND 9.5–301.1 OF THIS TITLE.

(E) “EARLY DETECTION RAPID RESPONSE (EDRR) PLANT SPECIES”
MEANS A NONNATIVE PLANT SPECIES THAT:

(1) IS NOT YET WIDESPREAD IN THE STATE BUT IS AT RISK OF:

(I) BECOMING ESTABLISHED AS AN INVASIVE SPECIES; AND

(II) CAUSING SIGNIFICANT DAMAGE; AND

(2) (I) HAS BEEN FOUND IN AT LEAST ONE NATIVE SPECIES
HABITAT IN THE STATE; OR

(II) HAS NOT YET BEEN FOUND IN THE STATE.

(F) “EXPERT ASSESSOR” MEANS:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 590

(1) AN INDIVIDUAL OR A TEAM WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OR THE
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES; OR

(2) A QUALIFIED INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR.

[(c)] (G) (1) “Invasive plant” means [a terrestrial plant species] ANY LIVING
PART OF A PLANT SPECIES OR ITS SUBSPECIES that:

[(1)] (I) Did not evolve in the State; and

[(2)] (II) If introduced within the State, will cause or is likely to cause, as
determined by the Secretary:

[(i)] 1. Economic harm;

[(ii)] 2. Ecological harm;

[(iii)] 3. Environmental harm; or

[(iv)] 4. Harm to human health.

(2) “INVASIVE PLANT” INCLUDES A COMMERCIAL OR
NONCOMMERCIAL PLANT THAT IS TERRESTRIAL OR AQUATIC AND MEETS THE
DEFINITION UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(H) “INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES STATUS ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL” MEANS A
PROTOCOL BASED ON THE NATURESERVE’S 2004 PROTOCOL (“AN INVASIVE
SPECIES ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL: EVALUATING NON–NATIVE PLANTS FOR THEIR
IMPACT ON BIODIVERSITY. VERSION 1.”).

(I) (1) “INVASIVENESS RANK” MEANS A RANK ASSIGNED TO A
NONNATIVE SPECIES TO SIGNIFY ITS LEVEL OF INVASIVENESS BASED ON THE
RESULTS OF AN INVASIVE ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL.

(2) “INVASIVENESS RANK” INCLUDES AN INVASIVENESS
SIGNIFICANCE RANKING OF HIGH, MEDIUM, LOW, OR INSIGNIFICANT.

[(d)] (J) “Landscaping services” includes services for ornamental horticultural
design, maintenance, and installation of living plants.

[(e)] (K) [“Tier 1] “PROHIBITED invasive plant” includes invasive plant species
that cause or are likely to cause severe harm within the State.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 590 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(f) “Tier 2 invasive plant” includes invasive plant species that cause or are likely
to cause substantial negative impact within the State.]

(L) “QUALIFIED INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL OR A
TEAM THAT:

(1) POSSESSES EXTENSIVE AT LEAST 2 YEARS OF FIELD EXPERIENCE
IN INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES IN MARYLAND OR IN NEARBY JURISDICTIONS,
INCLUDING WASHINGTON, D.C., DELAWARE, NEW JERSEY, NEW YORK,
PENNSYLVANIA, VIRGINIA, AND WEST VIRGINIA; AND

(2) HAS ASSESSED INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES WITHOUT SUPERVISION
FROM THE DEPARTMENT, THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES, OR THE
COMMITTEE.

(M) “WATCH LIST” MEANS A LIST OF PLANT SPECIES THAT:

(1) HAVE BEEN ASSESSED BY AN EXPERT ASSESSOR IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 9.5–301 OF THIS TITLE;

(2) WERE NOT DETERMINED BY THE ASSESSMENT TO BE ELIGIBLE
FOR CLASSIFICATION AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT; AND

(3) MAY BE REASSESSED IN THE FUTURE.

9.5–201.

There is an Invasive Plants Advisory Committee in the Department.

9.5–205.

The Committee shall:

(1) Advise the Secretary regarding regulations necessary to carry out the
provisions of this title; [and]

(2) (i) Conduct an annual review of the [risk assessment protocol]
ASSESSMENT PROTOCOLS adopted under § 9.5–301 of this title; and

(ii) Report to the Secretary regarding any proposed changes to ~~the~~
risk assessment protocol AN ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL OR A REPLACEMENT OF A
PROTOCOL; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 590

(3) (I) REVIEW IN CONSULTATION WITH THE SECRETARY AND THE
SECRETARY OF NATURAL RESOURCES, REVIEW THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE
QUALIFIED INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR; AND

(II) REPORT TO THE SECRETARY ANY PROPOSED CHANGES TO
THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE QUALIFIED INDEPENDENT ASSESSOR;

(4) REVIEW INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES ASSESSMENTS CONDUCTED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 9.5–301 OF THIS TITLE TO ADVISE THE SECRETARY ON WHICH
PLANTS TO CLASSIFY AS PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANTS FOR INCLUSION ON THE
CONSOLIDATED LIST OF MARYLAND INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES; AND

(5) (I) REVIEW ANY DATA SUBMITTED TO THE COMMITTEE THAT
INDICATES A CULTIVAR, SELECTION, OR INFRA–SPECIFIC HYBRID OF A PROHIBITED
INVASIVE PLANT IS NOT INVASIVE; AND

(II) IF THE DATA SUBMITTED UNDER ITEM (I) OF THIS ITEM IS
DEEMED ACCURATE AND SUFFICIENT, ADVISE THE SECRETARY TO DECLASSIFY OR
PREEMPTIVELY NOT CLASSIFY THE CULTIVAR, SELECTION, OR INFRA–SPECIFIC
HYBRID AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT.

9.5–301.

(a) The Secretary, with the advice of THE SECRETARY OF NATURAL
RESOURCES AND the Committee, shall:

(1) On or before October 1, [2012] 2024, adopt regulations that:

(i) Establish [a science–based risk assessment protocol]
PROFESSIONALLY RECOGNIZED ASSESSMENT PROTOCOLS for invasive plants that:

1. Will serve as a basis for [creating a two–tiered] THE
regulatory approach for controlling invasive plants in the State; [and]

2. Considers CONSIDER the harm, as determined by the
Secretary, that invasive plants cause in the State, including:

A. [Economic harm;

B.] Ecological harm; AND

[C.] B. Environmental harm; and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 590 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. MAY CONSIDER ADDITIONAL HARM, AS DETERMINED
BY THE EXPERT ASSESSOR, THAT INVASIVE PLANTS CAUSE IN THE STATE,
INCLUDING:

A. ECONOMIC HARM; AND

[D.] B. Harm to human health;

(ii) Govern administrative orders that the Secretary may issue to
enforce this subtitle; and

(iii) Establish a procedure for the approval required under § 9.5–302
of this subtitle for activities involving [tier 1] PROHIBITED invasive plants.

(2) [On] SUBJECT TO § 9.5–301.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE, ON or before
October 1, [2013] 2024, adopt regulations that:

(i) Establish a list of [tier 1] PROHIBITED INVASIVE plants [and
tier 2 plants] in accordance with [the risk] AN assessment protocol adopted under
paragraph (1) of this subsection;

(ii) Establish a procedure for classification or declassification of an
invasive plant as a [tier 1] PROHIBITED invasive plant [or a tier 2 invasive plant];

(iii) Phase in the implementation of the requirements of this subtitle
with consideration of the economic impact of these requirements on nurseries, landscapers,
plant wholesalers, plant retailers, and any other industry; AND

(iv) Establish a procedure for the disposal of [tier 1] PROHIBITED
INVASIVE plants[;

(v) Designate the format, size, and content of the sign required
under § 9.5–302(b)(1) of this subtitle; and

(vi) Provide for the distribution of a list of tier 2 invasive plants to
licensed nurseries, plant dealers, and plant brokers on an annual basis].

(b) (1) The Secretary shall classify as a [tier 1] PROHIBITED invasive plant
[or a tier 2 invasive plant] each plant identified as invasive in the National Park Service’s
and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Plant Invaders of Mid–Atlantic Natural Areas IF THE
PLANT IS ASSESSED AS AN INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTIONS (C) AND (D) OF THIS SECTION.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 590

(2) Nothing in this section may be construed as limiting the Secretary’s
authority to classify as a [tier 1] PROHIBITED invasive plant [or a tier 2] AN invasive plant
[plants] not identified as invasive in the National Park Service’s and U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service’s Plant Invaders of Mid–Atlantic Natural Areas.

(C) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
EXPERT ASSESSOR SHALL:

(I) ASSESS A NONNATIVE PLANT SPECIES ESTABLISHED IN
NATURAL AREAS WITHIN THE STATE;

(II) DETERMINE THE INVASIVENESS RANK OF THE NONNATIVE
PLANT SPECIES; AND

(III) 1. NOTIFY THE COMMITTEE THAT THE NONNATIVE
PLANT SPECIES IS ASSESSED AS AN INVASIVE PLANT IF THE INVASIVENESS RANK IS
HIGH OR MEDIUM; OR

2. NOTIFY THE COMMITTEE THAT THE NONNATIVE
PLANT SPECIES MAY BE PLACED ON THE WATCH LIST IF THE INVASIVENESS RANK
IS LOW OR INSIGNIFICANT.

(2) IN CARRYING OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION, AN EXPERT ASSESSOR SHALL FOLLOW THE INVASIVE PLANT
SPECIES STATUS ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL THAT INCLUDES CONSIDERATION OF
ECOLOGICAL FACTORS AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS.

(D) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
EXPERT ASSESSOR SHALL:

(I) ASSESS AN EARLY DETECTION RAPID RESPONSE (EDRR)
PLANT SPECIES;

(II) DETERMINE THE INVASIVENESS RANK OF THE EDRR
PLANT SPECIES; AND

(III) 1. NOTIFY THE COMMITTEE THAT THE EDRR PLANT
SPECIES IS ASSESSED AS AN INVASIVE PLANT IF THE INVASIVENESS RANK IS HIGH
OR MEDIUM; OR

2. NOTIFY THE COMMITTEE THAT THE EDRR PLANT
SPECIES MAY BE PLACED ON THE WATCH LIST IF THE INVASIVENESS RANK IS LOW
OR INSIGNIFICANT.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 590 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IN CARRYING OUT THE REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION, AN EXPERT ASSESSOR SHALL FOLLOW:

(I) THE INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES STATUS ASSESSMENT
PROTOCOL IF:

1. THE EDRR PLANT SPECIES IS PRESENT IN AT LEAST
ONE NATIVE SPECIES HABITAT IN THE STATE; AND

2. THE ECOLOGICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF
THE SPECIES IN THE STATE MAY BE EFFECTIVELY ASSESSED UNDER THE
PROTOCOL; AND

(II) AN INVASIVE PLANT RISK ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL IF:

1. THE EDRR PLANT SPECIES IS NOT PRESENT
ANYWHERE IN THE STATE; OR

2. A. THE EDRR PLANT SPECIES IS PRESENT IN THE
STATE; AND

B. THE ECOLOGICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF
THE SPECIES IN THE STATE CANNOT BE EFFECTIVELY ASSESSED UNDER THE
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES STATUS ASSESSMENT PROTOCOL.

(E) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9.5–205 OF THIS TITLE AND PARAGRAPH
(2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMITTEE SHALL REVIEW THE INVASIVE PLANT
SPECIES ASSESSMENT CONDUCTED BY AN EXPERT ASSESSOR.

(2) IF THE ASSESSMENT IS ACCURATE AND SUFFICIENT AND THE
INVASIVENESS RANK IS:

(I) HIGH OR MEDIUM, THE COMMITTEE SHALL ADVISE THE
SECRETARY TO CLASSIFY THE PLANT AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT; OR

(II) LOW OR INSIGNIFICANT, THE COMMITTEE SHALL PLACE
THE PLANT ON THE WATCH LIST.

(3) THE SECRETARY SHALL DETERMINE WHETHER TO CLASSIFY A
PLANT SPECIES AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT ON REVIEWING THE ADVICE OF
THE COMMITTEE.

9.5–301.1.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 590

(A) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER § 9.5–301 OF THIS SUBTITLE
SHALL CLASSIFY AS PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANTS ALL TERRESTRIAL PLANTS
CLASSIFIED BY REGULATION BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2024, AS A TIER 1 OR TIER 2
INVASIVE PLANT.

(B) EACH TERRESTRIAL PLANT CLASSIFIED BY REGULATION BEFORE
JANUARY 1, 2024, AS A TIER 2 INVASIVE PLANT SHALL BE ASSESSED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 9.5–301 OF THIS SUBTITLE BY DECEMBER 31, 2025, AND
SHALL BE:

(1) IF THE RESULTS OF THE ASSESSMENT DETERMINE THE PLANT IS
AN INVASIVE PLANT, CLASSIFIED AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT UNDER THE
REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER § 9.5–301 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(2) IF THE RESULTS OF THE ASSESSMENT DETERMINE THE PLANT IS
NOT AN INVASIVE PLANT, PLACED ON THE WATCH LIST.

(B) (C) IN ADDITION TO THE PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANTS SET FORTH
IN SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE SECRETARY MAY CLASSIFY, BY
REGULATION, A PLANT SPECIES AS A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 9.5–301 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) (D) THE SECRETARY SHALL INCLUDE ON THE CONSOLIDATED LIST
OF MARYLAND INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES AN INVASIVE PLANT CLASSIFIED AS A
PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9.5–301 OF THIS TITLE
SUBTITLE AND SUBSECTIONS (A) AND (B) OF THIS SECTION.

9.5–301.2.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL
RESOURCES EACH SHALL POST ON ITS WEBSITE THE CONSOLIDATED LIST OF
MARYLAND INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES AND THE WATCH LIST.

(2) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EXTENSION SHALL POST A LINK
TO THE CONSOLIDATED LIST OF MARYLAND INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES AND THE
WATCH LIST ON ITS WEBSITE.

(B) ON AN ANNUAL BASIS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE
CONSOLIDATED LIST OF MARYLAND INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES AND THE WATCH
LIST TO LICENSED NURSERIES, PLANT DEALERS, AND PLANT BROKERS.

9.5–302.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 590 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) [(1)] This [subsection] SECTION does not apply to the transfer, lease, sale,
or purchase of real property on which [an] A PROHIBITED invasive plant is located.

[(2)] (B) (1) Except as provided in paragraph PARAGRAPHS (2) AND
[(3)] (2) of this subsection and in accordance with regulations adopted by the Secretary, a
person may not propagate, import, transfer, sell, purchase, transport, or introduce any
living part of a [tier 1] PROHIBITED invasive plant in the State.

[(3)] (2) A person may, IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS
ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT, conduct an activity prohibited under paragraph [(2)]
(1) of this subsection if:

(i) The person receives approval from the Secretary before
conducting the activity; and

(ii) The activity is for the purpose of:

1. Disposing of the PROHIBITED invasive plant;

2. Controlling the PROHIBITED invasive plant;

3. Using the PROHIBITED invasive plant for research or
educational purposes; or

4. Exporting the PROHIBITED invasive plant out of the
State.

(3) (I) NOTWITHSTANDING PARAGRAPH (2)(I) OF THIS
SUBSECTION AND SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION MAY CONDUCT AN ACTIVITY PROHIBITED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONTROLLING
OR DISPOSING OF A PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANT ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS
WITHOUT PRIOR APPROVAL OF THE SECRETARY.

(II) THE STATE HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SHALL CONTROL
OR DISPOSE OF PROHIBITED INVASIVE PLANTS ALONG STATE HIGHWAYS UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IN A MANNER CONSISTENT WITH
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(III) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL NOTIFY THE STATE HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION OF ANY CHANGES TO REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE
DEPARTMENT THAT IMPACT THE CONTROL OR DISPOSAL OF PROHIBITED INVASIVE
PLANTS.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 590

[(b) In accordance with regulations adopted by the Secretary, a person may not:

(1) Sell or offer for sale at a retail outlet a tier 2 invasive plant unless the
retail outlet posts in a conspicuous manner in proximity to all tier 2 plant displays, a sign
identifying the plants as tier 2 plants; or

(2) Provide landscaping services to plant or supply for planting a tier 2
invasive plant unless the person provides to its customer a list of tier 2 invasive plants.]

9.5–303.

(a) On finding a [tier 1] PROHIBITED INVASIVE plant in violation of [§
9.5–302(a)(2)] § 9.5–302(B)(1) of this subtitle, the Secretary may:

(1) Issue a written condemnation seizure order;

(2) Mark or tag the plant in a conspicuous manner; and

(3) Provide written notice to the owner, tenant, or person in charge of the
premises.

(b) (1) On notice from the Secretary, a person shall dispose of a [tier 1]
PROHIBITED INVASIVE plant in accordance with regulations adopted by the Secretary.

(2) If a [tier 1] PROHIBITED INVASIVE plant is not disposed of in
accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary shall:

(i) Destroy the plant;

(ii) Prepare a statement of facts and a statement of the expense of
destruction; and

(iii) Provide copies of the statements to the Attorney General.

(c) (1) The Attorney General shall institute the appropriate proceeding to
collect the expenses due to the Secretary.

(2) A copy of the statements prepared under subsection (b)(2) of this section
is sufficient evidence to prove a claim under this subsection.

[9.5–304.

(a) If the Secretary finds that a tier 2 plant does not meet the signage requirement
under § 9.5–302(b)(1) of this subtitle, the Secretary shall:

(1) Issue a stop sale order; and
– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 590 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Mark or tag the plant in a conspicuous manner.

(b) The Secretary shall give written notice of a finding made under subsection (a)
of this section to the owner, tenant, or person in charge of the premises.

(c) A stop sale order issued under this section shall remain in effect until the
required signage is posted.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12