START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 960 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 960 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
City of Frederick - Assignment of Offenders to Road Work - Repeal 
 
   
This bill repeals the requirement – and related provisions – in the City of Frederick, for a 
District Court judge, who tries and commits a vagrant or other offender of a municipal law 
or ordinance, to assign the offender to work on the public roads of the county or City of 
Frederick, whenever practicable. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not have a material impact on State government operations or 
finances.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not have a material impact on the operations or finances of the 
City of Frederick or Frederick County.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In the City of Frederick, a District Court judge who tries and commits a 
vagrant or other offender of a municipal law or ordinance, whenever practicable, must 
assign the offender to work on the public roads of the county or City of Frederick. The 
sheriff or other officer into whose custody an offender is committed must comply with the 
court’s order of assignment. 
 
An offender ordered by the court to work on the public roads of the city must be guarded 
by the superintendent of streets or by any other individual deputized by the sheriff. An 
offender ordered by the court to work on the public roads of the county must be guarded 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 960/ Page 2 
by the road supervisor of the district in which the offender works. For the purpose of 
guarding offenders employed in accordance with a court order issued by these provisions, 
the sheriff may deputize the superintendent of streets, the district road supervisor, or any 
other individual to take charge of the offenders.        
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 640 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1154 (Frederick County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; City of Frederick; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2