START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

Chapter 531

(House Bill 991)

AN ACT concerning

~~Environment~~ ~~–~~ ~~Industrial~~ ~~Sludge~~ Agriculture – Food Processing Residuals
Utilization Permit – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing ~~an~~ a ~~industrial~~ ~~sludge~~ food processing residuals utilization
permit; prohibiting a person from utilizing ~~industrial~~ ~~sludge~~ food processing
residuals in the State unless the person obtains a permit; requiring the Department
of ~~the~~ ~~Environment~~ Agriculture to provide a certain ~~notices~~ notice and information
to certain persons; ~~applying~~ ~~certain~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~law~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~public~~ ~~notice~~ ~~and~~
~~participation~~ ~~to~~ ~~industrial~~ ~~sludge~~ ~~utilization~~ ~~permits~~ establishing the Food
Processing Residuals Administration Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund;
authorizing a representative of the Department to enter and inspect any site where
~~industrial~~ ~~sludge~~ ~~is~~ food processing residuals are utilized; authorizing the
Department to administer a Commercial Hauler Certification Program; and
generally relating to ~~industrial~~ ~~sludge~~ food processing residuals utilization permits.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Environment~~
~~Section~~ ~~1–601(a)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2013~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – ~~Environment~~ Agriculture
Section ~~9–293~~ ~~through~~ ~~9–299,~~ ~~9–299.1,~~ ~~9–299.2,~~ ~~9–299.3,~~ ~~and~~ ~~9–299.4~~ 8–8A–01
through 8–8A–15 to be under the new ~~part~~ subtitle ~~“Part~~ ~~IX.~~ ~~Industrial~~
~~Sludge”~~ “Subtitle 8A. Food Processing Residuals”; and 8–1101 through 8–1103
to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 11. Commercial Hauler Certification
Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
~~(2014~~ (2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – ~~Environment~~ Agriculture

~~1–601.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~Permits~~ ~~issued~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~sections~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~issued~~
~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle:~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(1)~~ ~~Air~~ ~~quality~~ ~~control~~ ~~permits~~ ~~to~~ ~~construct~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–404~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~Permits~~ ~~to~~ ~~install,~~ ~~materially~~ ~~alter,~~ ~~or~~ ~~materially~~ ~~extend~~ ~~landfill~~
~~systems,~~ ~~incinerators~~ ~~for~~ ~~public~~ ~~use,~~ ~~or~~ ~~rubble~~ ~~landfills~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~§~~ ~~9–209~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article;~~

(3) Permits to discharge pollutants to waters of the State issued [pursuant
to] IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–323 of this article;

~~(4)~~ ~~Permits~~ ~~to~~ ~~install,~~ ~~materially~~ ~~alter,~~ ~~or~~ ~~materially~~ ~~extend~~ ~~a~~ ~~structure~~
~~used~~ ~~for~~ ~~storage~~ ~~or~~ ~~distribution~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~type~~ ~~of~~ ~~sewage~~ ~~sludge~~ ~~issued,~~ ~~renewed,~~ ~~or~~ ~~amended~~
[pursuant to] IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–234.1 or § 9–238 of this article;

~~(5)~~ ~~Permits~~ ~~to~~ ~~own,~~ ~~operate,~~ ~~establish,~~ ~~or~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~a~~ ~~controlled~~ ~~hazardous~~
substance facility issued [pursuant to] IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–232 of this article;

~~(6)~~ ~~Permits~~ ~~to~~ ~~own,~~ ~~operate,~~ ~~or~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~a~~ ~~hazardous~~ ~~material~~ ~~facility~~
issued [pursuant to] IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–103 of this article;

~~(7)~~ ~~Permits~~ ~~to~~ ~~own,~~ ~~operate,~~ ~~establish,~~ ~~or~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~a~~ ~~low–level~~ ~~nuclear~~
waste facility issued [pursuant to] IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–233 of this article;

(8) PERMITS TO UTILIZE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE ISSUED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–297 OF THIS ARTICLE; and

[(8)] (9) Potable reuse permits issued in accordance with § 9–303.2 of this
~~article.~~

~~9–291.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~9–292.~~ ~~RESERVED.~~

~~PART~~ ~~IX.~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE.~~

SUBTITLE 8A. FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS.

~~9–293.~~ 8–8A–01.

(A) IN THIS PART SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) (1) “INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE” MEANS MATERIAL THAT IS:

(I) AN ACCUMULATED SEMILIQUID SUSPENSION OF SETTLED
SOLIDS, OR DRIED RESIDUE OF THESE SOLIDS, THAT IS GENERATED AS A

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

BY–PRODUCT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, AGRICULTURAL, OR MANUFACTURING PROCESS;
~~AND~~

(II) INTENDED TO BE:

1. STORED OR APPLIED TO AGRICULTURAL LAND; OR

2. DISPOSED OF IN THE STATE.

(2) “INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE” INCLUDES MATERIAL SEPARATED FROM
LIQUID WASTE THROUGH A DISSOLVED AIR FLOTATION PROCESS.

(C) “AGRICULTURAL OPERATION” MEANS EACH PHYSICAL SITE WHERE A
PERSON ENGAGES IN A BUSINESS THAT:

(1) GROWS, RAISES, KEEPS, PASTURES, OR OTHERWISE PRODUCES A
FARM PRODUCT, INCLUDING:

(I) ANY AGRICULTURAL, HORTICULTURAL, VEGETABLE, OR
FRUIT PRODUCT OF THE SOIL; OR

(II) LIVESTOCK, POULTRY, EGGS, DAIRY PRODUCTS, NUTS,
HONEY, AND EVERY PRODUCT OF A FARM, A FOREST, OR AN ORCHARD; AND

(2) HAS:

(I) A GROSS ANNUAL INCOME OF $2,500 OR MORE; OR

(II) EIGHT OR MORE ANIMAL UNITS.

(C) “APPLICANT” MEANS:

(1) THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF AN AGRICULTURAL OPERATION; OR

(2) A COMMERCIAL BROKER OR COMMERCIAL HAULER WHO HAS
CONTRACTED WITH THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF AN AGRICULTURAL OPERATION
TO HAVE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS UTILIZED AT THAT LOCATION.

(D) “COMMERCIAL BROKER” MEANS A PERSON WHO:

(1) FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES, ASSUMES TEMPORARY CONTROL
OF FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS FROM AN AGRICULTURAL OPERATION OR A FOOD
PROCESSING PLANT AND TRANSPORTS OR ARRANGES THE TRANSPORT OF THIS
MATERIAL TO AN IMPORTING AGRICULTURAL OPERATION; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) IS NOT WORKING FOR OR UNDER THE CONTROL OF AN
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION.

(E) “COMMERCIAL HAULER” MEANS A PERSON THAT IS ENGAGED IN THE
BUSINESS OF HAULING, TRANSPORTING, MOVING, OR LAND–APPLYING FOOD
PROCESSING RESIDUALS AS A CONTRACT AGENT FOR A FARM OPERATOR,
COMMERCIAL BROKER, OR FOOD PROCESSING PLANT UNDER THE DIRECTION OF
THE OPERATOR, BROKER, OR PROCESSING PLANT.

(F) “FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS” MEANS AN ORGANIC MATERIAL THAT
IS:

(1) GENERATED BY PROCESSING AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES FOR
HUMAN OR ANIMAL CONSUMPTION AND INCLUDES FOOD RESIDUALS, FOOD
COPRODUCTS, FOOD PROCESSING WASTES, FOOD PROCESSING SLUDGES, OR ANY
OTHER INCIDENTAL MATERIAL WHOSE CHARACTERISTICS ARE DERIVED FROM
PROCESSING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION OR ANIMAL
CONSUMPTION; AND

(2) REGISTERED WITH THE STATE CHEMIST AS A SOIL CONDITIONER.

(G) “NRCS” MEANS THE NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE.

(H) “PERMIT” MEANS AN INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE A FOOD PROCESSING
RESIDUALS UTILIZATION PERMIT.

~~(D)~~ (I) ~~“UTILIZATION~~ UTILIZE” MEANS:

(1) COLLECTING, HANDLING, BURNING, STORING, OR TREATING
INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE FOR DISPOSAL OR LAND APPLICATION HANDLING OR STORING
FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS OR USING FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS FOR LAND
APPLICATION; AND

(2) TRANSPORTING INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING
RESIDUALS TO OR FROM ~~AN~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ A GENERATOR ~~OR~~ ~~UTILIZER~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
STATE OF FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS TO OR FROM AN AGRICULTURAL
OPERATION.

~~9–294.~~ 8–8A–02.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS PART SUBTITLE, A PERSON MAY NOT
UTILIZE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN THE STATE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(B) A PERSON SHALL OBTAIN A PERMIT BEFORE UTILIZING INDUSTRIAL
SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN THE STATE.

(C) A PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE PERMIT HOLDER TO UTILIZE INDUSTRIAL
~~SLUDGE~~ FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN CONJUNCTION WITH AN AGRICULTURAL
OPERATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE, REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER
THIS SUBTITLE, AND THE TERMS OF THE PERMIT.

(D) A PERSON MUST HAVE A PERMIT FOR EACH SITE WHERE THE PERSON
UTILIZES INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS.

8–8A–03.

A PERSON MAY NOT UTILIZE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN CONJUNCTION
WITH AN AGRICULTURAL OPERATION UNLESS:

(1) THE PERSON HAS A PERMIT;

(2) THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF THE AGRICULTURAL OPERATION:

(I) HAS A NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN THAT MEETS THE
REQUIREMENTS OF SUBTITLE 8 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(II) IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE PLAN;

(3) THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS BEING UTILIZED ARE:

(I) REGISTERED WITH THE STATE CHEMIST; AND

(II) APPLIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE NUTRIENT
MANAGEMENT PLAN;

(4) IF THE PERSON IS NOT THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF THE
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION, THE PERSON HAS OBTAINED THE OWNER OR
OPERATOR’S CONSENT TO UTILIZE THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN
CONJUNCTION WITH THE AGRICULTURAL OPERATION;

(5) IF THE AGRICULTURAL OPERATION IS SUBJECT TO A DISCHARGE
PERMIT UNDER § 9–301 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE, THE OWNER OR
OPERATOR OF THE AGRICULTURAL OPERATION IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH ALL LAWS,
REGULATIONS, AND PERMITS GOVERNING THOSE PERMITTED ACTIVITIES; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) FOR STORAGE OF FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS, THE PERSON
HAS OBTAINED ANY NECESSARY COUNTY APPROVAL OR PERMITS TO STORE
MATERIAL AT THE AGRICULTURAL OPERATION.

~~9–295.~~ 8–8A–04.

AN APPLICANT FOR A PERMIT SHALL:

(1) SUBMIT AT LEAST 45 DAYS BEFORE UTILIZING THE FOOD
PROCESSING RESIDUALS, SUBMIT AN APPLICATION TO THE DEPARTMENT ON THE
FORM THAT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES;

(2) CERTIFY BY SIGNATURE THE TRUTH AND ACCURACY OF THE
COMPLETED APPLICATION;

(3) PAY ANY ASSOCIATED APPLICATION FEES AT THE SAME TIME
THAT THE APPLICATION IS SUBMITTED;

(4) PROVIDE THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF ANY SOURCE OF
INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS THAT WILL BE UTILIZED,
INCLUDING:

(I) THE LOCATION, CAPACITY, AND AGE OF ANY STORAGE
STRUCTURE AT THE SITE WHERE THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS WILL BE
STORED; AND

(II) ANY OTHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE STORAGE
STRUCTURE THAT THE DEPARTMENT DEEMS NECESSARY IN ISSUING A PERMIT
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING EVIDENCE:

1. SHOWING THAT THE STRUCTURE MEETS THE NRCS
WASTE STORAGE FACILITY NO. 313 CONSERVATION PRACTICE STANDARD OR AN
EQUIVALENT STANDARD DETERMINED BY A PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER; AND

2. DEMONSTRATING ANY REQUIRED COUNTY APPROVAL
OF THE STORAGE STRUCTURE, INCLUDING PERMITS REQUIRED FOR THE
STRUCTURE;

(5) OBTAIN THE WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE OWNER OR OPERATOR OF
THE LAND WHERE THE ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS WILL BE
APPLIED UTILIZED, INCLUDING AN AGREEMENT FROM THE OWNER OR OPERATOR
THAT THE OWNER OR OPERATOR WILL NOT VIOLATE THE PERMIT;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(6) AGREE TO ALLOW OR SECURE ACCESS TO THE INDUSTRIAL
~~SLUDGE~~ ANY FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS UTILIZATION SITE FOR ANY
INSPECTION AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS PART SUBTITLE;

(7) PROVIDE THE DEPARTMENT WITH ACCEPTABLE EVIDENCE OF A
PERFORMANCE BOND OR OTHER SECURITY IN THE AMOUNT THAT THE
DEPARTMENT CONSIDERS SUFFICIENT TO GUARANTEE THE FULFILLMENT OF ANY
REQUIREMENT RELATED TO THE PERMIT; AND

(8) IF HAULING FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS, PROVIDE ALL
~~HAULING~~ ~~ROUTES~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FOOD~~ ~~PROCESSING~~ ~~GENERATOR~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION; AND

(9) (8) SATISFY EVERY OTHER REQUIREMENT OF THIS PART
SUBTITLE.

~~9–296.~~ 8–8A–05.

(A) WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A PERMIT APPLICATION TO STORE
~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~FACILITY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~PROPOSED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~CONSTRUCTION~~ ~~AND~~
~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~DESIGNED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PRIMARILY~~ ~~STORE~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~LATER~~
~~UTILIZATION~~ THAT INCLUDES STORING FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN
CONJUNCTION WITH AN AGRICULTURAL OPERATION, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) PUBLISH NOTICE OF THE APPLICATION IN A LOCAL NEWSPAPER
~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~PRIMARILY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CIRCULATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~
SLUDGE WILL BE APPLIED OR THE FACILITY WILL BE CONSTRUCTED;

(2) MAIL A COPY OF THE PROVIDE NOTICE BY MAIL TO:

(I) THE LOCAL HEALTH OFFICIAL IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE
INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE WILL BE APPLIED OR THE FACILITY WILL BE CONSTRUCTED;

(II) THE THE CHAIR OF THE LEGISLATIVE BODY AND ANY
ELECTED EXECUTIVE IN THE COUNTY WHERE THE ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~
APPLIED OR THE FACILITY WILL BE CONSTRUCTED; FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS
WILL BE STORED.

(III) THE ELECTED EXECUTIVE OF ANY MUNICIPAL
~~CORPORATION~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~APPLIED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FACILITY~~
WILL BE CONSTRUCTED; AND

(IV) ANY COUNTY WITHIN 1 MILE OF WHERE THE INDUSTRIAL
SLUDGE WILL BE APPLIED OR THE FACILITY WILL BE CONSTRUCTED; AND
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) POST THE NOTICE ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

(B) WITHIN 15 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING A NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION, THE EXECUTIVE OR LEGISLATIVE BODY OF THE COUNTY OR
~~MUNICIPAL~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~APPLIED~~ ~~OR~~
THE FACILITY WILL BE CONSTRUCTED MAY REQUEST THAT THE DEPARTMENT HOLD
A PUBLIC HEARING.

~~9–297.~~ 8–8A–06.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ISSUE A PERMIT TO AN APPLICANT THAT
SATISFIES THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS PART SUBTITLE.

(2) (B) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT ISSUE A PERMIT TO AN
APPLICANT IF THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT AN APPLICANT CANNOT
UTILIZE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS WITHOUT:

(I) (1) CAUSING UNDUE RISK TO:

1. (I) THE ENVIRONMENT; OR

2. (II) PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, OR WELFARE; OR

(II) (2) OTHERWISE VIOLATING THIS PART SUBTITLE.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE EACH COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION THAT RECEIVES A NOTICE UNDER § 9–296 OF THIS SUBTITLE WITH
AN OPPORTUNITY TO CONSULT WITH THE DEPARTMENT ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT’S
DECISION TO ISSUE, DENY, OR PLACE CONDITIONS ON A PERMIT.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SEND THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION TO THE
~~LOCAL~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~OFFICIAL~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~SOIL~~ ~~CONSERVATION~~ ~~DISTRICT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
COUNTY FOR WHICH A PERMIT APPLICATION IS RECEIVED:

(1) A COPY OF ANY PERMIT ISSUED IN THE COUNTY;

(2) A NOTICE OF THE DENIAL OF A PERMIT APPLICATION THAT
~~WOULD~~ ~~HAVE~~ ~~AUTHORIZED~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UTILIZATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
~~COUNTY;~~

(3) A NOTICE OF THE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, MODIFICATION, OR
TERMINATION OF A PERMIT ISSUED IN THE COUNTY;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(4) A COPY OF ANY NOTICE, COMPLAINT, OR ORDER THE
DEPARTMENT ISSUES UNDER THIS PART THAT RELATES TO THE COUNTY; AND

(5) A COPY OF ANY REPORT FILED WITH THE DEPARTMENT IN
ACCORDANCE WITH A CONDITION OF A PERMIT.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAINTAIN A PERMANENT PUBLIC RECORD ON
THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE OF ALL PERMITS ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

~~9–298.~~ 8–8A–07.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PERMIT
SHALL EXPIRE ON THE DATE THE DEPARTMENT SETS AT THE TIME THE PERMIT IS
ISSUED OR RENEWED.

(2) THE TERM OF A PERMIT MAY NOT LAST FOR MORE THAN 3 YEARS
1 YEAR.

(B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE
THE DEPARTMENT MAY RENEW A PERMIT IF THE PERMIT HOLDER:

(I) IS IN COMPLIANCE WITH:

1. THE CONDITIONS OF THE PERMIT;

2. THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS PART; AND SUBTITLE;

3. ALL APPLICABLE REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED BY
THE DEPARTMENT; AND

4. AN APPLICABLE DISCHARGE PERMIT UNDER § 9–301
OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE;

(II) SUBMITS TO THE DEPARTMENT IN A TIMELY MANNER A
RENEWAL APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES; AND

(III) PAYS A RENEWAL APPLICATION FEE.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY REFUSE TO RENEW A PERMIT IF:

(I) THE PERMIT HOLDER VIOLATES THIS PART SUBTITLE, ANY
REGULATION ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT UNDER THIS PART SUBTITLE, OR ANY
CONDITION OF THE PERMIT;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT CONTINUED
OPERATION OF ANY AREA COVERED BY THE PERMIT WOULD BE INJURIOUS TO THE
ENVIRONMENT OR PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, OR WELFARE; OR

(III) THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT THERE IS ANY
OTHER GOOD CAUSE.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT RENEW OR MODIFY A PERMIT TO STORE OR
~~DISTRIBUTE~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~FACILITY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~INSTALLED~~ ~~OR~~
MATERIALLY ALTERED UNLESS THE DEPARTMENT HOLDS A PUBLIC HEARING ON
THE RENEWAL OR MODIFICATION.

~~9–299.~~ 8–8A–08.

TO MAINTAIN A PERMIT IN GOOD STANDING, A PERMIT HOLDER SHALL:

(1) MAINTAIN A PERFORMANCE BOND OR OTHER SECURITY IN THE
AMOUNT THAT THE DEPARTMENT CONSIDERS SUFFICIENT TO GUARANTEE THE
FULFILLMENT OF ANY REQUIREMENT RELATED TO THE PERMIT;

(2) ENSURE THAT INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE IS NOT APPLIED FOR MORE
THAN 365 DAYS WITHIN ANY 3–YEAR PERIOD;

(3) ENSURE THAT INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE IS APPLIED:

(I) BY SUBSURFACE INJECTION;

(II) UNIFORMLY AND AT A RATE THAT DOES NOT CONTRIBUTE
TO RUNOFF;

(III) ONLY ON SOIL THAT:

1. CONTAINS GROUNDWATER THAT IS MORE THAN 20
~~INCHES~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEPTH~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TILLAGE~~ ~~AS~~ ~~DETERMINED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~TEMPORARY~~ ~~SOIL~~
BORINGS BEFORE LAND APPLICATION; AND

2. DOES NOT CONTAIN STANDING WATER, SNOW COVER
GREATER THAN 1 INCH, OR HARD–FROZEN CONDITIONS GREATER THAN 2 INCHES;

(IV) ONLY FROM MARCH 1 TO DECEMBER 15, INCLUSIVE, OF
ANY CALENDAR YEAR;

(V) ONLY IF A CROP IS PLANTED WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER
APPLICATION UNLESS OTHERWISE APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(VI) ONLY IF A COVER CROP OR APPROPRIATE WINTER CROP IS
ESTABLISHED AT THE APPLICATION SITE; AND

(VII) IN LOCATIONS THAT DO NOT INTERFERE WITH THE BUFFER
AREAS ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN REGULATION UNDER § 9–299.4 OF
~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS ARE UTILIZED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH:

(I) § 8–8A–03 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) GOOD HUSBANDRY AND SOUND AGRONOMIC PRACTICES;

(3) ALLOW A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT, SEEKING TO
INSPECT A SITE, ENTRY TO ANY AREA COVERED BY THE PERMIT;

(4) KEEP RECORDS REGARDING THE UTILIZATION OF INDUSTRIAL
SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS, INCLUDING DAILY RECORDS OF THE
SOURCE AND AMOUNT OF ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS IN
EACH TRUCKLOAD DELIVERED TO A SITE;

(5) MAKE REPORTS, INCLUDING INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE ANALYSIS
REPORTS, AS OFTEN AS NECESSARY TO ENSURE THE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE MEETS
THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE PERMIT;

(6) HAVE A COPY OF THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (5) OF THIS
SECTION AVAILABLE IN THE VEHICLE TRANSPORTING THE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE;

(7) INSTALL, CALIBRATE, USE, AND MAINTAIN MONITORING
EQUIPMENT OR METHODS, INCLUDING BIOLOGICAL MONITORING METHODS AND
WELL MONITORING IF APPROPRIATE;

(8) TAKE SAMPLES IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE METHOD, LOCATION,
FREQUENCY, AND MANNER REQUIREMENTS SET BY THE DEPARTMENT;

(9) (6) PROVIDE TO THE DEPARTMENT OR THE RELEVANT LOCAL
HEALTH OFFICIAL ANY INFORMATION THAT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES; AND

(10) (7) COMPLY WITH ANY OTHER REQUIREMENT SET BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

~~9–299.1.~~ 8–8A–09.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE DEPARTMENT MAY SUSPEND, REVOKE, OR MODIFY A PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER THIS PART SUBTITLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ADMINISTRATIVE
PROCEDURE ACT IF THE DEPARTMENT FINDS THAT:

(1) THE PERMIT APPLICATION CONTAINED FALSE OR INACCURATE
INFORMATION;

(2) THERE HAS BEEN A SUBSTANTIAL DEVIATION FROM:

(I) THE PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS, OR OTHER DOCUMENTS
APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT; OR

(II) ANY REQUIREMENT ESTABLISHED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

(3) A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT SEEKING TO INSPECT
A SITE IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 9–299.2 8–8A–10 OF THIS SUBTITLE HAS BEEN
REFUSED ENTRY TO ANY AREA COVERED BY THE PERMIT;

(4) THERE IS OR HAS BEEN A VIOLATION OF THIS PART SUBTITLE,
ANY REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS PART SUBTITLE, OR ANY CONDITION OF
THE PERMIT; OR

(5) THERE IS ANY OTHER GOOD CAUSE AS DETERMINED BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

~~9–299.2.~~ 8–8A–10.

(A) TO ENFORCE THIS PART SUBTITLE AND TO ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH
A PERMIT, A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT MAY ENTER AND INSPECT, AT
ANY REASONABLE TIME, ANY SITE WHERE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE IS FOOD
PROCESSING RESIDUALS ARE UTILIZED.

(B) A PERMIT HOLDER OR OTHER PERSON AT A SITE WHERE INDUSTRIAL
SLUDGE IS FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS ARE UTILIZED MAY NOT:

(1) REFUSE ACCESS TO THE SITE TO ANY REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
DEPARTMENT THAT REQUESTS ACCESS UNDER THIS SECTION; OR

(2) INTERFERE WITH ANY INSPECTION UNDER THIS PART SUBTITLE.

(C) AFTER COMPLETING AN INSPECTION UNDER THIS SECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ISSUE A STOP WORK ORDER OR OTHER ORDER IF NECESSARY
TO OBTAIN COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW, REGULATIONS, OR A PERMIT.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

~~9–299.3.~~ 8–8A–11.

(A) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER REMEDY AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE, THE DEPARTMENT MAY BRING AN ACTION TO ENJOIN THE VIOLATION OF
ANY LAW, REGULATION, OR ORDER CONCERNING THE UTILIZATION OF INDUSTRIAL
SLUDGE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS UNDER THIS PART SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) ANY PERSON THAT OWNS LAND THAT ADJOINS LAND FOR WHICH
~~AN~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~APPLY~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~FILED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~A~~ ~~PERMIT~~
TO APPLY INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE IS ISSUED HAS STANDING:

(I) TO SUE THE STATE, THE APPLICANT, OR THE PERMIT
~~HOLDER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~REQUIRE~~ ~~COMPLIANCE~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~PART~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~PERMIT~~ ~~ISSUED~~
UNDER THIS PART; AND

(II) WITH RESPECT TO THE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE UTILIZATION
SITE, TO INTERVENE IN ANY:

1. CIVIL COURT PROCEEDING; AND

2. CONTESTED ADMINISTRATIVE CASE.

(2) ANY COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION IN WHICH THERE IS
~~LAND~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~AN~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~APPLY~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~FILED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FOR~~
WHICH A PERMIT TO APPLY INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE IS ISSUED HAS STANDING:

(I) TO SUE THE APPLICANT OR THE PERMIT HOLDER TO
REQUIRE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PART AND ANY PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART;
~~AND~~

(II) WITH RESPECT TO THE INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE UTILIZATION
SITE, TO INTERVENE IN ANY:

1. CIVIL COURT PROCEEDING; AND

2. CONTESTED ADMINISTRATIVE CASE THE RIGHT TO
BRING AN ACTION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION IS IN ADDITION TO AND
NOT INSTEAD OF THE RIGHT TO BRING ANY OTHER ACTION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO FURNISH BOND.

(D) THE COURT SHALL ISSUE A PRELIMINARY INJUNCTION IF IT FINDS THAT
THE PERMIT HOLDER IS:

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ENGAGING IN UNLAWFUL CONDUCT IN VIOLATION OF THIS
SUBTITLE; OR

(2) ENGAGED IN CONDUCT WHICH IS CAUSING IMMEDIATE AND
IRREPARABLE HARM TO THE PUBLIC.

~~9–299.4.~~

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS PART.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT ADOPT A REGULATION OR PART OF A
~~REGULATION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~DEALS~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~STORAGE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~LAND~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~OF~~
~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~SLUDGE~~ ~~MATERIAL~~ ~~ON~~ ~~AGRICULTURAL~~ ~~LAND~~ ~~UNLESS~~ ~~THE~~
DEPARTMENT CONSULTS WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE.

(B) (1) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS PART SHALL ADDRESS:

(I) ALTERNATIVE UTILIZATION METHODS;

(II) CONTROL OF PATHOGENS AND POLLUTANTS OF CONCERN
IDENTIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT;

(III) ADVERTISING REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS AND
PUBLIC INFORMATION MEETINGS;

(IV) PERFORMANCE BONDS, LIABILITY INSURANCE, OR OTHER
FORMS OF SECURITY;

(V) PROCEDURES FOR NOTIFYING UNITS OF LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES;

(VI) ADEQUATE STANDARDS FOR TRANSPORTING INDUSTRIAL
~~SLUDGE;~~

(VII) EXISTING LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE
APPLICATION AND SUITABILITY OF SOIL AMENDMENTS FOR LAND APPLICATION;

(VIII) METHODS FOR CALCULATING LOADING RATES THAT:

1. WILL ENSURE NONDEGRADATION OF THE
GROUNDWATER; AND

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

2. ARE LIMITED BY THE NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS OF
CROP OR COVER VEGETATION, AS RECOMMENDED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF
~~AGRICULTURE;~~

(IX) THE CROPS THAT ARE TO BE GROWN ON LAND ON WHICH
INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE MAY BE APPLIED;

(X) THE NATURE OF ANY NEARBY SURFACE WATER OR
~~GROUNDWATER;~~

(XI) THE CHARACTER OF ANY AFFECTED AREA;

(XII) THE CHARACTER OF NEARBY EXISTING OR PLANNED LAND
USES AND TRANSPORT ROUTES;

(XIII) THE NEARNESS OF THE LAND ON WHICH INDUSTRIAL
SLUDGE MAY BE APPLIED TO SENSITIVE AREAS, INCLUDING FLOOD PLAINS,
WETLANDS, AND AREAS OF CRITICAL CONCERN;

(XIV) THE DEFINITIONS OF:

1. INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE THAT IS UNSUITABLE FOR
APPLICATION TO AGRICULTURAL LAND;

~~2.~~ ~~AGRICULTURAL~~ ~~LAND;~~

3. MARGINAL LAND; AND

~~4.~~ ~~COMPOST;~~

(XV) ACCEPTABLE CUMULATIVE LOADING RATES, INCLUDING
RATES FOR NITROGEN, PHOSPHORUS, AND HEAVY METALS; AND

(XVI) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
REASONABLE BUFFER AREAS TO SEPARATE ANY HOME, AGRICULTURAL LAND, OR
OTHER PROPERTY FROM LAND ON WHICH INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE MAY BE APPLIED.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF BUFFER AREAS TO SEPARATE
AGRICULTURAL LAND FROM LAND ON WHICH INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE MAY BE APPLIED.

(C) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO ESTABLISH AND UPDATE PERMIT
APPLICATION FEES.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) (I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PUBLIC INPUT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A FEE SCHEDULE UNDER THIS SECTION.

(II) A FEE SCHEDULE DEVELOPED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL
INCLUDE CONSIDERATION OF:

1. THE ANTICIPATED COSTS OF MONITORING AND
REGULATING INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE UTILIZATION SITES;

2. THE ANTICIPATED COSTS OF IMPLEMENTING THIS
PART; AND

3. THE POTENTIAL IMPACT OF AN INDUSTRIAL SLUDGE
UTILIZER’S ACTIVITIES ON THE ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, AND
~~WELFARE.~~

8–8A–12.

(A) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER ACTION AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE, THE DEPARTMENT MAY IMPOSE ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES UP TO
$5,000 PER DAY, NOT TO EXCEED $50,000 IN TOTAL PENALTIES, FOR A VIOLATION
OF THIS SUBTITLE, REGULATIONS ADOPTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, OR ANY
CONDITION OF THE PERMIT.

(B) THE PENALTY SHALL BE ASSESSED WITH CONSIDERATION GIVEN TO:

(1) THE WILLFULNESS OF THE VIOLATION;

(2) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE EXISTENCE OF THE VIOLATION WAS
KNOWN TO THE VIOLATOR BUT UNCORRECTED BY THE VIOLATOR;

(3) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE VIOLATOR EXERCISED REASONABLE
CARE;

(4) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE VIOLATION RESULTED IN ACTUAL
HARM TO THE ENVIRONMENT OR TO HUMAN HEALTH OR SAFETY;

(5) THE NATURE AND DEGREE OF INJURY TO OR INTERFERENCE
WITH GENERAL WELFARE, HEALTH, AND PROPERTY;

(6) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE CURRENT VIOLATION IS PART OF A
RECURRENT PATTERN OF THE SAME OR SIMILAR TYPE OF VIOLATION COMMITTED
BY THE VIOLATOR; AND

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(7) THE EXTENT TO WHICH THE VIOLATION CREATES THE POTENTIAL
FOR HARM TO THE ENVIRONMENT OR TO HUMAN HEALTH OR SAFETY.

8–8A–13.

(A) THERE IS A FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS ADMINISTRATION FUND.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SET REASONABLE FEES NECESSARY TO
CARRY OUT ITS RESPONSIBILITIES REGULATING THE UTILIZATION OF FOOD
PROCESSING RESIDUALS UNDER THIS TITLE.

(2) THE FEES CHARGED SHALL BE SET SO AS TO PRODUCE FUNDS TO
APPROXIMATE THE COST OF ADMINISTERING THE DEPARTMENT’S
RESPONSIBILITIES REGULATING THE UTILIZATION OF FOOD PROCESSING
RESIDUALS UNDER THIS TITLE.

(C) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PAY ALL FEES COLLECTED UNDER THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE TO THE COMPTROLLER OF THE STATE.

(2) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DISTRIBUTE THE FEES RECEIVED
FROM THE DEPARTMENT TO THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS ADMINISTRATION
FUND.

(D) THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS ADMINISTRATION FUND SHALL BE
USED EXCLUSIVELY TO COVER THE ACTUAL DOCUMENTED DIRECT AND INDIRECT
COSTS OF FULFILLING THE STATUTORY AND REGULATORY DUTIES OF THE
DEPARTMENT AS PROVIDED BY THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

(E) (1) THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS ADMINISTRATION FUND IS A
CONTINUING, NONLAPSING SPECIAL FUND THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) ANY UNSPENT PORTION OF THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS
ADMINISTRATION FUND MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED OR REVERT TO THE GENERAL
FUND OF THE STATE, BUT SHALL REMAIN IN THE FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS
ADMINISTRATION FUND TO BE USED FOR THE PURPOSES SPECIFIED IN THIS TITLE.

(F) (1) A DESIGNEE OF THE DEPARTMENT THE SECRETARY OR THE
SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(2) MONEY IN THE FUND MAY BE EXPENDED ONLY FOR ANY LAWFUL
PURPOSE AUTHORIZED UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THIS TITLE.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(G) THE LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR SHALL AUDIT THE ACCOUNTS AND
TRANSACTIONS OF THE FUND SHALL BE SUBJECT TO AUDIT AS PROVIDED IN §
2–1220 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

8–8A–14.

(A) (1) EACH PERSON ISSUED A PERMIT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL
SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT ON A FORM THAT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES:

(I) A SEMIANNUAL WRITTEN STATEMENT OF THE TONNAGE OF
FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS UTILIZED IN CONJUNCTION WITH AN AGRICULTURAL
OPERATION IN THE STATE; AND

(II) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THE DEPARTMENT DEEMS
NECESSARY IN ADMINISTERING THIS PROGRAM.

(2) THE STATEMENT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE UTILIZATIONS FOR THE PERIODS JANUARY 1
THROUGH JUNE 30 AND JULY 1 THROUGH DECEMBER 31.

(B) (1) THE PERMIT HOLDER SHALL KEEP RECORDS NECESSARY OR
REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT TO INDICATE ACCURATELY THE TONNAGE OF
FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS UTILIZED IN CONJUNCTION WITH AGRICULTURAL
OPERATIONS IN THE STATE.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT HAS THE RIGHT TO EXAMINE THE RECORDS TO
VERIFY ANY STATEMENT OF TONNAGE.

8–8A–15.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT
THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) THE REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT MAY INCLUDE:

(1) ADEQUATE STANDARDS FOR HAULING FOOD PROCESSING
RESIDUALS;

(2) ADEQUATE STANDARDS GOVERNING THE APPLICATION AND
SUITABILITY OF SOIL CONDITIONERS FOR LAND APPLICATION, INCLUDING
STANDARDS GOVERNING THE NUMBER OF APPLICATIONS PER FIELD PER SEASON
CONSISTENT WITH GOOD HUSBANDRY AND SOUND AGRONOMIC PRACTICES;

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 531

(3) THE CROPS THAT ARE TO BE GROWN ON LAND ON WHICH FOOD
PROCESSING RESIDUALS MAY BE APPLIED;

(4) THE CHARACTER OF NEARBY EXISTING LAND USES AND
TRANSPORTATION ROUTES;

(5) ACCEPTABLE NUTRIENT APPLICATION RATES, INCLUDING RATES
FOR NITROGEN, PHOSPHORUS, AND HEAVY METALS, CONSISTENT WITH
RECOMMENDATIONS PUBLISHED OR ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT;

(6) REASONABLE BUFFER AREAS TO SEPARATE ANY HOME OR OTHER
PROPERTY ON WHICH FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS MAY BE APPLIED;

(7) METHODS FOR CALCULATING NUTRIENT APPLICATION RATES
THAT ARE LIMITED BY THE NUTRIENT REQUIREMENTS OF THE HARVESTABLE CROP
OR COVER CROP; AND

(8) ANY OTHER STANDARDS DEEMED NECESSARY BY THE
DEPARTMENT.

SUBTITLE 11. COMMERCIAL HAULER CERTIFICATION PROGRAM.

8–1101.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
8–8A–01 OF THIS TITLE.

(C) “HAULING” MEANS TRANSPORTING, MOVING, AND THE LAND
APPLICATION OF FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS.

8–1102.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADMINISTER A COMMERCIAL HAULER
CERTIFICATION PROGRAM FOR THE PURPOSE OF CERTIFYING INDIVIDUALS WHO
HAUL FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT MAY DEVELOP TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL
REQUIREMENTS, TESTING, AND OTHER CRITERIA IT DEEMS NECESSARY FOR
CERTIFICATION.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 531 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE TRAINING DEVELOPED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY ADDRESS THE FOLLOWING TOPICS:

(I) LAWS AND REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO THE HAULING OF
FOOD PROCESSING RESIDUALS;

(II) INFORMATION NECESSARY FOR UNDERSTANDING AND
FOLLOWING A NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT PLAN; AND

(III) BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES WITH RESPECT TO:

1. HAULING;

2. TRANSPORTATION SAFETY PROCEDURES;

3. CALIBRATION OF APPLICATION RATES FOR VARIOUS
TYPES OF APPLICATION EQUIPMENT;

4. SETBACKS FROM WATER SOURCES AND PROPERTY
LINES;

5. NUTRIENT RUNOFF CONCERNS;

6. INCORPORATION AND INJECTION TECHNIQUES; AND

7. RECORD–KEEPING REQUIREMENTS ESTABLISHED BY
THE DEPARTMENT FOR HAULING.

8–1103.

THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF THE
ENVIRONMENT, MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20