START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 977 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 977 
(Delegate Otto) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Somerset County – Sale of Property – Revells Neck Road 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Somerset County Commissioners to sell the property on 
Revells Neck Road, County Tax Map 32, Parcel 149 under terms considered appropriate 
by the county commissioners. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill would not materially affect the operations or finances of 
Somerset County. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, the Somerset County Commissioners may sell any interest in 
county surplus property by acceptance of sealed bids solicited by advertisement. The 
county commissioners must publish an invitation for bids at least twice in a newspaper of 
general circulation in the county between 10 and 90 days before the date set for opening 
bids. The county commissioners must open the bids in public and may act on the bids only 
during a public session. If the highest bid fails to yield a reasonable price for the property, 
the county commissioners can reject all bids. If all bids are rejected, the county 
commissioners must record the highest bid in the minutes of its public session and may 
proceed to sell the property by re-advertising for sealed bids, through public auction or, if 
the property is surplus school property, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 977/ Page 2 
The Somerset County Commissioners may also negotiate the sale of real property owned 
by the county school board with any governmental body located in the county. The sale 
can be completed without advertising after three independent appraisals have been 
obtained. 
 
The Somerset County Commissioners have previously been authorized to sell specified 
properties under terms deemed appropriate by the county commissioners, without public 
sale:  
 
 
Chapter 313 of 2007 authorized the sale of a property known as Whittington 
Elementary School to Shore Up Inc.  
 
Chapter 386 of 2007 authorized the county to sell four properties to the City of 
Crisfield.  
 
Chapters 544 and 545 of 2011 authorized the county to sell, at a private sale, 
three properties to the City of Crisfield. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 763 (Senator Carozza) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Somerset County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2