START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 285

Chapter 285

(House Bill 998)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Department of Labor – Unemployment Insurance – Study on Actively
Seeking Work Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Labor to conduct a study on the
actively seeking work requirement of the unemployment insurance system in the
State and other states to evaluate the effects of ghosting on actively seeking work
requirements; and generally relating to a study on actively seeking work
requirements for unemployment insurance benefits.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Actively seeking work requirements” means the requirement
established under § 8–903(a)(iii) of the Labor and Employment Article to maintain
eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits.

(3) “Department” means the Maryland Department of Labor.

(4) “Ghost” means the failure of a claimant for unemployment insurance
benefits who is scheduled for a job interview with an employer to attend the interview or
maintain contact with the employer after the interview is scheduled.

(b) The Department shall conduct a study on the actively seeking work
requirements of the unemployment insurance system in the State and other states to
evaluate the effects of ghosting on actively seeking work requirements.

(c) The study shall:

(1) examine the actively seeking work requirements of other states to
determine:

(i) the ways in which the actively seeking work requirements of
other states are different from those in the State; and

(ii) how the actively seeking work requirements of other states are
verified to ensure a claimant remains eligible for unemployment insurance benefits;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 285 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) determine whether the Department, using existing resources, is able to
perform periodic verification of the information reported by claimants to satisfy the
claimant’s actively seeking work requirement;

(3) evaluate and explain why the online BEACON system for claimants
and employers does not or cannot allow an employer to input information about a claimant’s
actively seeking work requirement, including:

(i) confirmation that a claimant contacted an employer for work;
and

(ii) a report of ghosting;

(4) determine whether it is feasible to remove requirements for employers
to input certain information in the BEACON system, such as a claimant’s Social Security
number, for purposes of reporting incidents of ghosting; and

(5) examine any other factors relevant to reporting ghosting or verifying
whether a claimant meets the actively seeking work requirement.

(d) On or before December 1, 2024, the Department shall report its findings and
recommendations to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2