START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 934 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 934 
(Delegate Hutchinson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Physicians - Performance of X-Ray Duties Without a License 
 
 
This bill alters the circumstances under which an individual may perform x-ray duties 
without a license. A physician’s office that employs an unlicensed individual to perform 
x-ray duties is responsible for ensuring that all requirements are met for each x-ray 
examination performed. If an unlicensed individual performs x-ray duties without meeting 
the bill’s requirements, the Maryland Board of Physicians (MBP) may impose a civil 
penalty (1) of up to $5,000 for each violation of the physician’s office where the violation 
occurred and (2) of up to $1,000 for each violation of the individual who committed the 
violation. The bill may not be construed to prohibit the establishment of a program that 
provides training described in the bill before the bill’s effective date. By October 1, 2029, 
MBP must report to specified committees of the General Assembly on the number of 
individuals who have registered to perform limited x-ray duties and its recommendations 
regarding continuing the registration process or replacing the registration process with a 
limited licensure category. The bill takes effect January 1, 2025, and terminates 
December 31, 2030.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBP can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are 
not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.       
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 934/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Under the bill, an individual who performs x-ray duties without a license 
must do so in accordance with regulations adopted by MBP. An individual may perform 
x-ray procedures limited to (1) the chest; (2) the spine, including the cervical spine, lumbar 
spine, sacroiliac joints, sacrum and coccyx, and thoracic spine; (3) the lower extremities, 
including toes, the foot, the ankle, the calcaneus, the tibia and fibula, the knee and patella, 
and the femur; and (4) the upper extremities, including fingers, the hand, the wrist, the 
forearm, the elbow, the humerus, the shoulder, the clavicle, acromioclavicular joint, and 
the scapula. 
 
These x-ray duties must be performed (1) in the physician’s office under the supervision 
of a licensed physician or radiologic technologist who is on site or able to provide 
immediately available direction and (2) by an individual who meets specified requirements.  
 
Specifically, to perform x-ray duties without a license, an individual must: 
  
 
attest to the completion of at least six months of clinical care experience;   
 
complete a limited scope x-ray educational program consisting of at least 115 hours 
of didactic training delivered by a radiologic technologist certified by the American 
Registry of Radiologic Technologists (ARRT) providing instruction, as specified; 
 
complete at least 480 hours of clinical training and a minimum of five competencies 
in each body part specified under the direct supervision of a radiologic technologist 
certified by ARRT;  
 
achieve a passing score (as determined by MBP) on the ARRT examination for 
limited scope of practice in radiography or an alternative examination approved by 
MBP; and  
 
register with MBP attesting to completion of each of the above requirements and 
the completion of at least 24 hours of approved continuing education credits earned 
during the two-year period immediately following the date of initial registration and 
every two years thereafter. 
 
Current Law:  The mission of MBP is to assure quality health care in Maryland through 
the efficient licensure and effective discipline of health providers under its jurisdiction by 
protecting and educating clients/customers and stakeholders and enforcing the  
Maryland Medical Practice Act. The board has regulatory authority over physicians, 
physician assistants, radiographers, radiation therapists, nuclear medicine technologists, 
radiologist assistants, respiratory care practitioners, polysomnographic technologists, 
athletic trainers, perfusionists, naturopathic doctors, and genetic counselors. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 934/ Page 3 
In general, an individual must be licensed by MBP before the individual may practice 
radiation therapy, radiography, nuclear medicine technology, and radiology assistance 
under the supervision of a licensed physician. An individual may perform x-ray duties 
without a license only if the duties (1) do not include computerized or noncomputerized 
tomography, fluoroscopy, invasive radiology, mammography, nuclear medicine, radiation 
therapy, or xerography; (2) are limited to x-ray procedures of the chest (anterior-posterior 
and lateral), spine (anterior-posterior and lateral), or extremities (anterior-posterior and 
lateral, not including the head); and (3) are performed by an individual who is not employed 
primarily to perform x-ray duties, in the medical office of the physician who delegates the 
duties, and by an individual with specified training who has passed a specified examination. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 830 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 8, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3