START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 975 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 975 
(Delegate Otto) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Somerset County – Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Medical Services 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Somerset County Commissioners to enact local laws and adopt 
measures for effective management and regulation of fire, rescue, and emergency medical 
services in the county. The bill also authorizes the county commissioners to establish an 
entity or body to administer the county’s affairs relating to fire, rescue, and emergency 
medical services and associated activities while maintaining the volunteer emergency 
services. If the county commissioners elect to do this, they must also establish an 
Emergency Services Advisory Council to provide the county commissioners with 
recommendations regarding the operations of fire suppression, emergency medical, and 
hazardous materials services in the county. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Somerset County operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Somerset County Commissioners do not have specific authority to 
establish an emergency services advisory council. The Public Local Laws of 
Somerset County require the county commissioners to appropriate funds to organized 
volunteer fire companies in the county. Appropriations made by the county commissioners 
to volunteer fire companies were last changed by Chapters 327 and 328 of 2018, which 
increased funding for fiscal 2019 through 2024. Chapters 327 and 328 also required that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 975/ Page 2 
the fiscal 2024 funding levels remain the same for each year thereafter, unless changed by 
legislation. There are eight organized volunteer fire companies in Somerset County. 
 
The county commissioners may also appropriate funds annually for emergency services 
provided by any volunteer fire company or rescue squad if the volunteer fire company or 
rescue squad is operated on a not-for-profit basis. 
 
Additionally, the public local laws of Somerset County authorized the county 
commissioners to establish a fire marshal office in the county. The fire marshal must be 
appointed and compensated by the county commissioners and may be removed for 
incompetence, neglect, or other reasons. 
 
The fire marshal may inspect buildings to discover fire hazards and to enforce the 
regulations adopted by the county commissioners. The county commissioners may create 
regulations to safeguard the public from fire hazards in all buildings in the county. These 
regulations may provide for the repair or removal of dangerous structures, trash removal, 
and the removal of other materials that may increase fire hazards or hinder a firemen’s 
efficiency in extinguishing fires or in preventing the spread of fires. 
 
The fire marshal must enforce the regulations adopted, order the removal of any fire hazard, 
and make any repairs and improvement to ensure compliance with the regulations. The 
fire marshal must also report to the county commissioners all violations of the regulations 
and the names of all persons who refuse to comply with the fire marshal’s orders for the 
repair and removal of fire hazards. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 807 (Senator Carozza) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Somerset County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2