START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 967 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 967 
(Delegates Wivell and Valentine) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Town of Keedysville - Parking of Vehicles - Restrictions 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from parking certain vehicles in the Town of Keedysville, 
Washington County. However, the bill’s restrictions do not apply if the parking of the 
vehicle is essential to its immediate use. Additionally, the bill does not apply to specified 
Class A (passenger) or Class E (truck) vehicles. Finally, the bill establishes more stringent 
enforcement provisions for certain types of vehicles and for vehicles parked for multiple 
days.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations.   
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
Enforcement can be handled with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill prohibits the parking of certain vehicles on any street or highway 
in the Town of Keedysville. Specifically, the prohibition applies to any vehicle registered 
(or capable of being registered) as a: 
 
 
Class E (truck), excluding those with a manufacturer’s rated capacity of 
three-fourths of a ton or less and a maximum gross vehicle weight of 7,000 pounds 
or less;  
 
Class F (tractor); 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 967/ Page 2 
 
Class G (trailer); 
 
Class H (school bus); and 
 
Class P (passenger bus). 
 
For the purpose of determining the penalty under the bill, each day of a violation is 
considered a separate offense. Additionally, in the case of a combination tractor and trailer, 
a person who violates the bill is subject to a separate fine for each vehicle.  
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Vehicle Law governs the stopping, standing, and parking of 
vehicles, with various restrictions applicable under certain circumstances or within certain 
jurisdictions. A local authority, in the reasonable exercise of its police power, may also 
regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on highways within its 
jurisdiction. Generally, a violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law is a misdemeanor that 
carries a fine of up to $500. The amount of the prepaid fine for a violation of most 
provisions regulating stopping, standing, or parking is generally $50, $60, or $70, 
depending on the specific violation. 
 
Under Chapter 590 of 2023, provisions identical to those in the bill apply in the Town of 
Sharpsburg, Washington County. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see HB 1194 of 2023 (enacted as Chapter 590). 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2