START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 929 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 929 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Agriculture – Nuisance Insects 
 
 
This bill requires, rather than authorizes, the Secretary of Agriculture to implement a 
program to use Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti) to control or eliminate nuisance 
insects in the State in accordance with the State budget and subject to specified existing 
notice requirements. The bill further requires, rather than authorizes, the Secretary to carry 
out a project under the program if the county or municipality in which the nuisance insects 
are located agrees to pay 50% of the costs associated with the project. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect State finances. It is assumed that 
the Secretary of Agriculture can continue to implement the existing program in accordance 
with funding in the State budget. The FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $550,000 in general funds and $137,500 in special funds for the Nuisance Insects 
Program. This analysis assumes that the bill does not require the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture to expand the existing program. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to directly affect local government finances. Any 
matching funds provided by local governments for such projects continues to be voluntary 
under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 929/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Nuisance insect” means an insect that is determined by the Secretary of 
Agriculture to pester or annoy only humans. “Nuisance insect” does not include an insect 
that is a threat to the health of humans, animals or plants, or a pollinator. 
 
The Secretary of Agriculture may, subject to available funding in the State budget, and 
subject to specified notice requirements (discussed below), implement a program to use Bti 
to control or eliminate nuisance insects in the State. The program must be implemented on 
(1) State-owned property; (2) property owned by a local government with the consent of 
the local government; and (3) private property with the consent of the property owner. 
 
The Secretary may carry out a project under the program if the county or municipality in 
which the nuisance insects are located agrees to pay 50% of the costs; these matching funds 
are paid into the Nuisance Insects Fund.  
 
To carry out the program, the Secretary may (1) treat property with aerial spraying or 
backpack spraying of Bti; (2) conduct filed studies to determine the need for, location, and 
time of spraying; (3) schedule spraying when the conditions are optimal for ingestion by 
nuisance insects; (4) notify appropriate persons of the date and location of an upcoming 
spraying; and (5) review the effectiveness of spraying.  
 
Notice of the date and location of an upcoming spraying must, at a minimum, be: 
 
 
provided to (1) local press outlets; (2) county and local governments that are in the 
area that will be affected by the spraying; (3) emergency responders and associated 
agencies that service the area that will be affected by the spraying; and (4) the local 
riverkeeper for the area that will be affected by the spraying; and 
 
posted on appropriate social media sites.  
 
The Nuisance Insects Fund is a special fund administered by the Secretary (or the 
Secretary’s designee) to facilitate the control or elimination of nuisance insects in the State. 
The fund consists of (1) any funding provided by counties and municipalities for 50% of 
project costs, as discussed above; (2) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; 
and (3) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The 
fund may be used only to cover the actual, documented direct and indirect costs associated 
with controlling or eliminating nuisance insects in accordance with the Nuisance Insects 
Program. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $687,500 for the 
Nuisance Insects Program ($550,000 in general funds and $137,500 in special funds), of 
which (1) $300,000 in general funds is budgeted for the purpose of spraying midges in 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 929/ Page 3 
Back River and (2) $112,500 in general funds is budgeted for the purpose of spraying for 
black flies. With respect to the $412,500 in general funds budgeted for those specific 
purposes, any funds not expended for those purposes may not be transferred by budget 
amendment or otherwise to any other purpose and must revert to the general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 854 (Washington County Senators) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, 
Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Baltimore City Community College; 
University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of General Services; Department of Juvenile Services; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3