START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 973 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 973 
(Delegate Valentine, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Law Enforcement Agencies - Positive Community Feedback 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission (MPTSC) to 
develop a uniform citizen positive community feedback process to be adopted and followed 
by each law enforcement agency. The process must be (1) simple and (2) posted on 
MPTSC’s website and on the website of each law enforcement agency that maintains a 
website. Each law enforcement agency must maintain a record of positive community 
feedback for all law enforcement officers within the agency. A record of positive 
community feedback that was not solicited by the police officer who is the subject of the 
feedback is not considered a personnel record under the Maryland Public Information Act 
(PIA). Notwithstanding any other provision of law, records of positive community 
feedback are subject to public inspection in accordance with PIA. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MPTSC can adopt and post the required process using existing resources. 
While any State law enforcement agency that has an existing positive feedback process in 
place may need to update its process to meet the uniform process adopted by MPTSC 
pursuant to the bill, such alterations are not expected to materially affect State expenditures. 
Any impact on PIA-related activities is not expected to materially affect State finances. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 973/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Police Training and Standards Commission:  MPTSC operates approved police 
training schools and prescribes standards for and certifies schools that offer police and 
security training. Among other duties, MPTSC is required to (1) establish a Police 
Complaint Mediation Program to which a law enforcement agency may refer a nonviolent 
complaint made against a police officer out of the standard complaint process; (2) refer a 
complaint referred to the program to voluntary mediation conducted by an independent 
mediation service; and (3) adopt regulations to implement the program, including criteria 
concerning eligibility for referral of complaints. In addition, MPTSC must develop a 
uniform citizen complaint process to be followed by each law enforcement agency that is 
simple, requires that a complainant be informed of the final disposition of the 
complainant’s complaint and any discipline imposed as a result, and is posted on MPTSC’s 
and each law enforcement agency’s website. 
 
Inspection of Police Discipline Records:  Chapter 62 of 2021 established that, except for a 
record of a technical infraction, a record relating to an administrative or criminal 
investigation of misconduct by a law enforcement officer, including an internal affairs 
investigatory record, a hearing record, and records relating to a disciplinary decision, is not 
a personnel record for purposes of PIA. Thus, such records are not subject to mandatory 
denial of inspection under PIA; instead, they are subject to discretionary denial as provided 
under PIA. However, a custodian must allow inspection of such records by the 
U.S. Attorney, the Attorney General, the State Prosecutor, or the State’s Attorney for the 
jurisdiction relevant to the record. In addition, a custodian must redact the portions of a 
record that reflects medical information of the person in interest, personal contact 
information of the person in interest or a witness, or information relating to the family of 
the person in interest. A custodian may redact the portions of a record to the extent that the 
record reflects witness information. A custodian must notify the person in interest when 
the record is inspected but may not disclose the identity of the requestor to the person in 
interest. “Technical infraction” means a minor rule violation by an individual solely related 
to the enforcement of administrative rules that (1) does not involve an interaction between 
a member of the public and the individual; (2) does not relate to the individual’s 
investigative, enforcement, training, supervision, or reporting responsibilities; and (3) is 
not otherwise a matter of public concern. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 973/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 69 and HB 682 of 2023; and SB 581 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 7 (Senator Bailey) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kent and Worcester counties; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Office of the Attorney General; 
Comptroller’s Office; Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of 
General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; 
Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3