START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 981 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 981 
(Delegate Martinez, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Principal Departments - Individuals With Limited English Proficiency - Access 
to Public Services 
 
   
This bill requires the principal departments of the Executive Branch to fully implement, by 
July 1, 2025, statutory provisions that require certain reasonable steps to provide equal 
access to public services for individuals with limited English proficiency (LEP). Any 
principal department that is created on or after October 1, 2024, must comply with the 
aforementioned requirements beginning one year after the date the principal department is 
created.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $100,000 in FY 2025 
and $200,000 annually thereafter to implement the bill, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
200,000 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000) 
($200,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 981/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under § 10-1103 of the State Government Article, specified 
State departments, agencies, or programs must take reasonable steps to provide equal 
access to public services for individuals with LEP. Reasonable steps to provide equal 
access to public services include: 
 
 
the provision of oral language services for individuals with LEP, which must be 
through face-to-face, in-house oral language services if contact between the agency 
and individuals with LEP is on a weekly or more frequent basis; 
 
the translation of vital documents ordinarily provided to the public into any 
language spoken by any LEP population that constitutes 3% of the overall 
population within the geographic area served by a local office of a State program, 
as specified (and the provision of vital documents to any local office as necessary); 
and 
 
any additional methods or means necessary to achieve equal access to public 
services. 
 
Chapter 141 of 2002, which originally established the aforementioned requirements, also 
included an implementation schedule within § 10-1103, setting forth the date by which 
designated State entities must fully implement the requirements. State departments, 
agencies, or programs that are not specified in § 10-1103 must monitor their operations to 
determine if they should take reasonable steps under statute to achieve equal access to 
public services for LEP individuals. 
 
Under the bill, each principal department listed in § 8-201 of the State Government Article 
must implement the aforementioned requirements. Principal departments listed in § 8-201 
that were not explicitly included in the aforementioned implementation schedule must 
therefore implement the requirements discussed above by July 1, 2025. These departments 
are (1) the Department of Budget and Management (DBM); (2) the Maryland Department 
of Disabilities (MDOD); (3) the Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
(MDEM); (4) the Department of General Services (DGS); (5) the Department of 
Information Technology (DoIT); (6) the Maryland Department of Planning (MDP); and 
(7) the Department of Service and Civic Innovation (DSCI).  
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal impact associated with the bill’s implementation for 
affected agencies varies, as discussed below.  
 
MDEM advises that it must expand its translation services to include Chinese and Korean 
languages in order to comply with the bill. Contractual costs are estimated at approximately 
$200,000 on an annual basis, which, according to MDEM, accounts for higher rates 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 981/ Page 3 
associated with the need for continuous accessibility 24/7 (such services are already 
available for Spanish-speaking individuals). Although costs in fiscal 2025 depend on 
MDEM implementation decisions, for purposes of this analysis, it is assumed that costs are 
incurred no earlier than January 1, 2025 (which gives MDEM time to expand/modify its 
existing services while still meeting the bill’s requirement for full implementation by 
July 1, 2025). Accordingly, MDEM general fund expenditures are assumed to increase by 
up to $100,000 in fiscal 2025 and by an estimated $200,000 annually thereafter. 
 
General fund expenditures for MDP may increase to the extent it utilizes contractual 
services to translate necessary documents and update its website. Based on preliminary 
information from MDP, this analysis assumes any impact on expenditures is likely 
minimal.  
 
MDOD advises that it contracts with interpreters on an as-needed basis. Current costs for 
interpretation services vary between in-person continuous translation ($78 per hour) and 
virtual interpretation ($60 to $70 per hour); these amounts are exclusive of the language 
needed, duration of services, and number of individuals requiring services, all of which 
may further increase costs. To comply with the bill, MDOD anticipates an increased need 
for both in-person and virtual interpretation services, as well as the translation of numerous 
public-facing documents. However, it is anticipated that minimal costs incurred for 
compliance are absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
 
DGS, DoIT, and DSCI also advise it can implement the bill using existing resources.  
 
Although DBM did not respond to requests for information on the fiscal and operational 
impact of the bill, this analysis assumes there is no material effect on the department.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management; Department of General Services; Department of Information Technology; 
Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Service and Civic Innovation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 981/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4