START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 950 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 950 
(Delegate Edelson, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Transit Administration - Locally Operated Transit Systems - 
Mandatory Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor, for fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, to include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation from the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) of at 
least $80,533,314 to the Locally Operated Transit System (LOTS) Grant Program for 
statewide program operations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect TTF expenditures; funding provided for 
the LOTS Grant Program generally exceeds the minimum funding level required by the 
bill. However, by establishing a mandated minimum funding level for the program, the bill 
reduces the Maryland Department of Transportation’s (MDOT) flexibility to balance its 
budget in future fiscal years, as discussed below. This bill establishes a mandated 
appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Historically, MDOT has provided local governments with financial support 
for local transit systems through its LOTS Grant Program, and the program was codified 
by Chapter 508 of 2023. Under the codified program:   
 
 
MDOT must provide funds to LOTSs in the State; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 950/ Page 2 
 
a LOTS may use funds received through the program for capital expenses, operating 
expenses, planning expenses, and any other eligible expense, as determined by 
MDOT; and 
 
MDOT may source funds from specified federal transportation programs and State 
public transportation programs. 
 
The program is generally supported through a combination of State and federal funding. 
Pursuant to § 3-216 of the Transportation Article, federal funding for transportation 
projects and grants, including for the LOTS Grant Program, flows through TTF. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill is not anticipated to affect TTF expenditures; funding 
provided for the LOTS Grant Program generally exceeds the minimum funding level 
required by the bill. Historically, program funding has been level-funded or has increased 
from year to year. However, establishing a mandated minimum funding level reduces 
MDOT’s flexibility to balance its budget should it experience financial difficulties in future 
fiscal years. 
 
Notably, in fall 2023, MDOT announced across-the-board reductions to its operating and 
capital spending in order to account for a substantial projected budget deficit in TTF. These 
reductions would have reduced LOTS Grant Program funding below the funding level 
required by the bill. However, the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced included additional 
financial support for TTF to ensure that many of the previously announced reductions, 
including the anticipated reduction in funding for the LOTS Grant Program, would no 
longer be necessary. This additional financial support was retained in the fiscal 2025 
budget as passed by the General Assembly. Specifically, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly includes $93.7 million for the LOTS Grant Program; funding for 
the LOTS Grant Program, combined with funding for other programs that generally support 
local jurisdictions, is included in the State budget under budget code J00H01.06 (Statewide 
Programs Operations). Collectively, funding for those programs totals $134.9 million in 
the fiscal 2025 as passed by the General Assembly. 
 
Should MDOT experience future financial constraints, MDOT would likely be required to 
make more significant reductions to other programs to ensure the minimum funding level 
required by the bill is met; however, any such occurrence cannot be predicted. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1125 (Senator Jackson) - Rules. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 950/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Baltimore City; 
Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Frederick, Harford, Montgomery, Prince George’s, and 
St. Mary’s counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 16, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3