START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 962 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 962 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Procurement - Small Business Reserve Program - Goals and Outreach 
Program 
 
 
This bill raises the goal, from 15% to 20%, for the percentage of the total dollar value of 
contract awards made to small businesses under the Small Business Reserve (SBR) 
Program and allows all contract awards made to small businesses to count toward 
achievement of the goal, not just those designated as SBR contracts. The bill also requires 
the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) to develop an outreach program to 
increase the participation of small businesses in the SBR program, and to report on the 
status of the outreach program. Finally, the bill alters reporting requirements for agencies 
participating in SBR. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures (all funds) may increase to the extent that agencies set 
aside more contracts for small businesses to comply with the bill. Set-asides limit 
competition for State contracts, which has been shown to increase contract costs. Any such 
effect cannot be reliably estimated but is expected to be minimal, at least in the near future, 
as discussed below. MDOT can implement the outreach program and submit annual reports 
with existing resources. No effect on revenues.     
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  By December 1 of each year, MDOT must report to the Board of Public 
Works and the Legislative Policy Committee on (1) the status of the outreach program and  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 962/ Page 2 
(2) the total number and dollar value of awards made to small businesses owned by 
economically disadvantaged individuals under designated SBR contracts. 
 
In their annual SBR reports to the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), which are required under current law, State procurement units 
must report the number and total dollar value of awards (instead of payments) made (1) to 
small businesses under SBR designated contracts and non-SBR designated contracts and 
(2) for all procurements.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Small Business Reserve Program  
 
SBR requires most State agencies to structure their procurements so that at least 15% of 
the total dollar value of their procurements is made directly to small businesses; 
Chapter 438 of 2017 raised the goal from 10% to 15%. Under regulations governing the 
program, each agency must prepare an annual forecast of its total procurement spending. 
The agency must then develop a plan to allocate at least 15% of its forecasted spending to 
contracts for small businesses serving as prime contractors. Under Chapter 438, an agency 
can apply toward its total SBR participation goal only payments made under a contract that 
is designated as an SBR procurement (not all payments to small businesses). The bill allows 
agencies to count payments under all contract awards to small businesses toward 
achievement of the goal. The Special Secretary of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs must, in consultation with the Attorney General, establish standards and guidelines 
for participation in SBR every five years. 
 
Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, each unit must submit a report to GOSBA 
that includes (1) the number and dollar value of payments made to small businesses under 
designated SBR contracts; (2) the number and dollar value of payments made to small 
businesses under contracts not designated as SBR; and (3) the total dollar value of 
payments made under all procurement contracts. 
 
The University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, and St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland are exempt from most provisions of State procurement law, including SBR. 
 
Under SBR, a “small business” is defined as: 
 
 
a certified MBE; 
 
a veteran-owned small business enterprise; or 
 
a business other than a broker that is independently owned and operated, not a 
subsidiary of another firm, and not dominant in its field of operation.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 962/ Page 3 
In addition, to qualify as a small business, any business must meet either of the following 
criteria in its most recently completed three fiscal years:  
 
 
the firm did not employ more than 25 people in its retail operations; 50 people in 
either its wholesale or construction operations; or 100 people in either its service, 
manufacturing, or architectural and engineering operations; or 
 
average gross sales did not exceed $2.0 million for manufacturing operations, 
$3.0 million for retail operations, $4.0 million for wholesale operations, 
$4.5 million for architectural and engineering services, $7.0 million for construction 
operations, and $10.0 million for service operations. 
 
Small businesses self-report their small business status by registering on eMaryland 
Marketplace Advantage, the State’s online procurement portal. Chapter 119 of 2016 
transferred responsibility for administering SBR from the Department of General Services 
to GOSBA and repealed its termination date, making the program permanent. 
 
Executive Order 
 
Executive Order 01.01.2021.01, signed by the Governor on January 6, 2021, requires that 
any procurement by an Executive Branch agency for goods, supplies, services, 
maintenance, construction, construction-related services, architectural services, and 
engineering services with a total dollar value between $50,000 and $500,000 be designated 
for SBR, except for:   
 
 
procurements from a preferred provider; 
 
procurement involving expenditures of federal dollars, if inclusion in SBR conflicts 
with federal law or grant requirements; 
 
small procurements; 
 
procurements of human, social, cultural, or educational services; and 
 
certain term or master contracts, as determined by GOSBA and the Office of State 
Procurement (OSP). 
 
A procurement is exempt from designation for SBR if GOSBA certifies, concurrently with 
the review of any waiver determinations for certified MBE contract goals, that it is not 
practicable to do so. OSP must assist GOSBA in establishing procedures and guidelines 
for the efficient exemption of procurements from SBR. 
 
Economically Disadvantaged Individuals  
 
An “economically disadvantaged individual” is someone who is socially disadvantaged 
whose ability to compete in the free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished 
capital and credit opportunities compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 962/ Page 4 
An individual with a personal net worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for 
inflation, is not considered economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for 
calendar 2024 is $2,073,412. A “socially disadvantaged individual” is someone who has 
been subject to racial or ethnic prejudice or cultural bias within American society because 
of his or her membership in a group and without regard to individual qualities. 
 
State Expenditures:  The State has never achieved the current 15% goal, whether counting 
only SBR-designated contracts or all contract awards. In fiscal 2023, 2.7% of all contract 
payments were made to small businesses under SBR-designated contracts, and 11.7% of 
all contract payments were made to small businesses. Therefore, raising the goal to 20% 
has no immediate effect on State procurement activity, because any subsequent increase in 
awards or payments to small businesses, either because of increased outreach or other 
factors, only gets the State closer to the current goal.  
 
Only after contract awards exceed the current goal does the bill begin to have a practical 
effect on procurement costs by limiting more awards only to small businesses. Limiting 
competition for procurement awards has been shown to increase contract costs.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may benefit from outreach by MDOT and a 
greater number of contract awards due to the higher SBR goal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 673 (Senator Charles) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Office of the Attorney General; Department of General Services; Board of Public 
Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4