START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 928 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 928 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Washington County - Procurement - Vehicles 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Board of County Commissioners of Washington County, or an 
employee of Washington County, to enter into a contract for the purchase of one or more 
vehicles without advertising for bids if the amount involved in the contract does not exceed 
$100,000. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to Washington County. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill likely has no direct effect on Washington County finances but may 
create administrative efficiencies with respect to the purchase of vehicles by the county. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: The Board of County Commissioners of Washington County or any 
employee of the county may not enter into a contract to which the county is a party where 
the amount involved in the contract exceeds $50,000 without advertising for bids at least 
one week before the bid. The notice must be published in at least one newspaper that is 
published in the county or through electronic media. 
 
However, regardless of the total amount of the procurement, if a contract is for an 
indeterminate number of goods or services on an as-needed basis over a period of time, the 
Board of County Commissioners of Washington County, or an employee of the county, 
may enter into a contract without advertising for bids. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 928/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2