START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 947 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 947 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Civil Actions - Public Nuisances - Firearm Industry Members (Gun Industry 
Accountability Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill (1) prohibits a “firearm industry member” from knowingly creating, maintaining, 
or contributing to harm to the public through the sale, manufacture, distribution, 
importation, or marketing of a firearm-related product by engaging in conduct that is 
unlawful or unreasonable under the totality of the circumstances; (2) requires a firearm 
industry member to establish and implement “reasonable controls” regarding the sale, 
manufacture, distribution, importation, marketing, possession, and use of the firearm 
industry member’s firearm‐related products; and (3) establishes that a violation of these 
provisions is a public nuisance. In addition, the bill authorizes the Attorney General, a 
county attorney, or the Baltimore City Solicitor to bring an action against a firearm industry 
member for a public nuisance caused by a violation of the bill’s provisions, as specified. 
The bill also requires the Attorney General, in consultation with the Department of State 
Police (DSP), to conduct a specified study related to firearm trace requests and report its 
recommendations and findings to the General Assembly by June 30, 2025. The bill’s 
provisions are severable. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential increase in general fund expenditures for the Office of the Attorney 
General (OAG) to pursue actions as authorized under the bill. Potential increase in general 
fund revenues to the extent specified relief is awarded to the State. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential increase in local expenditures to pursue actions as authorized under 
the bill. Potential increase in local revenues to the extent specified relief is awarded to a 
jurisdiction. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 947/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In an action brought under the bill’s provisions, the Attorney General, 
county attorney, or Baltimore City Solicitor may seek injunctive relief, restitution, 
compensatory and punitive damages, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, and any other 
appropriate relief. 
 
A party seeking relief under the bill’s provisions is not required to prove that a firearm 
industry member acted with the intent to violate the bill’s provisions. 
 
Nothing in the bill may be construed to affect (1) any other common law or statutory cause 
of action or (2) any other obligation or restriction imposed on a firearm industry member 
under State or federal law. 
 
“Firearm industry member” means a person engaged in the sale, manufacture, distribution, 
importation, or marketing of a firearm-related product.  
 
“Reasonable controls” means policies that are designed:  
 
 
to prevent the sale or distribution of a firearm-related product to a straw purchaser, 
a firearm trafficker, a person prohibited from possessing a firearm under State or 
federal law, and a person who the firearm industry member has reasonable cause to 
believe intends to use the firearm-related product to commit a crime or to cause 
harm to the person or another person;  
 
to prevent the loss or theft of a firearm-related product from a firearm industry 
member; and 
 
to ensure that the firearm industry member complies with all provisions of State and 
federal law and does not otherwise promote the unlawful sale, manufacture, 
alteration, importation, marketing, possession, or use of a firearm‐related product.  
 
The Attorney General, in consultation with DSP, must study and make recommendations 
regarding the legality and feasibility of a statutory requirement that would compel licensed 
firearm dealers within the State to provide records of firearm trace requests received from 
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) to the Attorney General. 
The Attorney General must provide staff for the study.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Regulation of Firearms:  DSP regulates firearms and regulated firearms dealer licensees 
under provisions of the Public Safety Article. Before a person purchases, rents, or transfers 
a regulated firearm in the State, the person must submit to DSP or other designated law 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 947/ Page 3 
enforcement agency a firearm application that identifies the applicant and the firearm that 
is the subject of the transaction. Applications are investigated by DSP and are subject to a 
seven-day waiting period before the transaction may take place. Chapter 11 of 2021 
requires that before a sale, rental, or transfer of a rifle or shotgun is conducted, the seller, 
lessor, or transferor and purchaser, lessee, or transferee both request that a licensed firearms 
dealer facilitate the sale, rental, or transfer. 
 
A person must lawfully possess a regulated firearms dealer’s license issued by the 
Secretary of State Police before the person engages in the business of selling, renting, or 
transferring regulated firearms. One dealer’s license is required for each place of business 
where regulated firearms are sold.  
 
Reports of sales of all regulated firearms must be forwarded to DSP within seven days of 
the completed sale. A dealer must also forward all disapproved applications that are being 
held. A dealer must maintain the dealer’s copy of the application form for a minimum of 
three years. The prospective seller, lessor, or transferor must keep one copy of the firearm 
application for at least three years. These records must be open for inspection by any law 
enforcement officer during normal business hours or as specifically requested by the 
Secretary. 
 
State licensees must also have a federal firearms license issued by ATF.   
 
Prohibitions on the Sale, Rental, or Transfer of Regulated Firearms:  A dealer or other 
person is prohibited from selling, renting, or transferring a regulated firearm to a purchaser, 
lessee, or transferee who the dealer or other person knows or has reasonable cause to 
believe: 
 
 
is younger than age 21; 
 
has been convicted of a disqualifying crime; 
 
has been convicted of a conspiracy to commit a felony; 
 
has been convicted of a violation classified as a common law crime and received a 
term of imprisonment of more than two years; 
 
is a fugitive from justice; 
 
is a habitual drunkard; 
 
is addicted to a controlled dangerous substance or is a habitual user; 
 
suffers from a mental disorder and has a history of violent behavior, as specified; 
 
has been confined for more than 30 consecutive days to a mental health facility, as 
specified; 
 
is a respondent against whom a current non ex parte civil protective order has been 
entered;  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 947/ Page 4 
 
if younger than age 30 at the time of the transaction, has been adjudicated delinquent 
by a juvenile court for an act that would be a disqualifying crime if committed by 
an adult; 
 
is visibly under the influence of alcohol; 
 
is a participant in a straw purchase; or 
 
has not completed a specified certified firearms safety training course. 
 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction subject to maximum penalties of 
imprisonment for five years and/or a $10,000 fine. Each violation is a separate crime. 
 
Prohibitions on the Sale, Rental, Transfer, or Loan of Rifles and Shotguns:  A licensee or 
any other person may not sell, rent, transfer, or loan a rifle or shotgun to a purchaser, lessee, 
transferee, or recipient who the licensee or other person knows or has reasonable cause to 
believe: 
 
 
has been convicted of a disqualifying crime; 
 
has been convicted of a violation classified as a common law crime and received a 
term of imprisonment of more than two years; 
 
is a fugitive from justice; 
 
is a habitual drunkard; 
 
is addicted to a controlled dangerous substance or is a habitual user; 
 
suffers from a mental disorder and has a history of violent behavior against the 
purchaser, lessee, transferee, recipient, or another; 
 
has been found incompetent to stand trial; 
 
has been found not criminally responsible; 
 
has been voluntarily admitted for more than 30 consecutive days to a facility that 
provides treatment or other services for mental disorders; 
 
has been involuntarily committed to a facility that provides treatment or other 
services for mental disorders; 
 
is under the protection of a guardian of the person or property of a disabled person 
appointed by a court, except for cases in which the appointment of a guardian is 
solely a result of a physical disability; 
 
is a respondent against whom a current non ex parte civil protective order has been 
entered in this State or an order for protection has been issued by a court of another 
state or a Native American tribe and is in effect; 
 
if younger than age 30 at the time of the transaction, has been adjudicated delinquent 
by a juvenile court for an act that would be a disqualifying crime if committed by 
an adult; 
 
is visibly under the influence of alcohol or drugs; 
 
is a participant in a straw purchase; or 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 947/ Page 5 
 
intends to use the rifle or shotgun to commit a crime, or cause harm to the purchaser, 
lessee, transferee, or recipient or another person. 
 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction subject to maximum penalties of 
imprisonment for five years and/or a $10,000 fine.  
 
Prohibitions on Possession:  Generally, a person is prohibited from possessing regulated 
firearms, rifles, and shotguns if the person: 
 
 
has been convicted of a disqualifying crime; 
 
has been convicted of a violation classified as a common law crime and received a 
term of imprisonment of more than two years; 
 
is a fugitive from justice; 
 
is a habitual drunkard; 
 
is addicted to a controlled dangerous substance or is a habitual user; 
 
suffers from a mental disorder and has a history of violent behavior against the 
person or another; 
 
has been found incompetent to stand trial; 
 
has been found not criminally responsible; 
 
has been voluntarily admitted for more than 30 consecutive days to a facility that 
provides treatment or other services for mental disorders; 
 
has been involuntarily committed to a facility that provides treatment or other 
services for mental disorders; 
 
is under the protection of a guardian of the person or property of a disabled person 
appointed by a court, except for cases in which the appointment of a guardian is 
solely a result of a physical disability; 
 
is a respondent against whom a current non ex parte civil protective order has been 
entered in this State or an order for protection has been issued by a court of another 
state or a Native American tribe and is in effect; or 
 
if younger than age 30 at the time of possession, has been adjudicated delinquent by 
a juvenile court for an act that would be a disqualifying crime if committed by an 
adult. 
 
In addition, a person is prohibited from possessing a regulated firearm if the person (1) was 
previously convicted of a crime of violence, a violation of specified controlled dangerous 
substances laws, or an offense under the laws of another state or the United States that 
would constitute one of these crimes if committed in this State; (2) has been convicted on 
or after October 1, 2023, of a second or subsequent violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal 
Law Article (child’s access to firearms), or has been convicted on or after October 1, 2023, 
of a violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article if the violation resulted in the use of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 947/ Page 6 
a loaded firearm by a minor causing death or serious bodily injury to the minor or another 
person; or (3) unless the person was not convicted of but received only probation before 
judgment for an offense, is on supervised probation after being convicted of a crime 
punishable by imprisonment for one year or more, for a violation of § 21-902(b) or (c) of 
the Transportation Article (driving while impaired), or for violating a protective order 
under § 4-509 of the Family Law Article. Further, a person who has been convicted on or 
after October 1, 2023, of a violation of § 4-104 of the Criminal Law Article may not possess 
a regulated firearm for five years following the date of the conviction.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  OAG advises that it lacks sufficient personnel to bring, 
manage, and litigate claims under the bill and that it estimates the need for one assistant 
Attorney General and one paralegal, with estimated general fund expenditures of 
$207,816 in fiscal 2025 (which assumes a hiring date of October 1, 2024), and at least 
$252,200 annually thereafter. However, OAG acknowledges that the need for staff depends 
on how many civil actions are actually filed. The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
advises it is unable to reliably predict the extent to which civil actions may be filed (and 
the corresponding need for any additional staff). It is likely that a small number of 
additional actions can be accommodated without hiring new staff; however, to the extent 
that OAG uses its authority under the bill to pursue more robust enforcement of violations, 
general fund expenditures increase. For illustrative purposes only, general fund 
expenditures associated with the hiring of one assistant Attorney General total 
approximately $140,000 annually. Although the bill takes effect June 1, 2024, it is assumed 
that any potential expenditures are not incurred until fiscal 2025.  
 
OAG can complete the required study and report with existing budgeted resources. DSP 
can consult with OAG on the required study with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Although the bill may result in additional civil actions filed, the bill is not anticipated to 
materially impact the workloads of the circuit courts and the District Court.  
 
Local expenditures may increase in any jurisdiction that uses the authority granted under 
the bill to bring actions against firearm industry members. 
 
Because OAG, a county attorney, or the Baltimore City Solicitor may seek specified relief 
under the bill, including compensatory and punitive damages and reasonable attorney’s 
fees and costs, general fund and local revenues may increase to the extent that such relief 
is awarded by the courts and allocated to the State or a local jurisdiction. However, DLS is 
unable to reliably estimate the magnitude of any potential revenues in advance. This 
analysis does not account for how (or if) any such awards received by the State or a local 
jurisdiction may be further directed to other entities. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 947/ Page 7 
Small Business Effect:  The bill has a potential meaningful effect on small businesses that 
encounter additional litigation, liability, and potential increased costs for insurance 
coverage as a result of the bill’s provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 259 and SB 113 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 488 (Senators Waldstreicher and Smith) - Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - April 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 7, 2024 
 
md/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7