START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 983

Chapter 983

(House Bill 960)

AN ACT concerning

City of Frederick – Assignment of Offenders to Road Work – Repeal

FOR the purpose of repealing provisions relating to the assignment of offenders guilty of
violating municipal laws or ordinances to work on the public roads of Frederick
County or the City of Frederick; and generally relating to penalties for the violation
of municipal law or ordinance in the City of Frederick.

BY repealing
Article – Correctional Services
Section 9–518
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

[9–518.

(a) This section applies only in the City of Frederick.

(b) A District Court judge who tries and commits a vagrant or other offender of a
municipal law or ordinance, whenever practicable, shall assign the offender to work on the
public roads of the county or City of Frederick.

(c) The Sheriff or other officer into whose custody an offender is committed under
this section shall comply with the court’s order of assignment.

(d) (1) An offender ordered by the court to work on the public roads of the City
shall be guarded by the superintendent of streets or by any other individual deputized by
the Sheriff.

(2) An offender ordered by the court to work on the public roads of the
county shall be guarded by the road supervisor of the district in which the offender works.

(e) For the purpose of guarding offenders employed in accordance with a court
order issued under subsection (b) of this section, the Sheriff may deputize the
superintendent of streets, the district road supervisor, or any other individual to take
charge of the offenders.]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 983 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2