START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 219

Chapter 219

(House Bill 971)

AN ACT concerning

~~Public~~ ~~Schools~~ Washington County – Interscholastic Athletics – Student
Eligibility Waiver and School Classification

FOR the purpose of authorizing ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~board~~ ~~of~~ ~~education~~ the Washington County Board
of Education to waive a certain eligibility requirement for participation in
interscholastic athletics at a certain Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic
Association member school for students who attend certain public high schools;
requiring ~~a~~ ~~county~~ ~~superintendent~~ ~~of~~ ~~schools~~ the Washington County
Superintendent of Schools to report to the Maryland Public Secondary Schools
Athletic Association the school enrollment of certain schools in a certain manner;
and generally relating to interscholastic athletics at public schools in Washington
County.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section ~~7–135~~ 4–142
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

~~7–135.~~ 4–142.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “MEMBER SCHOOL” MEANS A PUBLIC SCHOOL THAT IS A MEMBER
OF THE MARYLAND PUBLIC SECONDARY SCHOOLS ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION.

(3) “ZONED HIGH SCHOOL” MEANS THE PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOL THAT
A STUDENT WOULD BE REQUIRED TO ATTEND UNDER THE REGULATIONS OF THE
COUNTY BOARD.

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN WASHINGTON COUNTY.

(C) FOR A STUDENT TO PARTICIPATE IN INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETICS AT
THE HIGH SCHOOL LEVEL UNDER COMAR 13A.06.03.02, A COUNTY BOARD THE
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 219 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

WASHINGTON COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION MAY WAIVE THE ELIGIBILITY
REQUIREMENT THAT THE STUDENT BE ENROLLED AT AND ATTEND A MEMBER
SCHOOL IF:

(1) THE STUDENT ATTENDS A PUBLIC SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY THAT
IS NOT THE STUDENT’S ZONED HIGH SCHOOL;

(2) THE PUBLIC SCHOOL THE STUDENT ATTENDS UNDER ITEM (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT HAVE AN INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETICS PROGRAM;
AND

(3) THE STUDENT MEETS ALL OTHER ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
ESTABLISHED BY THE COUNTY BOARD AND THE MARYLAND PUBLIC SECONDARY
SCHOOLS ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION.

(C) (D) A STUDENT WHO RECEIVES AN ELIGIBILITY WAIVER UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION MAY ONLY PARTICIPATE IN INTERSCHOLASTIC
ATHLETICS AT THE STUDENT’S ZONED HIGH SCHOOL.

(D) (E) FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING THE CLASSIFICATION OF
MEMBER SCHOOLS FOR ATHLETIC CONTESTS UNDER COMAR 13A.06.03.06, THE
COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT WASHINGTON COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS
SHALL REPORT TO THE MARYLAND PUBLIC SECONDARY SCHOOLS ATHLETIC
ASSOCIATION AS THE ACTUAL ENROLLMENT OF THE MEMBER SCHOOL:

(1) THE ACTUAL SCHOOL ENROLLMENT OF THE MEMBER SCHOOL IN
GRADES 9, 10, AND 11 AS OF SEPTEMBER 30 OF EACH EVEN–NUMBERED YEAR; PLUS

(2) THE ACTUAL NUMBER OF STUDENTS AUTHORIZED TO
PARTICIPATE IN INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETICS AT THE MEMBER SCHOOL UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2