START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 700

Chapter 700

(House Bill 967)

AN ACT concerning

Town of Keedysville – Parking of Vehicles – Restrictions

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from parking certain vehicles in the Town of
Keedysville, Washington County; and generally relating to the parking of vehicles in
the Town of Keedysville, Washington County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 21–1011
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

21–1011.

(a) (1) This section applies:

(i) To a vehicle registered or capable of being registered:

1. Other than under § 13–917 of this article, as a Class E
(truck) vehicle under this article;

2. As a Class F (tractor) vehicle under this article;

3. As a Class G (trailer) vehicle under this article;

4. As a Class H (school bus) vehicle under this article; and

5. As a Class P (passenger bus) vehicle under this article; and

(ii) Only in [the]:

1. THE Town of Sharpsburg, Washington County; AND

2. THE TOWN OF KEEDYSVILLE, WASHINGTON COUNTY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 700 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) This section does not apply to any vehicle that is of a type capable of
being registered:

(i) As a Class A (passenger) vehicle under § 13–912 of this article;
or

(ii) As a Class E (truck) vehicle under § 13–917 of this article.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, a person may
not park a vehicle on any street or highway.

(2) This subsection does not apply if the parking of the vehicle is essential
to the immediate use then being made of the vehicle.

(c) (1) In the case of a combination tractor and trailer, a person who violates
this section is subject to a separate fine for each vehicle.

(2) For the purpose of determining the penalty under this section, each day
of a violation is a separate offense.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2