START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 906 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
House Bill 906 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Garrett County – Sheriff’s Salary – Alteration 
 
 
This bill establishes that the salary of the Garrett County Sheriff is equal to 80% of the 
salary of the State’s Attorney of Garrett County. The bill also repeals the requirement for 
the Garrett County Salary Study Commission to study the salary of the county sheriff. 
Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the salary increase takes effect at the beginning of 
the next term of office.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Garrett County expenditures increase by a minimum of $32,700 in FY 2027 
and by at least $56,100 annually thereafter. Local revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to statute, the Sheriff of Garrett County receives an annual salary 
set by the county commissioners in accordance with Chapter 91 of the Public Local Laws 
of Garrett County. The Garrett County Salary Study Commission is charged with studying 
the salaries of specified public officials in the county (including the sheriff) and may 
recommend to the county commissioners an increase or decrease in the salary of the 
State’s Attorney, or any office it is required to study. Within 45 days after receiving the 
recommendations of the commission, the county commissioners may accept, reduce, or 
reject the salary recommendations but may not increase them. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 906/ Page 2 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public official from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Garrett County advises that the current salary of the Garrett County 
State’s Attorney is set at 80% of the salary of a judge of the District Court. Garrett County 
expenditures therefore increase by a minimum of $32,700 in fiscal 2027 and by at least 
$56,100 annually thereafter. This estimate (1) is based on the fiscal 2026 salary of a 
District Court judge ($201,333), as discussed below; (2) assumes the salary of the 
State’s Attorney remains tied to the salary of a District Court judge; (3) is based on the 
current salary of the Sheriff ($85,000), as reported by Garrett County; (4) accounts for the 
next term of office beginning December 2026; and (5) includes fringe benefits.  
 
Joint Resolutions 2 and 3 of the 2022 session, which implemented the recommendations 
of the Judicial Compensation Commission, set judicial salaries through fiscal 2026. Salary 
increases in future years are dependent on the recommendations submitted by the 
Judicial Compensation Commission when it next meets in 2025 (and subsequent action by 
the General Assembly pertaining to the recommendations). Expenditures increase beyond 
the estimate shown to the extent that judicial salaries further increase, thereby 
correspondingly increasing the salary of the State’s Attorney and the Sheriff.       
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 521 (Senator McKay) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 19, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2