START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 990 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 990 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions - Manufacturers 
 
   
This bill makes State greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction requirements apply to 
the production of cement by altering the definition of “manufacturing” for purposes of the 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act (GGRA). The Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) must make specified considerations and consult with specified 
stakeholders related to the regulation of the production of cement. The bill also alters 
provisions related to the regulation of GHG emissions reductions by other manufacturers 
under the Act, as described below.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE advises that it can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources, including any actions related to considering and/or adopting 
regulations. The State may experience higher costs for cement on State construction 
projects, but any such increase has no effect on total spending under the capital budget, 
which is determined annually by the Governor and the General Assembly through the 
capital budget process. Any increase in capital project costs may result in fewer projects 
receiving funding each year. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments may experience higher costs for cement on construction 
projects. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 990/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Production of Cement 
 
As part of the consideration of any regulation of the production of cement under the bill, 
MDE must consider (1) the extent to which cement manufacturing is an energy-intensive 
and trade-exposed industry; (2) credit for early action investments made by cement 
producers to reduce emissions or for the manufacturing of alternative materials that result 
in GHG emissions reductions; (3) the adoption of policies that encourage, facilitate, and 
offer financial incentives for the use of alternative fuel sources; (4) the availability and cost 
of mature GHG abatement technologies; and (5) advancing policies that provide financial 
incentives to offset the costs of installing and transitioning to GHG emissions abatement 
technologies, including the manufacturing of materials and technology that results in GHG 
emissions reductions. In considering the feasibility of regulation and the topics listed 
above, MDE must consult with impacted cement producers and other stakeholders.   
 
Other Manufacturing  
 
Existing provisions under GGRA that limit GHG emissions reductions and cost increases 
for the manufacturing sector are modified to apply only to persons who engaged in 
manufacturing in 2023 and to apply to specific manufacturers. Other related provisions are 
unchanged. More specifically, for persons who engaged in manufacturing in 2023, unless 
required by federal law or regulations or existing State law, regulations adopted by State 
agencies to implement a final GHG reduction plan may not: 
 
 
require any manufacturer to reduce GHG emissions below the emissions levels for 
that manufacturer in 2023; 
 
cause an increase in costs to a manufacturer that are significantly beyond the costs 
that were incurred by that manufacturer in 2023; or 
 
require any manufacturer that is engaged in the creation of renewable energy 
components or technology aimed at GHG emissions reductions to reduce GHG 
emissions. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Treatment of Manufacturers under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act 
 
Under GGRA, unless required by federal law or regulations or existing State law, 
regulations adopted by State agencies to implement a final GHG reduction plan may not: 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 990/ Page 3 
 
require GHG emissions reductions from the State’s manufacturing sector; or 
 
cause a significant increase in costs to the State’s manufacturing sector. 
 
However, the above requirements may not be construed to exempt GHG emissions sources 
in the State’s manufacturing sector from the obligation to comply with (1) GHG emissions 
monitoring, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements or (2) GHG emissions reductions 
required of the manufacturing sector as a result of the State’s implementation of the 
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). 
 
“Manufacturing” means the process of substantially transforming, or a substantial step in 
the process of substantially transforming, tangible personal property into a new and 
different article of tangible personal property by the use of labor or machinery. When 
performed by companies primarily engaged in the activities described above, 
manufacturing includes (1) the operation of saw mills, grain mills, or feed mills; (2) the 
operation of machinery and equipment used to extract and process minerals, metals, or 
earthen materials or by-products that result from the extracting or processing; and  
(3) research and development activities. 
 
“Manufacturing” does not include (1) activities that are primarily a service; (2) activities 
that are intellectual, artistic, or clerical in nature; (3) public utility services, including gas, 
electric, water, and steam production services; or (4) other activity that would not 
commonly be considered as manufacturing.  
 
The Maryland Department of the Environment’s Climate Change Program 
 
MDE’s Climate Change Program leads the State’s efforts to reduce GHG emissions, as 
required by GGRA and participation and oversight in other initiatives, including RGGI and 
the U.S. Climate Alliance. The program also ensures State compliance with climate-related 
State and federal laws, such as the Climate Solutions Now Act (Chapter 38 of 2022), 
discussed below. 
 
The U.S. Climate Alliance is a bipartisan coalition of governors, including the Governor 
of Maryland, committed to reducing GHG emissions consistent with the goals of the Paris 
Agreement. These goals include reducing collective net GHG emissions by at least 26% to 
28% by 2025 and by 50% to 52% by 2030 (both below 2005 levels) and collectively 
achieving overall net-zero GHG emissions as soon as practicable, but no later than 2050.  
 
Maryland also participates in the multi-state RGGI in order to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) 
emissions from the power sector. Each participating state limits CO2 emissions from 
electric power plants, issues CO2 allowances, and establishes participation in CO2 
allowance auctions. A single CO2 allowance represents a limited authorization to emit one 
ton of CO2.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 990/ Page 4 
Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program 
and the implementing Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) to decrease energy 
demand and increase energy supply to promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. SEIF 
is primarily funded through the proceeds from the auction of carbon allowances under 
RGGI. 
 
Maryland Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Targets and the Climate Solutions Now  
Act 
 
Chapter 38 made broad changes to the State’s approach to reducing statewide GHG 
emissions and addressing climate change. Among other things, the Act accelerated 
previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets originally established under GGRA 
by requiring the State to develop plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to 
(1) reduce GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero 
statewide GHG emissions by 2045. In December 2023, MDE published Maryland’s 
Climate Pollution Reduction Plan, which was developed to implement Chapter 38. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that engaged in manufacturing in 2023, with 
limited exceptions specified in the bill, are subject to modified requirements related to 
emissions levels and cost increases. Small businesses that did not engage in manufacturing 
in 2023 – for example, businesses formed in 2025 – are subject to GHG emissions 
reductions requirements like other businesses. Any small businesses that use significant 
volumes of cement may experience increased costs, as GHG abatement costs for the State’s 
large cement manufacturers are passed on to customers.  
 
Additional Comments:  Chapter 11 of 2016 required the Maryland Commission on 
Climate Change to oversee an independent study of the economic impact of requiring GHG 
emissions reductions from the State manufacturing sector. The report notes that the 
manufacturing sector accounted for 10% of statewide GHG emissions in 2020, with cement 
production being the largest single contributor in the sector and two cement plants being 
the highest-emitting facilities in the State.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 990/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Environmental Service; 
Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, and St. Mary’s counties; City of Greenbelt; Town of La Plata; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Center for Global 
Sustainability; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5