START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 902 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 902 
(Delegate Ghrist, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
 
Prekindergarten - Ulysses Currie Head Start Program - Eligibility for State 
Funds 
 
 
This bill establishes that a provider in the Ulysses Currie Head Start Program is eligible to 
receive full State funds under the full-day prekindergarten program, even if the program 
receives federal funds. Also, an eligible prekindergarten provider in the Ulysses Currie 
Head Start Program is exempted from including specified structural elements that are 
evidence-based and nationally recognized as important for ensuring program quality, in 
order to qualify for full-day prekindergarten funding, if a structural element under that 
program conflicts with a federal requirement for the Ulysses Currie Head Start Program. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  For reasons discussed below, State expenditures are not materially affected. 
State revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The county government share of the full-day prekindergarten 
program is not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Head Start 
 
The Head Start program aims to promote the school readiness of low-income children by 
enhancing their cognitive, social, and emotional development. Funding for Head Start 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 902/ Page 2 
comes largely from the federal government, although the State provides supplemental 
funding – required to be at least $3.0 million annually. State funding may be used for the 
expansion and improvement of services, including expanding the hours of services, 
increasing the number of children served, and developing quality improvement measures 
such as staff development and program improvement. 
 
Federal regulations (45 CFR Part 1302) specify requirements that providers must meet 
under Head Start. This includes, among numerous other provisions, requirements related 
to Head Start center group size and staff-to-child ratios, staff qualifications and competency 
requirements, training and professional development, the teaching and learning 
environment, full participation of children with disabilities, community partnerships, and 
program management and quality improvement. 
 
Publicly Funded Full-day Prekindergarten 
 
Chapter 36 of 2021 established a new funding formula providing for voluntary 
full-day prekindergarten for four-year-olds and three-year-olds from low-income families 
(Tier  I). Chapter 119 of 2023 added homeless youths to Tier I. “Low-income” is defined 
as at or below 300% of the federal poverty level. The Maryland State Department of 
Education (MSDE) must develop a sliding scale to calculate the family share for families 
with income above 300% of the federal poverty level. Beginning in the  
2024-2025 school year (fiscal 2025), four-year-olds from families whose income is 
between 300% and 600% of the federal poverty level (Tier II) may be offered full-day 
prekindergarten if space is available to encourage socioeconomic diversity in 
prekindergarten classrooms. Priority in expanding full-day prekindergarten slots is given 
to three- and four-year-olds who are (1) Tier I children; (2) children with disabilities, 
regardless of income; or (3) children from homes where English is not the primary spoken 
language. For four-year-olds from families with income above 600% (Tier III), the family 
share covers the full cost of full-day prekindergarten. However, a local board may provide 
up to 100% of the family share on behalf of the family. A Head Start provider that receives 
federal funds is not prohibited from receiving full-day prekindergarten funding. 
 
Prekindergarten Provider Structural Elements 
 
Under the full-day prekindergarten program, all eligible prekindergarten providers must 
include structural elements that are evidence-based and nationally recognized as important 
for ensuring program quality. Structural elements that eligible prekindergarten providers 
must include are:   
 
 
beginning in the 2027-2028 school year, specified high staff qualifications; 
 
professional development for all staff; 
 
a student-to-classroom personnel ratio of no more than 10- to-1 in each class; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 902/ Page 3 
 
class sizes of no more than 20 students per classroom; 
 
a full-day prekindergarten program (an early learning program with a 
6.5-hour school day); 
 
inclusion of students with disabilities to ensure access to and full participation in all 
program opportunities; 
 
for at least one year before a student’s enrollment in kindergarten, learning 
environments that meet certain criteria; 
 
individualized accommodations and supports for all students; 
 
instructional staff salaries and benefits that are comparable to the salaries and 
benefits of instructional staff employed by the local board of the county in which 
the early learning program is located; 
 
program evaluation to ensure continuous program improvement; 
 
on-site or accessible comprehensive services for students; 
 
community partnerships that promote access to comprehensive services for families 
of students; and 
 
evidence-based health and safety standards. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that, under the bill, a conflict which qualifies 
for exemption of a full-day prekindergarten structural element entails either (1) an element 
required by the Maryland full-day prekindergarten program that is prohibited under federal 
Head Start requirements or (2) an element prohibited by the Maryland full-day 
prekindergarten program that is required under federal Head Start requirements. Following 
a review of the federal Head Start regulations discussed above, the Department of 
Legislative Services is not at this time able to identify any such clear conflict under the bill 
between federal Head Start requirements and the State full-day prekindergarten structural 
elements listed above. Similarly, MSDE advises that none of the structural elements, if 
applied to a Head Start program in the State, would constitute a definitive violation of 
federal Head Start requirements. 
 
However, despite the absence of clear conflicts, the standards for the two programs do 
differ. This may require a Head Start program to meet additional requirements beyond 
those necessary to qualify for the Head Start program in order to also qualify for the 
Maryland full-day prekindergarten program. One such example is teacher qualifications. 
Starting in the 2027-2028 school year, to qualify for the Maryland full-day prekindergarten 
program, a teacher must either hold State certification in early childhood education or be 
pursuing residency through the Maryland Approved Alternative Preparation Program, 
which includes early childhood coursework and clinical practice. While the Head Start Act 
and Program Performance Standards mandate that center-based teachers have at least an 
associate or bachelor’s degree in child development or early childhood education, or 
equivalent coursework, they are not required to have or be working toward a teaching 
certificate. In this case, to qualify for the Maryland full-day prekindergarten program, a 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 902/ Page 4 
Head Start program would need to hire a teacher who meets both the requirements for the 
federal Head Start program and the Maryland full-day prekindergarten program. 
 
Regardless, under current State and federal law, it is assumed that the bill is largely 
clarifying and that no exemptions are provided under it. Accordingly, the bill does not 
materially affect the number of providers or related slots available for funding under the 
State full-day prekindergarten program. Because the bill also does not alter the $3.0 million 
minimum annual funding for the Ulysses Currie Head Start Program, it is assumed that the 
bill does not materially affect State expenditures for either the Ulysses Currie Head Start 
Program or the full-day prekindergarten program. The bill does not alter State revenues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4