START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 971 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 971 
(Delegates Grossman and Wims) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Washington County - Interscholastic Athletics - Student Eligibility Waiver and 
School Classification 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Washington County Board of Education to waive the eligibility 
requirement for high school interscholastic athletics that the student be enrolled at and 
attend a member school if (1) the student attends a public school in the county that is not 
the student’s zoned school, (2) the public school the student attends does not have an 
interscholastic athletics program, and (3) the student meets all other eligibility 
requirements established by the county board of education and the Maryland Public 
Secondary Schools Athletic Association (MPSSAA). For purposes of determining the 
enrollment-based classification of member schools for athletics contests, the 
Washington County Superintendent of Schools must report to MPSSAA as the actual 
enrollment of a member school, the actual enrollment of grades 9 through 11 as of 
September 30 of each even-numbered year plus the actual number of students authorized 
to participate at the member school under the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill authorizes, but does not require, the Washington County 
Board of Education to waive specified interscholastic athletics requirements. To the extent 
that the board uses its waiver authority, local finances are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 971/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State regulations under the Maryland State Department of Education 
govern the athletic programs for all high school students in Maryland public secondary 
schools, which are members of MPSSAA. Local school systems may adopt rules governing 
their athletic programs that are more restrictive than those of MPSSAA. 
 
Students must be officially registered and attending the member MPSSAA school they are 
authorized to attend under regulations of the local school system. They may represent only 
the school in which they are registered and at which it is anticipated they will complete 
their graduation requirements. 
 
For the purpose of parity in competition in meets and tournaments administered by 
MPSSAA, member schools are divided into classifications based on enrollment. If, in this 
calculation, two or more schools with equal enrollments fall between two classifications, 
they are placed in the lower classification. Each local superintendent of schools must 
submit to MPSSAA a report on the actual school enrollment of students in grades 9 through 
11 in each of the member MPSSAA schools as of September 30, in each even-numbered 
year. The MPSSAA Executive Director and Classification Committee must present a 
recommendation for classification of member schools for each MPSSAA-administered 
sport to the MPSSAA Board of Control for adoption. Classification is determined every 
two years based on the September 30 enrollment of the previous year and remains in effect 
for two years.  
 
A new member MPSSAA school that opens or a member school whose enrollment is 
significantly changed by growth or consolidation during the two-year period is placed in 
the proper classification by the Classification Committee. When a member MPSSAA 
school does not have all three grades included in the enrollment figures upon which the 
classification is based in the even-numbered year, but will have all three grades in the 
following odd-numbered year when classification becomes effective, the enrollment figure 
includes the existing grades and average of the current class sizes applied to each projected 
grade. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes, but does not require, the Washington County 
Board of Education to waive specified interscholastic athletics requirements. Because any 
such waiver is at the discretion of the board, any local administrative costs or costs related 
to transportation of students to and from athletic practices as a result of a waiver are 
voluntary, and thus avoidable. 
 
MPSSAA notes that the bill sets a different standard of participation for interscholastic 
athletics that is less restrictive for Washington County as compared to other counties in the 
State. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 971/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 851 (Senators Corderman and McKay) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Washington County 
Public Schools; Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3