START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 631

Chapter 631

(House Bill 983)

AN ACT concerning

State Personnel – Maryland Department of Health – Pay Rates

FOR the purpose of increasing the number of certain bargaining units for the purpose of
specifying certain pay rates for certain Maryland Department of Health employees;
requiring that the pay rates for certain employees of the Department who are in
certain bargaining units and who work at ~~the~~ ~~Regional~~ ~~Institutes~~ ~~for~~ ~~Children~~ ~~and~~
~~Adolescents~~ certain facilities be ~~equal~~ ~~set~~ ~~at~~ ~~or~~ ~~calculated~~ ~~at~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~rate~~ ~~compared~~
equal to certain pay rates of the employees who work at Clifton T. Perkins Hospital;
and generally relating to the pay rates of employees of the Maryland Department of
Health.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 8–203(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

8–203.

(a) (1) This subsection applies to employees in the Maryland Department of
Health who:

(i) have direct contact with patients; and

(ii) are in a position classified in one of the following bargaining
units:

1. Bargaining Unit D for Health and Human Services
Non–Professionals;

2. Bargaining Unit E for Health Care Professionals;

3. Bargaining Unit F for Social and Human Services
Professionals; [or]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 631 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. BARGAINING UNIT G FOR ENGINEERING,
SCIENTIFIC, AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROFESSIONALS CLASSIFIED AS A TEACHER OR
A LIBRARIAN; OR

5. Bargaining Unit H for Public Safety and Security
Personnel.

(2) The pay rate for an employee at the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital who is
not receiving a forensic pay premium shall be at least two grades higher than the
employee’s pay rate effective June 30, 2020.

(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the pay rate for an
employee in the Behavioral Health Administration or the Developmental Disabilities
Administration shall be equal to A PAY RATE TWO GRADES HIGHER OR CALCULATED
AT THE EQUIVALENT OF TWO GRADES HIGHER THAN the pay rate effective July 1, 2020,
for similarly trained, qualified, or licensed employees at the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital if
the employee works at:

(I) a facility that had a forensic admission rate greater than 75% for
the immediately preceding fiscal year; OR

(II) THE REGIONAL INSTITUTES FOR CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS – BALTIMORE AND ROCKVILLE.

(4) This subsection may not be construed to decrease the pay rate of any
employee.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2