START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 991 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 991 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Agriculture - Food Processing Residuals Utilization Permit - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a regulatory program in the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA) related to the “utilization” of “food processing residuals.” Specifically, the bill 
requires a person to obtain a permit from MDA before the person may utilize food 
processing residuals in the State and establishes related requirements and enforcement 
provisions. MDA must set reasonable fees to cover the department’s costs of administering 
the program, which are held in a newly established Food Processing Residuals 
Administration Fund. The bill also authorizes MDA to administer a certification program 
for individuals who haul food processing residuals. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly by 
$481,700 in FY 2025. Future years reflect ongoing costs and inflation as well as ongoing 
fee revenues to cover costs. General fund revenues increase beginning in FY 2025 due to 
interest earnings and any penalty revenues, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$481,700 
$333,000 
$347,300 
$362,600 
$378,000 
SF Expenditure 
$481,700 
$333,000 
$347,300 
$362,600 
$378,000 
Net Effect 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 991/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Food Processing Residuals 
 
The bill establishes a new subtitle, Subtitle 8A (“Food Processing Residuals”), under 
Title 8 of the Agriculture Article, governing utilization of food processing residuals.  
 
“Food processing residuals” means an organic material that is (1) generated by processing 
agricultural commodities for human or animal consumption and includes food residuals, 
food coproducts, food processing wastes, food processing sludges, or any other incidental 
material whose characteristics are derived from processing agricultural products for human 
consumption or animal consumption and (2) registered with the State Chemist as a soil 
conditioner. 
 
“Utilize” means (1) handling or storing food processing residuals or using food processing 
residuals for land application and (2) transporting food processing residuals to or from a 
generator of food processing residuals to or from an agricultural operation. 
 
“Agricultural operation” means each physical site where a person engages in a business 
that: 
 
 
grows, raises, keeps, pastures, or otherwise produces a farm product; and 
 
has (1) a gross annual income of $2,500 or more or (2) eight or more animal units. 
 
Permit 
 
Under the new subtitle, a person must obtain a permit from MDA before the person may 
utilize food processing residuals in the State. A permit is required for each site where the 
person utilizes food processing residuals. A permit authorizes the permit holder to utilize 
food processing residuals in conjunction with an agricultural operation in accordance with 
the subtitle, regulations adopted under the subtitle, and the terms of the permit. 
 
The bill defines an “applicant” for a permit as (1) the owner or operator of an agricultural 
operation or (2) a commercial broker or commercial hauler who has contracted with the 
owner or operator of an agricultural operation to have food processing residuals utilized at 
that location. 
 
“Commercial broker” means a person who (1) for commercial purposes, assumes 
temporary control of food processing residuals from an agricultural operation or a food 
processing plant and transports or arranges the transport of this material to an importing 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 991/ Page 3 
agricultural operation and (2) is not working for or under the control of an agricultural 
operation. 
 
“Commercial hauler” means a person that is engaged in the business of hauling, 
transporting, moving, or land-applying food processing residuals as a contract agent for a 
farm operator, commercial broker, or food processing plant under the direction of the 
operator, broker, or processing plant. 
 
Requirements That Must Be Met to Utilize Food Processing Residuals 
 
A person may not utilize food processing residuals in conjunction with an agricultural 
operation unless: 
 
 
the person has a permit; 
 
the owner or operator of the agricultural operation (1) has a nutrient management 
plan that meets State law requirements and (2) is in compliance with the plan; 
 
the food processing residuals being utilized are (1) registered with the State Chemist 
and (2) applied in accordance with the nutrient management plan; 
 
if the person is not the owner or operator of the agricultural operation, the person 
has obtained the owner or operator’s consent to utilize food processing residuals in 
conjunction with the agricultural operation; 
 
if the agricultural operation is subject to a Maryland Department of the Environment 
(MDE) permit to discharge pollutants into waters of the State, the owner or operator 
of the agricultural operation is in compliance with all laws, regulations, and permits 
governing those permitted activities; and 
 
for storage of food processing residuals, the person has obtained any necessary 
county approval or permits to store material at the agricultural operation. 
 
Permit Applications 
 
A permit applicant must, among other things: 
 
 
at least 45 days before utilizing the food processing residuals, submit an application 
to MDA on the form that the department requires; 
 
pay any associated application fees; 
 
provide the name and address of any source of food processing residuals that will 
be utilized and specified information about any storage structure at the site where 
the food processing residuals will be stored; 
 
obtain written consent of the owner or operator of the land where the food 
processing residuals will be utilized, as specified; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 991/ Page 4 
 
agree to allow or secure access to any utilization site for inspections, as specified; 
and 
 
provide MDA with acceptable evidence of a performance bond or other security, as 
specified, to guarantee the fulfillment of any permit requirement. 
 
Notice to Local Officials 
 
Within 10 days after receiving a permit application that includes storing food processing 
residuals in conjunction with an agricultural operation, MDA must provide notice by mail 
to the chair of the legislative body and any elected executive in the county where the food 
processing residuals will be stored. 
 
Issuance of Permits 
 
MDA may issue a permit to an applicant that satisfies the subtitle’s requirements. MDA 
may not issue a permit to an applicant if it determines that an applicant cannot utilize food 
processing residuals without (1) causing undue risk to the environment or public health, 
safety, or welfare or (2) otherwise violating the subtitle. 
 
Permit Terms and Renewals 
 
A permit expires on the date MDA sets at the time the permit is issued or renewed, but the 
term of a permit may not be more than one year. MDA may renew a permit if the permit 
holder (1) is in compliance with the subtitle, regulations established by MDA, the 
conditions of the permit, and an applicable MDE permit to discharge pollutants into waters 
of the State; (2) submits a renewal application to MDA; and (3) pays a renewal application 
fee. 
 
MDA may refuse to renew a permit if (1) the permit holder violates the subtitle, any 
regulation adopted under the subtitle, or any permit condition; (2) MDA determines that 
continued operation of any area covered by the permit would be injurious to the 
environment or public health, safety, or welfare; or (3) MDA determines that there is any 
other good cause. 
 
Maintaining a Permit in Good Standing 
 
To maintain a permit in good standing, a permit holder must meet several requirements. In 
addition to complying with any other requirement set by MDA, a permit holder must: 
 
 
maintain a performance bond or other security in the amount considered by MDA 
to be sufficient to guarantee the fulfillment of any requirement related to the permit; 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 991/ Page 5 
 
ensure that food processing residuals are utilized in accordance with (1) specified 
requirements of the subtitle (see “Requirements That Must Be Met to Utilize Food 
Processing Residuals,” above) and (2) good husbandry and sound agronomic 
practices; 
 
allow a representative of the department, seeking to inspect a site, entry to any area 
covered by the permit; 
 
keep records regarding the utilization of food processing residuals, including daily 
records of the source and amount of food processing residuals in each truckload 
delivered to a site; 
 
take samples as required by MDA; and 
 
provide to MDA or the relevant local health official any information MDA requires. 
 
Inspections and Enforcement 
 
To enforce the subtitle and to ensure compliance with a permit, an MDA representative 
may enter and inspect, at any reasonable time, any site where food processing residuals are 
utilized. A permit holder (or other person at a site) may not refuse access or interfere with 
any inspection. After an inspection, MDA must issue a stop work order or other order if 
necessary to obtain compliance. 
 
MDA may suspend, revoke, or modify a permit in accordance with the Administrative 
Procedure Act (APA) if MDA finds that any of several specified conditions exist, including 
that there is or has been a violation of the subtitle, any regulation adopted under the subtitle, 
or any permit condition. 
 
MDA may also bring an action to enjoin the violation of any law, regulation, or order 
concerning the utilization of food processing residuals under the subtitle. The right to bring 
such an action is in addition to and not instead of the right to bring any other action under 
the subtitle, and the department may not be required to furnish bond. The court must issue 
a preliminary injunction if it finds that the permit holder is (1) engaging in unlawful 
conduct in violation of the subtitle or (2) engaged in conduct which is causing immediate 
and irreparable harm to the public. 
 
In addition to any other action authorized under the subtitle, MDA may impose 
administrative penalties of up to $5,000 per day, not to exceed $50,000 in total penalties, 
for a violation of the subtitle, regulations adopted under the subtitle, or any permit 
condition. Specified considerations, including the willfulness of the violation, must be 
taken into account in assessing the penalty. 
 
Existing criminal (misdemeanor) penalties under the Agriculture Article also apply to 
violations of the subtitle or regulations adopted under it, as follows:  (1) a fine of up to 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 991/ Page 6 
$500 and/or imprisonment for up to three months for a first offense; and (2) a fine of up to 
$1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a second or subsequent offense.  
 
Establishment of Fees and the Food Processing Residuals Administration Fund 
 
Under the new subtitle, MDA must set reasonable fees necessary to carry out its 
responsibilities regulating the utilization of food processing residuals. The fees charged 
must be set to produce funds to approximate the cost of administering MDA’s 
responsibilities regulating the utilization of food processing residuals.  
 
The bill establishes a Food Processing Residuals Administration Fund under the new 
subtitle and requires the fees collected by MDA under the subtitle to be distributed to the 
fund. The fund must be used exclusively to cover the costs of fulfilling MDA’s duties under 
Title 8 of the Agriculture Article (which is much broader than Subtitle 8A; however, the 
fund appears intended to be primarily used for the costs of regulating the utilization of food 
processing residuals under Subtitle 8A, since the fees must be set to produce funds to 
approximate those costs). The Secretary of Agriculture, or the secretary’s designee, must 
administer the fund. The accounts and transactions of the fund are subject to audit as 
provided in specified State law governing the auditing of units of State government by the 
Office of Legislative Audits.  
 
The bill establishes that any unspent portion of the fund may not be transferred or revert to 
the general fund but must remain in the fund. This analysis assumes, however, that  
(1) the State Treasurer, as the constitutional officer responsible for the deposit and 
disbursement of State funds, holds and invests money in the fund and (2) interest earnings 
of the fund are deposited in the general fund pursuant to § 6-226 of the State Finance and 
Procurement Article, which requires net interest on all State money allocated by the 
Treasurer to special funds or accounts to accrue to the general fund unless the special fund 
or account is specifically exempted from that requirement. 
 
Tonnage – Semiannual Statement and Records 
 
Each person issued a permit must submit to MDA (1) a semiannual written statement of 
the tonnage of food processing residuals utilized in conjunction with an agricultural 
operation in the State and (2) any other information MDA deems necessary in 
administering the regulatory program. The permit holder must keep records necessary or 
required by MDA to indicate accurately the tonnage of food processing residuals utilized, 
and MDA has the right to examine the records to verify any statement of tonnage. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 991/ Page 7 
Required Regulations 
 
MDA, in consultation with MDE, must adopt regulations to carry out the subtitle. The 
regulations may include, in addition to any other standards deemed necessary by MDA: 
 
 
adequate standards (1) for hauling food processing residuals and (2) governing the 
application and suitability of soil conditioners for land application; 
 
the crops that are to be grown on land on which food processing residuals may be 
applied; 
 
the character of nearby existing land uses; 
 
acceptable nutrient application rates, including rates for nitrogen, phosphorus, and 
heavy metals, consistent with recommendations published or accepted by MDA for 
nutrient management; 
 
reasonable buffer areas to separate any home or other property on which food 
processing residuals may be applied; and 
 
methods for calculating nutrient application rates that are limited by the nutrient 
requirements of the harvestable crop or cover crop. 
 
Commercial Hauler Certification Program 
 
The bill creates a second new subtitle, Subtitle 11 (“Commercial Hauler Certification 
Program”), under Title 8 of the Agriculture Article. 
 
Under the new subtitle, MDA may administer a commercial hauler certification program 
to certify individuals who haul food processing residuals. MDA may develop training and 
educational requirements, testing, and other criteria it deems necessary for certification. 
The training may address (1) applicable laws and regulations; (2) information necessary 
for understanding and following a nutrient management plan; and (3) specified best 
management practices. MDA, in consultation with MDE, may adopt regulations to carry 
out this subtitle. 
 
Current Law:  MDA regulates the land application of all soil amendments/conditioners 
(including food processing residuals) on agricultural land through its Nutrient Management 
Program. State law does not require MDA or MDE to issue permits related to the utilization 
of food processing residuals; however, statutory provisions similar to the bill exist with 
respect to sewage sludge utilization (SSU) permits issued by MDE, as discussed below. 
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture’s Nutrient Management Program 
 
Pursuant to the Water Quality Improvement Act of 1998, agricultural operations with 
$2,500 or more in gross annual income and livestock operations with 8,000 pounds or more 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 991/ Page 8 
of live animal weight must have and comply with a nutrient management plan for nitrogen 
and phosphorus. A nutrient management plan is prepared to manage the amount, 
placement, timing, and application of animal waste, commercial fertilizer, sludge, or other 
plant nutrients to prevent pollution by transport of bioavailable nutrients and to maintain 
productivity. Farmers are required to submit copies of their initial nutrient management 
plans to MDA, update plans before they expire, take new soil samples at least once every 
three years, obtain manure analyses (as appropriate) at least every other year, and submit 
annual implementation reports documenting how they implement their plans. 
 
In general, MDA’s Nutrient Management Program regulates the land application of all soil 
amendments/conditioners, responds to complaints related to land application and storage, 
and records sources of all imported and exported materials through farmer reporting on 
annual implementation reports. Guidelines for the application of soil conditioners, soil 
amendments, waste materials, or effluent on agricultural land (including State Chemist 
product registration) are included in the program’s Maryland Nutrient Management 
Manual.  
 
Maryland Department of the Environment’s Sewage Sludge Utilization Permit 
 
MDE is the primary agency that regulates the utilization of sewage sludge (biosolids). An 
SSU permit is required for any person who treats, composts, transports, stores, distributes, 
applies to land, incinerates, conducts innovative or research projects on, or disposes of 
sewage sludge in the State. A sewage sludge utilizer submits an application for an SSU 
permit to MDE. The application includes the results of soil and sewage sludge tests and 
other information used to ensure that all regulatory requirements are met. The utilization 
site is also inspected to ensure that the permit application is accurate. If the permit 
application meets the minimum requirements established under regulations (COMAR 
26.04.06), MDE must issue the permit with the applicable control measures. To support the 
administration of the SSU regulatory program, wastewater treatment plants are charged 
fees based on the amount of sewage sludge they generate and how it is utilized. 
 
State Expenditures:  Special fund expenditures increase by $481,733 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the costs for 
MDA to hire: 
 
 
two nutrient management specialists to (1) work with applicants to complete permit 
applications; (2) facilitate timely annual registration of food processing residuals 
with MDA’s State Chemist; (3) make site visits prior to, during, and after land 
application of food processing residuals; (4) monitor field conditions; and  
(5) respond to complaints; 
 
one assistant Attorney General to assist with and review permits, assist with 
enforcement actions, and provide any other legal advice; and 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 991/ Page 9 
 
one part-time contractual administrative specialist to assist existing administrative 
staff with administrative work under the program, including collection and 
processing of fees. 
 
The estimate is based on MDA’s indication of the level of staff needed, when accounting 
for the potential number of sites that will be permitted and the limited capacity of MDA’s 
existing staff to implement the permitting program. Based on the nutrient management 
annual implementation reports MDA receives, MDA indicates there are approximately 
55 farm operators that report utilizing food processing residuals and those operators likely 
each have more than one site that will need to be permitted. The estimate includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the purchase of two trucks, one for each 
nutrient management specialist), and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Regular Positions 
3.0 
Contractual Positions 
0.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$328,637 
Vehicles 
116,000 
Operating Expenses 
   37,096 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$481,733 
 
Future year expenditures reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
This estimate also does not account for any costs MDA may incur associated with 
administrative hearings under APA when suspending, revoking, or modifying a permit 
under the bill, which cannot be reliably estimated and have not been quantified. 
 
MDA expects to administer the Commercial Hauler Certification Program with existing 
resources. In addition, MDE can coordinate and consult with MDA as needed using 
existing resources. 
 
Any application of existing criminal penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not 
anticipated to materially affect State incarceration expenditures. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund (Food Processing Residuals Administration Fund) revenues 
are assumed, for the purposes of this estimate, to increase correspondingly with special 
fund expenditures (shown above), beginning in fiscal 2025, reflecting the collection of fees, 
pursuant to the authority provided by the bill, to cover MDA’s costs of administering its 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 991/ Page 10 
responsibilities regulating the utilization of food processing residuals. MDA expects to 
charge both permit fees and tonnage fees (using the tonnage reporting and recordkeeping 
required by the bill) in order to allocate the cost of the program among permit holders based 
on the amount of food processing residuals utilized. To the extent that, in practice, there 
are unspent revenues in any fiscal year, the revenues remain in the fund (and available to 
the program to cover costs in the next fiscal year) and do not revert to the general fund. 
 
General fund revenues increase as a result of (1) interest earnings of the fund that are 
deposited in the general fund and (2) any administrative penalties or monetary criminal 
penalties imposed for violations under the bill. The extent of the increase cannot be reliably 
estimated but may be relatively minimal. As mentioned under the Bill Summary, this 
analysis assumes that the State Treasurer holds and invests money in the Food Processing 
Residuals Administration Fund and interest earnings of the fund are deposited in the 
general fund pursuant to § 6-226 of the State Finance and Procurement Article. In addition, 
since the bill does not specify where the administrative penalties established by the bill are 
deposited, this analysis assumes they are deposited in the general fund. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful negative impact on small 
businesses that currently benefit from utilization of food processing residuals, such as 
farmers (farm operators) that generate revenue from utilization of food processing residuals 
on their land. Conversely, there may also be small businesses that are negatively affected 
by utilization of food processing residuals that may benefit from the limitations established 
by the bill, the regulations adopted pursuant to the bill, and any permit conditions imposed 
on permittees under the bill. 
 
MDA indicates that it expects that the commercial brokers/haulers will manage the permit 
applications and fee payments on behalf of the farm operators in most cases. The 
commercial brokers/haulers and/or farm operators are responsible for payment of fees 
approximately equal to the estimated cost of the permit program (e.g., $481,733 in 
fiscal 2025) and for maintaining a performance bond or other security to guarantee 
fulfillment of the permit requirements.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1074 (Senator Ready, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 991/ Page 11 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Environmental Service; Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the 
Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department 
of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
an/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11