START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 780

Chapter 780

(House Bill 933)

AN ACT concerning

Behavioral Health Crisis Response Services – 9–8–8 Trust Fund Fees

FOR the purpose of establishing a 9–8–8 fee to be paid by each subscriber to switched local
exchange access service, commercial mobile radio service, or other 9–8–8–accessible
service; establishing a prepaid wireless 9–8–8 fee to be paid on certain retail
transactions; requiring the Comptroller to deposit the remitted 9–8–8 fees and the
prepaid wireless 9–8–8 fees in the 9–8–8 Trust Fund; requiring the Comptroller to
adopt procedures for auditing fee collection and remittance by telephone companies
and commercial mobile radio service providers; and generally related to the 9–8–8
Trust Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–5A–01, 7.5–5A–02, and 7.5–5A–04
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–5A–01(i), 7.5–5A–03.1, and 7.5–5A–03.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–5A–01(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–5A–01(i), 7.5–5A–02(e) and (l)(1), and 7.5–5A–04
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 7.5–5A–02(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 780 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

7.5–5A–01.

(A) In this subtitle[,] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE” OR “CMRS” MEANS MOBILE
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE THAT IS:

(1) PROVIDED FOR PROFIT WITH THE INTENT OF RECEIVING
COMPENSATION OR MONETARY GAIN;

(2) AN INTERCONNECTED, TWO–WAY VOICE SERVICE; AND

(3) AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.

(C) “COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE PROVIDER” OR “CMRS
PROVIDER” MEANS A PERSON AUTHORIZED BY THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION TO PROVIDE CMRS IN THE STATE.

(D) “CONSUMER” MEANS A PERSON THAT PURCHASES PREPAID WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE IN A RETAIL TRANSACTION.

(E) “Fund” means the 9–8–8 Trust Fund.

(F) “LIFELINE PROGRAM” MEANS THE FEDERAL LIFELINE PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED BY THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.

(F) (G) “PREPAID WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE” MEANS A
COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE THAT:

(1) ALLOWS A CONSUMER TO DIAL 9–8–8 TO ACCESS THE 9–8–8
SYSTEM;

(2) MUST BE PAID FOR IN ADVANCE; AND

(3) IS SOLD IN PREDETERMINED UNITS THAT DECLINE WITH USE IN A
KNOWN AMOUNT.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 780

(G) (H) “RETAIL TRANSACTION” MEANS THE PURCHASE OF PREPAID
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE FROM A SELLER FOR ANY PURPOSE
OTHER THAN RESALE.

(H) “SELLER” MEANS A PERSON THAT SELLS PREPAID WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE TO ANOTHER PERSON.

(I) “TELEPHONE COMPANY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 1–101 OF THE
PUBLIC UTILITIES ARTICLE.

7.5–5A–02.

(a) There is a 9–8–8 Trust Fund.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to provide reimbursement for costs associated with:

(1) Designating and maintaining 9–8–8 as the universal telephone number
for a national suicide prevention and mental health crisis hotline in accordance with the
federal National Suicide Hotline Designation Act of 2020; and

(2) Developing and implementing a statewide initiative for the
coordination and delivery of the continuum of behavioral health crisis response services in
the State, including:

(i) Crisis call centers;

(ii) Mobile crisis team services;

(iii) Crisis stabilization centers; and

(iv) Other acute behavioral health care services.

(c) The Department shall administer the Fund.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) MONEY FROM THE 9–8–8 FEE COLLECTED AND REMITTED TO THE
COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 780 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) MONEY FROM THE PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEE COLLECTED
AND REMITTED TO THE COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(1)] (3) (2) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

[(2)] (4) (3) Interest earnings of the Fund; and

[(3)] (5) (4) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the Fund.

(f) The Fund may be used only for carrying:

(1) CARRYING out the purpose of the Fund; AND

(2) ANY RELATED ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES OF THE
COMPTROLLER.

(g) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the Fund.

(h) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

(i) Money expended from the Fund for carrying out the purpose of the Fund is
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be
appropriated for carrying out the purpose of the Fund.

(j) No part of the Fund may revert or be credited to:

(1) The General Fund of the State; or

(2) Any other special fund of the State.

(k) The Fund is subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits as provided in
§ 2–1220 of the State Government Article.

(L) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
COMPTROLLER SHALL DISTRIBUTE TO AN ADMINISTRATIVE COST ACCOUNT THE
AMOUNT NECESSARY TO ADMINISTER THE FEES AND TO COVER THE EXPENSES OF
CONDUCTING AUDITS UNDER THIS SECTION FROM THE 9–8–8 FEE REVENUE
COLLECTED AND REMITTED TO THE COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.1 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 780

(2) THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE COST
ACCOUNT MAY NOT EXCEED:

(I) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2025, 2026, AND 2027, 6% OF
THE FEES COLLECTED BY THE COMPTROLLER; AND

(II) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2028 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER, 3% OF THE FEES COLLECTED BY THE COMPTROLLER.

(M) AFTER MAKING THE DISTRIBUTION REQUIRED BY SUBSECTION (L) OF
THIS SECTION, THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DEPOSIT THE 9–8–8 FEE REVENUE IN THE
FUND.

7.5–5A–03.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE” MEANS TELEPHONE SERVICE OR
ANOTHER COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE THAT CONNECTS AN INDIVIDUAL DIALING
THE DIGITS 9–8–8 TO AN ESTABLISHED PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT THE 988
SUICIDE AND CRISIS LIFELINE.

(3) “9–8–8 FEE” MEANS THE FEE IMPOSED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THIS SECTION.

(4) (I) “9–8–8 SERVICE CARRIER” MEANS A PROVIDER OF CMRS
OR OTHER 9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE.

(II) “9–8–8 SERVICE CARRIER” DOES NOT INCLUDE A
TELEPHONE COMPANY.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO PREPAID WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.

(C) (1) EACH EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, EACH SUBSCRIBER TO SWITCHED LOCAL EXCHANGE ACCESS SERVICE,
CMRS, OR OTHER 9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE SHALL PAY A 9–8–8 FEE.

(2) A SUBSCRIBER WHO IS ENROLLED IN THE LIFELINE PROGRAM
MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO PAY A 9–8–8 FEE.

(D) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPHS (2) THROUGH (4) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, THE 9–8–8 FEE IS 25 CENTS PER MONTH PAYABLE WHEN THE BILL FOR
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 780 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE SWITCHED LOCAL EXCHANGE ACCESS SERVICE, CMRS, OR OTHER
9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE IS DUE.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPHS (3) AND (4) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, IF A PERSON IS ABLE TO MAKE MORE THAN ONE SIMULTANEOUS
OUTBOUND CALL USING A 9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE, EACH SEPARATE OUTBOUND
CALL VOICE CHANNEL CAPACITY, REGARDLESS OF THE TECHNOLOGY, SHALL BE
CONSIDERED A SEPARATE 9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE FOR THE PURPOSE OF
DETERMINING THE 9–8–8 FEE DUE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(3) CMRS PROVIDED TO MULTIPLE DEVICES THAT SHARE THE SAME
TELEPHONE NUMBER SHALL BE CONSIDERED A SINGLE 9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE
SERVICE FOR THE PURPOSE OF DETERMINING THE 9–8–8 FEE DUE UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(4) A BROADBAND CONNECTION THAT IS NOT USED AS A TELEPHONE
SERVICE MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED A SEPARATE VOICE CHANNEL CAPACITY FOR THE
PURPOSE OF DETERMINING THE 9–8–8 FEE DUE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(E) (1) THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION SHALL DIRECT EACH
TELEPHONE COMPANY TO ADD THE 9–8–8 FEE TO ALL CURRENT BILLS RENDERED
FOR SWITCHED LOCAL EXCHANGE ACCESS SERVICE IN THE STATE.

(2) EACH TELEPHONE COMPANY:

(I) SHALL ACT AS A COLLECTION AGENT FOR THE FUND WITH
RESPECT TO THE 9–8–8 FEES; AND

(II) SHALL REMIT ALL MONEY COLLECTED TO THE
COMPTROLLER ON A MONTHLY BASIS.

(3) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DEPOSIT THE MONEY REMITTED IN
THE FUND.

(F) (1) EACH 9–8–8 SERVICE CARRIER SHALL ADD THE 9–8–8 FEE TO ALL
CURRENT BILLS RENDERED FOR CMRS OR OTHER 9–8–8–ACCESSIBLE SERVICE IN
THE STATE.

(2) EACH 9–8–8 SERVICE CARRIER:

(I) SHALL ACT AS A COLLECTION AGENT FOR THE FUND WITH
RESPECT TO THE 9–8–8 FEES;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 780

(II) SHALL REMIT ALL MONEY COLLECTED TO THE
COMPTROLLER ON A MONTHLY BASIS;

(III) SHALL KEEP RECORDS OF 9–8–8 FEES COLLECTED AND
REMITTED UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH FOR AT LEAST 4 YEARS AFTER THE FEE IS
REMITTED; AND

(IV) IS ENTITLED TO CREDIT, AGAINST THE MONEY FROM THE
9–8–8 FEE TO BE REMITTED TO THE COMPTROLLER, AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO 0.5% OF
THE 9–8–8 FEE TO COVER THE EXPENSES OF BILLING, COLLECTING, REMITTING,
AND KEEPING RECORDS OF THE 9–8–8 FEES.

(3) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DEPOSIT THE MONEY REMITTED IN
THE FUND.

(G) (1) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ADOPT PROCEDURES FOR AUDITING
FEE COLLECTION AND REMITTANCE BY TELEPHONE COMPANIES AND CMRS
PROVIDERS.

(2) THE COMPTROLLER IS ENTITLED TO AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO 0.5%
OF THE 9–8–8 FEES TO COVER THE EXPENSES OF CONDUCTING AUDITS UNDER THIS
~~SUBSECTION.~~

(H) A CMRS PROVIDER THAT PAYS OR COLLECTS 9–8–8 FEES UNDER THIS
SECTION HAS THE SAME IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY FOR TRANSMISSION FAILURES
AS THAT APPROVED BY THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION FOR LOCAL EXCHANGE
TELEPHONE COMPANIES THAT ARE SUBJECT TO REGULATION BY THE COMMISSION
UNDER THE PUBLIC UTILITIES ARTICLE.

(I) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

7.5–5A–04.

On or before December 1 each year, the Department shall submit a report to the
Legislative Policy Committee, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and the House
Appropriations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
that includes for the immediately preceding fiscal year a detailed description of:

(1) The amount of funds transferred and distributed from the Fund in
accordance with § 7.5–5A–02(b) of this subtitle;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 780 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDS COLLECTED AND REMITTED TO THE
COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(2)] (3) The additional services provided by the funding in each local
jurisdiction;

[(3)] (4) The amount of any unspent funds in the Fund; and

[(4)] (5) The reasons funds identified under item [(3)] (4) of this section
were not spent.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Health – General

7.5–5A–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(I) “SELLER” MEANS A PERSON THAT SELLS PREPAID WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE TO ANOTHER PERSON.

[(i)] (J) “Telephone company” has the meaning stated in § 1–101 of the Public
Utilities Article.

7.5–5A–02.

(a) There is a 9–8–8 Trust Fund.

(e) The Fund consists of:

(1) Money from the 9–8–8 fee collected and remitted to the Comptroller
under § 7.5–5A–03.1 of this subtitle;

(2) MONEY FROM THE PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEE COLLECTED
AND REMITTED TO THE COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(2)] (3) Money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

[(3)] (4) Interest earnings of the Fund; and

[(4)] (5) Any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the Fund.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 780

(l) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Comptroller shall
distribute to an administrative cost account the amount necessary to administer the fees
and to cover the expenses of conducting audits under this section from the 9–8–8 fee
revenue collected and remitted to the Comptroller under [§ 7.5–5A–03.1] §§ 7.5–5A–03.1
AND 7.5–5A–03.2 of this subtitle.

7.5–5A–03.2.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEE” MEANS THE FEE THAT IS
REQUIRED TO BE COLLECTED BY A SELLER FROM A CONSUMER IN THE AMOUNT
ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(3) “PROVIDER” MEANS A PERSON THAT PROVIDES PREPAID
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE UNDER A LICENSE ISSUED BY THE
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.

(B) (1) THE PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEE IS 25 CENTS PER RETAIL
TRANSACTION.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE SELLER SHALL COLLECT THE PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEES FEE
FROM THE CONSUMER FOR EACH RETAIL TRANSACTION IN THE STATE.

(II) A SELLER MAY NOT COLLECT A PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8
FEE FROM A CONSUMER IF THE CONSUMER IS ~~CERTIFIED~~ ~~AS~~ ~~ELIGIBLE~~ ~~FOR~~
ENROLLED IN THE LIFELINE PROGRAM ESTABLISHED BY THE FEDERAL
~~COMMUNICATIONS~~ ~~COMMISSION.~~

(3) A RETAIL TRANSACTION OCCURS IN THE STATE IF:

(I) THE SALE OR RECHARGE TAKES PLACE AT THE SELLER’S
PLACE OF BUSINESS LOCATED IN THE STATE;

(II) THE CONSUMER’S SHIPPING ADDRESS IS IN THE STATE; OR

(III) NO ITEM IS SHIPPED, BUT THE CONSUMER’S BILLING
ADDRESS OR THE LOCATION ASSOCIATED WITH THE CONSUMER’S MOBILE
TELEPHONE NUMBER IS IN THE STATE.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 780 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEE IS THE LIABILITY OF THE CONSUMER AND NOT
OF THE SELLER OR OF ANY PROVIDER.

(2) THE SELLER IS LIABLE FOR REMITTING ALL PREPAID WIRELESS
9–8–8 FEES THAT THE SELLER COLLECTS FROM CONSUMERS AS PROVIDED IN THIS
SECTION.

(D) A SELLER MAY DEDUCT AND RETAIN 3% OF PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8
FEES COLLECTED FROM CONSUMERS TO COVER THE EXPENSES OF COLLECTING
AND REMITTING THE PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEE.

(E) A SELLER SHALL REPORT AND REMIT TO THE COMPTROLLER ALL
PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEES COLLECTED BY THE SELLER IN A MANNER
PROVIDED FOR THE REMITTING OF THE SALES AND USE TAX UNDER TITLES 11 AND
13 OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(F) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL DEPOSIT ALL REPORTED AND REMITTED
PREPAID WIRELESS 9–8–8 FEES INTO THE FUND WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT.

(G) FOR THE PURPOSE OF THIS SECTION, THE AUDIT AND APPEAL
PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED FOR THE SALES AND USE TAX UNDER TITLES 11 AND 13
OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE APPLY.

(H) (G) PROVIDERS AND SELLERS OF PREPAID WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE HAVE THE SAME IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY FOR
TRANSMISSION FAILURES AS THAT APPROVED BY THE PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION FOR LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE COMPANIES THAT ARE SUBJECT
TO REGULATION BY THE COMMISSION UNDER THE PUBLIC UTILITIES ARTICLE.

(I) (H) A TAX, FEE, SURCHARGE, OR OTHER CHARGE MAY NOT BE
IMPOSED BY THE STATE, A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE, OR AN
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGENCY FOR 9–8–8 FUNDING PURPOSES ON A PROVIDER,
SELLER, OR CONSUMER WITH RESPECT TO THE SALE, PURCHASE, USE, OR
PROVISION OF PREPAID WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.

(J) (I) THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT
THIS SECTION.

7.5–5A–04.

On or before December 1 each year, the Department shall submit a report to the
Legislative Policy Committee, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and the House

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 780

Appropriations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
that includes for the immediately preceding fiscal year a detailed description of:

(1) The amount of funds transferred and distributed from the Fund in
accordance with § 7.5–5A–02(b) of this subtitle;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDS COLLECTED AND REMITTED TO THE
COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) The amount of funds collected and remitted to the Comptroller under §
7.5–5A–03.1 of this subtitle;

(3) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDS COLLECTED AND REMITTED TO THE
COMPTROLLER UNDER § 7.5–5A–03.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

[(2) (3)] (4) The additional services provided by the funding in each local
jurisdiction;

[(3) (4)] (5) The amount of any unspent funds in the Fund; and

[(4) (5)] (6) The reasons funds identified under item [(3) (4)] (5) of this
section were not spent.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall take
effect July 1, 2027.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in
Section 3 of this Act, this Act shall take effect October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11