START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 979 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 979 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Agriculture - Invasive Plant Species - Regulation (Biodiversity and Agriculture 
Protection Act) 
 
 
This bill alters the regulatory approach for controlling “invasive plant” species in the State. 
The bill repeals the existing two-tiered regulatory approach and instead establishes a 
regulatory approach that generally involves (1) assessments of nonnative plant species by 
“expert assessors” to determine the invasiveness rank of each such species; (2) the review 
of such assessments and related data; and (3) the determination by the Secretary of 
Agriculture whether such species should be classified as “prohibited invasive plants” and 
included on a Consolidated List of Maryland Invasive Plant Species or placed on a watch 
list. Specified regulations must be adopted; among other things, the regulations must 
classify as prohibited invasive plants all terrestrial plants classified by regulation before 
January 1, 2024, as tier 1 invasive plants; tier 2 plants must be assessed and either classified 
as prohibited invasive plants or placed on the watch list. The bill makes other related and 
conforming changes. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. The FY 2025 budget as passed by the General 
Assembly includes funding for three new positions for the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture’s (MDA) Plant Protection and Weed Management Program; it is anticipated 
that MDA can handle the bill’s changes with those budgeted positions, as discussed below. 
State expenditures (multiple funds) for various State agencies, as landowners and lessees, 
may increase beginning in FY 2025. The application of existing penalty provisions to 
violations of the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances.  
 
Local Effect:  Local governments, as landowners and lessees, may incur additional costs 
beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. The application of existing penalty provisions 
to violations of the bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 979/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Classify as a prohibited invasive plant” means the Secretary is including an invasive plant 
on the Consolidated List of Maryland Invasive Plant Species in accordance with the bill.  
 
“Early detection rapid response (EDRR) plant species” means a nonnative plant species 
that (1) is not yet widespread in the State but is at risk of becoming established as an 
invasive species and causing significant damage and (2) has been found in at least 
one native species habitat in the State or has not yet been found in the State.  
 
“Expert assessor” means an individual or a team within MDA or the Department of Natural 
Resources (DNR) or a qualified independent assessor. “Qualified independent assessor” 
means an individual or a team that (1) possesses at least two years of field experience in 
invasive plant species in Maryland or nearby jurisdictions, as specified, and (2) has 
assessed invasive plant species without supervision from MDA, DNR, or the Invasive 
Plants Advisory Committee. 
 
The definition of “invasive plant,” as modified by the bill, means any living part of plant 
species or its subspecies that did not evolve in the State and, if introduced within the State, 
will cause or is likely to cause, as determined by the Secretary, (1) economic harm; 
(2) ecological harm; (3) environmental harm; or (4) harm to human health. “Invasive plant” 
includes a commercial or noncommercial plant that is terrestrial or aquatic. 
 
“Invasive plant species status assessment protocol” means a protocol based on the 
NatureServe’s 2004 protocol (“An Invasive Species Assessment Protocol:  Evaluating 
Non-Native Plants for Their Impact on Biodiversity. Version 1”). 
 
“Invasiveness rank” means a rank assigned to a nonnative species to signify its level of 
invasiveness based on the results of an invasive assessment protocol. It includes an 
invasiveness significance ranking of high, medium, low, or insignificant.  
 
The term “tier 1 invasive plant” is renamed to be “prohibited invasive plant,” which 
includes invasive plant species that cause or are likely to cause severe harm within the 
State. The term “tier 2 invasive plant” is repealed. 
 
“Watch list” means a list of plant species that (1) have been assessed by an expert assessor 
in accordance with the bill; (2) were not determined by the assessment to be eligible for 
classification as a prohibited invasive plant; and (3) may be reassessed in the future. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 979/ Page 3 
Invasive Plant Species Regulations and the Classification of Prohibited Invasive Plants 
 
By October 1, 2024, the Secretary of Agriculture, with the advice of the Secretary of 
Natural Resources and the Invasive Plants Advisory Committee, must adopt regulations 
that:   
 
 
establish professionally recognized assessment protocols for invasive plants that 
(1) will serve as a basis for the regulatory approach for controlling invasive plants 
in the State; (2) consider the harm, as determined by the Secretary, that invasive 
plants cause in the State, including ecological harm and environmental harm; and 
(3) may consider additional harm, as determined by the expert assessor, that 
invasive plants cause in the State, including economic harm and harm to human 
health; 
 
govern administrative orders that the Secretary of Agriculture may issue to enforce 
the regulation of invasive plants; and 
 
establish a procedure for the approval required for activities involving prohibited 
invasive plants. 
 
By October 1, 2024, the Secretary, with the advice of the Secretary of Natural Resources 
and the Invasive Plants Advisory Committee, must also adopt regulations that:   
 
 
establish a list of prohibited invasive plants in accordance with the adopted 
assessment protocol; 
 
establish a procedure for classification or declassification of an invasive plant as a 
prohibited invasive plant; 
 
phase in the implementation of the regulatory requirements with consideration of 
the economic impact of these requirements on nurseries, landscapers, plant 
wholesalers, plant retailers, and any other industry; and 
 
establish a procedure for the disposal of prohibited invasive plants.  
 
The regulations must classify as prohibited invasive plants all terrestrial plants classified 
by regulation before January 1, 2024, as a tier 1 invasive plant. Each terrestrial plant 
classified by regulation before January 1, 2024, as a tier 2 invasive plant must be assessed 
in accordance with the bill by December 31, 2025, and must be (1) classified as a prohibited 
invasive plant under the regulations adopted pursuant to the bill, if the results of the 
assessment determine the plant is an invasive plant, or (2) placed on the watch list, if the 
results of the assessment determine the plant is not an invasive plant. 
 
In addition to those plants, the Secretary may classify, by regulation, a plant species as a 
prohibited invasive plant in accordance with the bill’s provisions. Further, the Secretary of 
Agriculture must classify as a prohibited invasive plant each plant identified as invasive in 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 979/ Page 4 
the Plant Invaders of Mid-Atlantic Natural Areas issued by the National Park Service 
(NPS) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) if the plant is assessed as an 
invasive plant species by an expert assessor in accordance with the bill. 
 
The Secretary must include an invasive plant classified as a prohibited invasive plant on 
the Consolidated List of Maryland Invasive Plant Species.  
 
Assessments Required 
 
An expert assessor must (1) assess a nonnative plant species established in natural areas 
within the State; (2) determine the invasiveness rank of the nonnative plant species; and 
(3) notify the Invasive Plants Advisory Committee that the nonnative plant species (1) is 
assessed as an invasive plant if the invasiveness rank is high or medium or (2) may be 
placed on the watch list if the invasiveness rank is low or insignificant. 
 
An expert assessor must also (1) assess an EDRR plant species; (2) determine the 
invasiveness rank of the EDRR plant species; and (3) notify the advisory committee that 
the EDRR plant species (1) is assessed as an invasive plant if the invasiveness rank is high 
or medium or (2) may be placed on the watch list if the invasiveness rank is low or 
insignificant.  
 
In carrying out the above requirements, an expert assessor must follow specified protocols. 
 
Invasive Plants Advisory Committee and the Determination of Prohibited Invasive Plants 
 
The duties of the Invasive Plants Advisory Committee are altered. Under the bill, the 
advisory committee must:   
 
 
conduct an annual review of the assessment protocols adopted under the bill; 
 
report to the Secretary regarding any proposed changes to an assessment protocol 
or a replacement of a protocol;  
 
in consultation with the Secretary and the Secretary of Natural Resources, review 
the qualifications of the qualified independent assessor; 
 
report to the Secretary any proposed changes to the qualifications of the qualified 
independent assessor; 
 
review invasive plant species assessments to advise the Secretary on which plants 
to classify as prohibited invasive plants for inclusion on the Consolidated List of 
Maryland Invasive Plant Species; and 
 
review any data submitted to the committee that indicates a cultivar, selection, or 
infra-specific hybrid of a prohibited invasive plant is not invasive; if the submitted 
data is deemed accurate and sufficient, the committee must advise the Secretary to 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 979/ Page 5 
declassify or preemptively not classify the cultivar, selection, or infra-specific 
hybrid as a prohibited invasive plant. 
 
If the assessment is accurate and sufficient and the invasive rank is (1) high or medium, 
the committee must advise the Secretary to classify the plant as a prohibited invasive plant 
or (2) low or insignificant, the committee must place the plant on the watch list.  
 
The Secretary must determine whether to classify a plant species as a prohibited invasive 
plant on reviewing the advice of the advisory committee.  
 
Publication and Distribution of Invasive Plant Species Lists 
 
MDA and DNR must each post the Consolidated List of Maryland Invasive Plant Species 
and the watch list on their respective websites. The University of Maryland Extension must 
post a link to those lists on its website. 
 
On an annual basis, MDA must distribute the lists to nurseries, plant dealers, and plant 
brokers.  
 
Restrictions on Activities, Exemptions, and Enforcement 
 
Generally, the restrictions on activities related to tier 1 invasive plants under current law 
apply to prohibited invasive plants under the bill. Accordingly, except as specified, a 
person may not propagate, import, transfer, sell, purchase, transport, or introduce any living 
part of a prohibited invasive plant in the State. However, a person may, in accordance with 
regulations adopted by MDA, conduct any such prohibited activity if the person receives 
prior approval from the Secretary and the activity is conducted for the purpose of disposing 
of the prohibited invasive plant, controlling the prohibited invasive plant, using the 
prohibited invasive plant for research or educational purposes, or exporting the prohibited 
invasive plant out of the State. 
 
Also, the bill establishes an exemption from the restrictions specified above for the State 
Highway Administration (SHA) if the activity is conducted for the purpose of controlling 
or disposing of a prohibited invasive plant along State highways without prior approval of 
the Secretary. SHA must control or dispose of prohibited invasive plants along State 
highways in a manner consistent with regulations adopted by MDA, and MDA must notify 
SHA of any changes to regulations adopted by MDA that impact the control or disposal of 
prohibited invasive plants. 
 
Certain provisions that relate to the sale of tier 2 invasive plants are repealed. Existing 
enforcement provisions that apply to violations of current law relating to tier 1 invasive 
plants apply to prohibited invasive plants under the bill. In addition, existing penalty 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 979/ Page 6 
provisions that apply to violations of current law relating to the regulation of invasive 
plants apply to violations of the bill. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Invasive Plants Advisory Committee 
 
The Invasive Plants Advisory Committee must (1) advise the Secretary regarding 
regulations necessary to carry out the regulation of invasive plants; (2) conduct an 
annual review of the science-based risk assessment protocol for invasive plants; and 
(3) report to the Secretary regarding any proposed changes to the risk assessment protocol. 
 
Establishment of Risk Assessment Protocol  
 
Chapter 142 of 2011 required the Secretary of Agriculture, with the advice of the Invasive 
Plants Advisory Committee, to adopt regulations by October 1, 2012, that, among other 
things, establish a science-based risk assessment protocol for invasive plants that (1) will 
serve as a basis for creating a two-tiered regulatory approach for controlling invasive plants 
in the State and (2) considers the harm, as determined by the Secretary, that invasive plants 
cause in the State, including, economic harm, ecological harm, environmental harm, and 
harm to human health.  
 
Establishment of Lists of Tier 1 and Tier 2 Invasive Plants and Related Regulations 
 
“Tier 1 invasive plant” includes invasive plant species that cause or are likely to cause 
severe harm within the State. “Tier 2 invasive plant” includes invasive plant species that 
cause or are likely to cause substantial negative impact within the State. 
 
Chapter 142 required the Secretary of Agriculture, with the advice of the advisory 
committee, to adopt regulations that (1) establish a list of tier 1 plants and tier 2 plants in 
accordance with the adopted risk assessment protocol; (2) establish a procedure for 
classification or declassification of an invasive plant as a tier 1 invasive plant or a 
tier 2 invasive plant; (3) phase in the implementation of the requirements regulating 
invasive plants with consideration of the economic impact of the requirements with 
consideration of the economic impact of the requirements on nurseries, landscapers, plant 
wholesalers, plant retailers, and any other industry; (4) establish a procedure for the 
disposal of tier 1 plants; (5) designate the format, size, and content of a sign required to be 
posted identifying a tier 2 plant in a retail outlet; and (6) provide for the distribution of a 
list of tier 2 invasive plants to licensed nurseries, plant dealers, and plant brokers on an 
annual basis. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 979/ Page 7 
Chapters 551 and 552 of 2022 require DNR to publish on its website a list of plant species 
native to the State. The list must identify native plants that may be used and planted as an 
alternative to the use and planting of tier 2 invasive plants. Additionally, the Secretary of 
Agriculture was required to classify as a tier 1 invasive plant or a tier 2 invasive plant each 
plant identified as invasive in the Plant Invaders of Mid-Atlantic Natural Areas publication 
issued by NPS and USFWS.  
 
Restrictions on Activities Related to Invasive Plants 
 
In general, a person may not propagate, import, transfer, sell, purchase, transport, or 
introduce any living part of a tier 1 invasive plant in the State. However, a person may 
conduct these activities, with prior approval from the Secretary, for the purpose of 
disposing of, controlling, using for research or educational purposes, or exporting a plant 
out of the State. These restrictions do not apply to the transfer, lease, sale, or purchase of 
real property on which an invasive plant is located.  
 
In accordance with regulations adopted by the Secretary, a person may not (1) sell or offer 
for sale at a retail outlet a tier 2 invasive plant unless the retail outlet posts, in a conspicuous 
manner in proximity to all tier 2 plant displays, a sign identifying the plants as tier 2 plants 
or (2) provide landscaping services to plant or supply for planting a tier 2 invasive plant 
unless the person provides to the customer a list of tier 2 invasive plants.  
 
State funds may not be used to purchase or plant an invasive plant species for an outdoor 
project, except as specified. Further, each entity that receives State funding, and each State 
agency, must prioritize, whenever possible, the use of plants native to the State for every 
planting project. 
 
Enforcement  
 
On finding a tier 1 plant in violation of the prohibition against a person propagating, 
importing, transferring, selling, purchasing, transporting, or introducing any living part of 
a tier 1 invasive plant in the State, the Secretary may (1) issue a written condemnation 
seizure order; (2) mark or tag the plant in a conspicuous manner; and (3) provide written 
notice to the owner, tenant, or person in charge of the premises. On notice from the 
Secretary, a person must dispose of a tier 1 plant in accordance with regulations adopted 
by the Secretary. If a tier 1 plant is not disposed of in accordance with that requirement, 
the Secretary must (1) destroy the plant; (2) prepare a statement of facts and a statement of 
the expense of the destruction; and (3) provide copies of the statements to the 
Attorney General. The Attorney General must institute a proceeding to collect the expenses 
due to the Secretary. A copy of the statements prepared by the Secretary is sufficient 
evidence to prove a claim for the expenses.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 979/ Page 8 
If the Secretary finds that a tier 2 plant that does not meet the signage requirement, the 
Secretary must (1) issue a stop-sale order; (2) mark or tag the plant in a conspicuous 
manner; and (3) give specified written notice to the owner, tenant, or person in charge of 
the premises. A stop-sale order remains in effect until the required signage is posted. 
 
The Secretary may bring an action for an injunction against a person to (1) enforce the 
provisions related to the regulation of invasive plants or an order of the Secretary under 
those provisions or (2) prevent or restrain a violation of those provisions. In an action for 
an injunction, the Secretary does not have to allege or prove that (1) an adequate remedy 
at law does not exist or (2) substantial or irreparable damage would result from the 
continued violations. An injunction must be issued without bond.  
 
Criminal and Civil Penalties for Violations 
 
A person that violates any provision relating to the regulation of invasive plants is subject 
to the penalties and fines set forth in Title 12 of the Agriculture Article. Under Title 12, a 
person who violates any provision of the Agriculture Article is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to $500 and/or imprisonment for up to 
three months, with costs imposed in the discretion of the court. For a second or subsequent 
offense, a person is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year, 
with costs imposed in the discretion of the court. A second or subsequent violation is 
one that has occurred within two years of any prior violation and that arises out of a 
separate set of circumstances. 
 
Instead of or in addition to any other authorized penalty, the Secretary may impose a civil 
penalty of up to $500 per violation on a person that violates the provisions relating to the 
regulation of invasive plants or any order issued by the Secretary under those provisions. 
Any civil penalties collected are paid into the general fund.  
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Maryland Department of Agriculture 
 
Pursuant to current regulations (COMAR 15.06.04.06), prior to January 1, 2024, 6 plants 
were classified as tier 1 invasive plants and 13 plants were classified as tier 2 invasive 
plants. Under the bill, each terrestrial plant classified by regulation before January 1, 2024, 
as a tier 1 invasive plant must be classified as a prohibited invasive plant in the regulations 
required to be adopted under the bill by October 1, 2024. Further, each terrestrial plant 
classified by regulation before January 1, 2024, as a tier 2 invasive plant must be assessed 
pursuant to the bill by December 31, 2025, and must either be classified as a prohibited 
invasive plant or placed on the watch list, depending on the results of the assessment. MDA 
advises that, in addition to the existing tier 1 plants and any existing tier 2 plants that are 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 979/ Page 9 
classified as prohibited invasive plants pursuant to those provisions, approximately 
100 additional invasive plant species are anticipated to be classified as prohibited invasive 
plants due to the bill’s requirements – with the list anticipated to increase over time. 
 
Because the bill establishes requirements relating to invasive plant species assessments and 
the review of those assessments, among other things, the bill results in an increase in 
workload for MDA’s Plant Protection and Weed Management Program. MDA advises that 
this program has been understaffed in recent years and that it needs to hire additional staff 
to handle the increase in workload resulting from the bill. Specifically, MDA advises that 
it needs to hire (1) two administrators to complete assessments, conduct outreach to the 
industry, and generally manage the regulatory program as altered by the bill and 
(2) one inspector to assist with enforcement. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes three new positions 
(two administrators and one inspector) – and $196,626 in associated general funds – for 
MDA’s Plant Protection and Weed Management Program. Although the budgeted funds 
and positions are not contingent on the enactment of this bill, MDA advises that the 
three new positions and the associated general funds included in the fiscal 2025 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly are sufficient to meet the requirements of the bill. 
Accordingly, it is anticipated that MDA can implement the bill’s requirements using those 
budgeted resources. (In the out-years, anticipated costs associated with those positions total 
more than $200,000 annually.)  
 
State Agencies as Landowners or Lessees 
 
Due to the likely expansion of the number of invasive plants that are considered prohibited 
invasive plants under the bill (compared to tier 1 invasive plants under current law), the 
existing general prohibition on the use of State funds to purchase or plant an invasive plant 
species for an outdoor project may affect State expenditures (multiple funds) for the 
purchase of plants. Additionally, affected State agencies may incur costs for projects on 
State-owned or State-leased property to remove and dispose of any prohibited invasive 
plants. 
 
Although the bill authorizes SHA to conduct certain generally prohibited activities for the 
purpose of controlling or disposing of a prohibited invasive plant without prior approval of 
the Secretary of Agriculture, SHA estimates that Transportation Trust Fund expenditures 
increase by approximately $30,000 annually to remove and dispose of additional invasive 
plants under the bill. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The prohibition on the purchase of prohibited invasive plants may 
affect local government expenditures related to the purchase of plants. Additionally, local 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 979/ Page 10 
governments may incur costs related to projects on local government-owned or local 
government-leased property to remove and dispose of any prohibited invasive plants. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business nurseries, plant dealers, and landscapers are likely 
affected by the bill’s changes to the regulation of invasive plants, particularly due to the 
anticipated expansion of the list of prohibited invasive plants under the bill compared to 
the existing list of tier 1 invasive plants under current law. The impact may be mitigated, 
at least to a certain extent, by the required phase in of the bill’s requirements. 
 
Additional Comments:  NatureServe is a nonprofit organization dedicated to providing 
the scientific knowledge that forms the basis for effective conservation action. An Invasive 
Species Assessment Protocol:  Evaluating Non-Native Plants for Their Impact on 
Biodiversity was published in January 2004. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 915 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Anne Arundel, Baltimore, 
Cecil, Frederick, Montgomery, and Somerset counties; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; cities of Frederick and 
Havre de Grace; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Department of 
General Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
NatureServe; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 979/ Page 11 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11