START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 698

Chapter 698

(House Bill 977)

AN ACT concerning

Somerset County – Sale of Property – Revells Neck Road

FOR the purpose of authorizing the County Commissioners of Somerset County to sell
certain property on Revells Neck Road under terms the county commissioners
consider appropriate; and generally relating to the sale of county property in
Somerset County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Local Government
Section 12–411
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

12–411.

(a) (1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the County Commissioners
of Somerset County may enter into a lease purchase agreement and related financing
agreements to obtain property for a public purpose in the county.

(2) The county commissioners shall solicit bids in at least two newspapers
of general circulation in the county before entering into a lease purchase agreement.

(3) If the county commissioners enter into a multiyear lease purchase
agreement or related financing agreement, the agreement shall be subject to cancellation
by the county commissioners at the end of a fiscal year if sufficient money is not
appropriated to fund the agreement in the subsequent fiscal year.

(b) (1) The County Commissioners of Somerset County may sell any interest
in county surplus property by soliciting and accepting sealed bids.

(2) The county commissioners shall publish an invitation for bids at least
twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county between 10 and 90 days, inclusive,
before the date set for opening bids.

(3) The county commissioners:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 698 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) shall open the bids in public; and

(ii) may act on the bids only during a public session of the county
commissioners.

(4) The county commissioners may reject all bids on the property if the
county commissioners determine that the highest bid does not yield a reasonable price.

(5) If the county commissioners reject all bids, the county commissioners:

(i) shall record the highest bid in the minutes of the public session;
and

(ii) may sell the property:

1. by republishing an invitation for sealed bids;

2. by public auction; or

3. if the property is surplus school property, in accordance
with subsection (c) of this section.

(6) The county commissioners shall adopt an ordinance or resolution to
govern the sale of property under this subsection.

(c) The County Commissioners of Somerset County may sell to a government unit
located in the county surplus school board real property:

(1) without advertising the property for sale; and

(2) after obtaining three independent appraisals.

(d) (1) The provisions of this subtitle do not apply to a sale of property under
this subsection.

(2) The County Commissioners of Somerset County may sell the
approximately 4.02 acres of property at county Tax Map 103, Grid 8, Parcel 1467 (known
as Whittington Elementary School) to Shore Up Inc., under terms considered appropriate
by the county commissioners.

(3) The county commissioners may sell the following property to the City
of Crisfield under terms considered appropriate by the county commissioners:

(i) 7 North First Street, Tax Map 101, Grid 22, Parcel 757 (.073
acres);

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 698

(ii) 320–322 Locust Street, Tax Map 101, Grid 21, Parcel 810 (.158
acres);

(iii) 304 Tyler Street, Tax Map 102, Grid 11, Parcel 616 (.146 acres);
and

(iv) 15 West Main Street, Tax Map 103, Grid 1, Parcel 1373 (.386
acres).

(4) THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS OF SOMERSET COUNTY MAY SELL
THE PROPERTY ON REVELLS NECK ROAD, COUNTY TAX MAP 32, PARCEL 149
UNDER TERMS CONSIDERED APPROPRIATE BY THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3