START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 986 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 986 
(Delegate R. Lewis) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Coverage for the Treatment of Obesity - 
Required Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to study the impact of 
requiring Medicaid to provide “comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity,” 
including coverage for intensive behavioral therapy, bariatric surgery, and any medication 
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) with an indication for chronic 
weight management in patients with obesity. By December 31, 2024, MDH must report its 
findings to the House Health and Government Operations Committee and the Senate 
Finance Committee. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH expenditures increase by $250,000 (50% general funds, 50% federal 
funds in FY 2025 only for actuarial analysis to support the required study. Federal fund 
revenues increase accordingly. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FF Revenue 
$125,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/FF Exp. 
$250,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($125,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 986/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In conducting the study, MDH must (1) identify and compare the coverage 
for the treatment of obesity under Medicaid and other public health programs in other states 
and (2) examine and estimate any potential savings that may result from requiring 
comprehensive coverage for the treatment of obesity. 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid generally provides health coverage to children, pregnant women, 
elderly or disabled individuals, low-income parents, and childless adults. To qualify for 
Medicaid, applicants must pass certain income and asset tests. Effective January 1, 2014, 
Medicaid coverage was expanded to persons with household incomes up to 138% of federal 
poverty guidelines, as authorized under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act. 
 
Maryland Medicaid currently covers bariatric surgery for participants who meet certain 
clinical criteria. Intensive behavioral therapy is also covered. The HealthChoice Diabetes 
Prevention Program, an evidenced-based program established by the U.S. Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, is covered for all HealthChoice participants to prevent or 
delay the onset of type 2 diabetes through lifestyle changes such as diet and exercise. 
 
Under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program, state Medicaid programs must cover nearly all 
of a participating manufacturer’s FDA-approved drugs for medically accepted indications. 
However, weight-loss drugs can be excluded from coverage. Thus, only a limited number 
of state Medicaid programs cover weight-loss drugs. 
 
Maryland Medicaid currently covers IMCIVREE (setmelanotide) injection, which is used 
to treat hunger and obesity in patients with certain genetic conditions and syndromes. 
Medicaid also provides coverage for certain GLP-1 agonist medications (Ozempic, 
Rybelsus, and Mounjaro) to treat type 2 diabetes. 
 
State Medicaid programs may only receive federal matching funds and federal drug rebates 
for a covered outpatient drug. A covered outpatient drug must:   
 
 
meet the definition of a prescribed drug in federal regulations (42 CFR § 440.120); 
 
be FDA-approved; 
 
be dispensed upon prescription; and  
 
be from a manufacturer that has entered into a rebate agreement with the federal 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 986/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 594 (Senator Hershey) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Kaiser Family Foundation; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3