START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 693

Chapter 693

(House Bill 907)

AN ACT concerning

Garrett County – Procurement – Bids and Contracts

FOR the purpose of increasing the minimum dollar amount of contracts for which the
County Commissioners, or any employee of Garrett County, are required to advertise
for bids; exempting certain contracts for professional services from a requirement to
advertise for bids; authorizing certain contracts to be solicited by written bids; and
generally relating to procurement in Garrett County.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Garrett County
Section 30.21(A)
Article 12 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2005 Edition and September 2022 Supplement, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article 12 – Garrett County

30.21.

(A) (1) Except for transactions under division (D) of this section,
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED BY THE STATE OF
MARYLAND, or as otherwise authorized by law, the County Commissioners, or any
employee of Garrett County, may not enter into any contract of sale or purchase to which
the county is a party where the amount involved under the contract exceeds [$25,000]
$50,000 without advertising for bids in one or more newspapers circulated in the county.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED BY THE STATE OF MARYLAND
MAY BE SOLICITED BY WRITTEN BIDS.

(2) The advertisement for bids shall appear at least a week prior to the date
on which bids are to be filed.

(3) Any contract of sale shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder,
and any contract of purchase shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, but the
County Commissioners shall have the right to reject any and all bids.

(4) Any contract entered into in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be null and void. The provisions of this section shall not apply to necessary repairs
made in case of emergency.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 693 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) If any County Commissioner shall violate any provisions of this
division, the Commissioner shall be liable to indictment, and, upon conviction, shall forfeit
the office.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2