START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 695

Chapter 695

(House Bill 989)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County – Subdivision Plats – Conditions

PG/MC 111–24

FOR the purpose of providing that the Montgomery County Planning Board may
tentatively approve a subdivision plat subject to specified conditions; providing for
the approval and submission of a certain subdivision plat to the county land records;
and generally relating to subdivision plats in Montgomery County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 23–207(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Land Use
Section 23–207(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Land Use

23–207.

(a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the subdivision regulations may
provide for tentative approval of a plat before improvements and installations.

(D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY.

(2) THE COUNTY PLANNING BOARD, OR A DESIGNEE OF THE COUNTY
PLANNING BOARD, MAY TENTATIVELY APPROVE A SUBDIVISION PLAT SUBJECT TO
THE COMPLETION OF SPECIFIED CONDITIONS.

(3) A TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF A SUBDIVISION PLAT UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION MAY NOT:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 695 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) BE ENTERED ON THE SUBDIVISION PLAT; OR

(II) ALLOW THE SUBDIVISION PLAT TO BE FILED OR RECORDED.

(4) THE COUNTY PLANNING BOARD, THROUGH ITS CHAIR OR A
DESIGNEE, MAY NOT ENDORSE A SUBDIVISION PLAT THAT IS SUBJECT TO SPECIFIED
CONDITIONS BEFORE ALL THE CONDITIONS ARE COMPLETED.

(5) IF ALL THE CONDITIONS SPECIFIED IN THE TENTATIVE APPROVAL
ARE COMPLETED, A POSTCOMPLETION HEARING BEFORE THE COUNTY PLANNING
BOARD IS NOT REQUIRED BEFORE THE SUBDIVISION PLAT IS APPROVED AND
SUBMITTED TO THE LAND RECORDS OF MONTGOMERY COUNTY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2