START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 901 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 901 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Higher Education - Part-Time Senatorial and Delegate Scholarships - Alterations 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to waive the 
minimum semester hour requirements (i.e., six semester hours) for part-time senatorial or 
delegate scholarships on request of an applicant with a documented disability. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHEC can waive semester hour requirements on request, as specified in the 
bill, with existing resources. Authorizing recipients to enroll in fewer semester hours does 
not alter overall spending on senatorial or delegate scholarships. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Senatorial Scholarships 
 
Until June 30, 2019, each senator could award $138,000 in scholarship funds each year. 
Beginning on July 1, 2019, that amount grows by the increase in tuition and mandatory 
fees over the previous year at the University System of Maryland (USM) institution with 
the highest annual expenses for a full-time resident undergraduate student other than the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 901/ Page 2 
University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC) and the University of Maryland, 
Baltimore Campus (UMB). 
 
To qualify for an award, an individual must be eligible for in-state tuition, be domiciled in 
the legislative district from which the applicant seeks an award, and demonstrate a definite 
financial need. Each senator must consider an applicant’s financial need. Applicants must 
be accepted for admission in the regular undergraduate, graduate, or professional program 
at an eligible institution or be enrolled in a two-year terminal certificate program in which 
the course work is acceptable for transfer credit for an accredited baccalaureate program in 
an eligible institution. In certain situations, an individual may need to take a competitive 
examination administered by the MHEC Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) 
to qualify for an award. An award under the program may not be less than $400 and may 
not exceed the tuition and mandatory fees at the USM institution with the highest annual 
tuition and fees, not including UMGC and UMB.  
 
Except under certain circumstances, a scholarship may be held for up to four years of 
full-time study or eight years of part-time study. Full-time scholarship recipients may hold 
the scholarship for up to four years of full-time study provided the student continues to be 
eligible for in-state tuition and takes at least 12 semester hours of courses as an 
undergraduate or 9 semester hours of courses as a graduate student each semester leading 
to a degree. Part-time scholarship recipients may hold the scholarship, appropriately 
prorated, for up to eight years of part-time study if the recipient continues to be eligible for 
in-state tuition and takes at least six semester hours of courses each semester leading to a 
degree.   
 
Senatorial Scholarships – Eligible Institutions  
 
A senatorial scholarship may be used at any undergraduate, graduate, or professional 
school in the State or at select in-state private career schools that offer two-year certificate 
programs that can transfer to a baccalaureate degree, including (1) at a degree-granting 
institution of higher education, if the curriculum is approved by MHEC; (2) at a hospital 
diploma school for training registered nurses; or (3) to attend as a full-time student a private 
postsecondary proprietary institution that is accredited by a national accrediting association 
approved by the U.S. Department of Education.  
 
Each senator may award at most 10% of scholarship funds to applicants planning to attend 
accredited undergraduate, graduate, or professional institutions outside of the State. Those 
students must be studying an academic area that is not offered in a program that is 
accredited by a national accrediting association approved by the U.S. Department of 
Education in any institution in the State or be a person with a hearing impairment who will 
be studying at an institution outside the State that makes special provisions for persons 
with a hearing impairment. A senatorial scholarship may also be used at an out-of-state 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 901/ Page 3 
institution of higher education if the applicant is an individual who is on active duty with 
the U.S. military and domiciled in the State.  
 
Delegate Scholarships 
 
During a term in office, each delegate may award the equivalent of four four-year, full-time 
scholarships or two part-time scholarships for each full-time scholarship available. A 
part-time scholarship may not be for more than twice as many years as a full-time 
scholarship. Each recipient of a part-time scholarship must carry at least six semester hours 
of courses each semester in a program leading to a degree. 
 
A delegate may select scholarship recipients on any basis he or she considers appropriate. 
The annual amount of a scholarship for any one recipient may not exceed the tuition and 
mandatory fees at the USM institution with the highest annual tuition and fees, not 
including UMGC and UMB. A scholarship award may be used to pay tuition and 
mandatory fees at a Maryland institution of postsecondary education or, when the desired 
program of study or appropriate accommodations are not available in Maryland, an 
out-of-state institution. Instead of awarding the scholarships himself or herself, a delegate 
may authorize MHEC to award funding to eligible applicants under the 
Delegate Howard P. Rawlings Educational Excellence Awards program.  
 
Delegate Scholarships – Eligible Institutions 
 
A delegate scholarship may be used at a public or private nonprofit institution of higher 
education in the State that possesses a certificate of approval from MHEC or, an accredited 
undergraduate, graduate, or professional institution outside the State under certain 
circumstances. To use a scholarship at an institution outside the State, an individual must 
either (1) be studying an academic area that is not offered in a program that is accredited 
by a national accrediting association approved by the U.S. Department of Education in any 
institution in the State; (2) be disabled and studying at an institution outside the State that 
makes special provisions for disabled students that are not available to the applicant at an 
institution in the State; or (3) be on active duty with the U.S. military and domiciled in the 
State. The scholarship may also be used at a private career school within the State that is 
approved by MHEC and that is accredited by a national accrediting association that is 
approved by the U.S. Department of Education. A recipient of a delegate scholarship who 
is currently enrolled, or was enrolled within the last two years, in a certificate or license 
program, course, or sequence of courses at a community college that leads to certification 
or licensure may use the scholarship to reimburse specified educational expenses, including 
tuition, mandatory fees, and room and board.  
 
State Expenditures:  MHEC advises that the agency already has an appeal and waiver 
process in place for scholarships that could be used to implement the waivers specified by 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 901/ Page 4 
the bill. Additionally, the Maryland College Aid Processing System already has the 
functionality to waive or override requirements.  
 
For senatorial scholarships, the bill does not alter the total dollar amount a senator may 
award each year. For delegate scholarships, the bill similarly does not alter the overall 
number of scholarships a delegate may award during a term in office. Therefore, allowing 
recipients to enroll in fewer semester hours likely has no direct effect on senatorial or 
delegate scholarship spending.    
 
Additional Comments:  Waiving the semester hour requirements for part-time senatorial 
or delegate scholarship recipients does not change other existing requirements in current 
law. For example, under the bill, a part-time senatorial scholarship recipient is still limited 
to eight years of part-time study. In addition, under the bill, a delegate may still only award 
two part-time scholarships for each full-time scholarship available.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 967 (Senator Zucker, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 8, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4