START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 907 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 907 
(Delegate Hinebaugh) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Garrett County - Procurement - Bids and Contracts 
 
 
This bill raises the contract value threshold – from $25,000 to $50,000 – above which the 
Board of County Commissioners of Garrett County, or any employee of Garrett County, 
must solicit bids in one or more newspapers. The bill also exempts contracts for 
professional services required to be licensed by the State of Maryland from the bid 
solicitation requirement, but otherwise authorizes such contracts to be solicited by written 
bids. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to Garrett County. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances in Garrett County. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except for the acquisition of used personal property, the Board of County 
Commissioners of Garrett County, or any employee of Garrett County, must advertise for 
bids in one or more newspapers circulated in the county if the contract value exceeds 
$25,000. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 907/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 558 (Senator McKay) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2