START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 920 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 920 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Washington County - Alcoholic Beverages - Multi-Use Sports and Events Facility 
Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
 
This bill alters the existing stadium beer and wine (BW) license in Washington County to 
be a multi-use sports and events facility beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license. The holder 
of a multi-use sports and events BWL license is authorized to sell beer, wine, and liquor 
for on-premises consumption to individuals present at an event in the specified facility. 
The bill also makes a series of changes related to the use of the multi-use sports and events 
facility BWL license, as specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County can handle any enforcement activity within existing 
resources. Washington County license revenues increase minimally due to the increase in 
licensing fees under the bill. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Stadium Licenses and Multi-use Sports and Events Facility Licenses 
 
Under current law, the Washington County Board of License Commissioners is authorized 
to issue a stadium BW license to the owner of a professional baseball team franchise that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 920/ Page 2 
may be in any form of business organization, including partnership, corporation, and 
limited liability company. The bill establishes that the board may issue a multi-use sports 
and events facility BWL license to the owner of a professional baseball team franchise that 
may be in any form of business organization, as specified, that will operate as a multi-use 
sports and events facility. 
 
Under current law, the license authorizes the license holder to sell beer and wine (1) for 
on-premises consumption to individuals present at an event held in the stadium, and (2) in 
plastic, Styrofoam, or paper containers. The written approval of the board is required before 
any beer and wine may be sold, served, or consumed on a parking lot of the stadium or 
during an event other than a baseball game in which the team of the license holder is 
playing. Under the bill, the license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and 
liquor for on-premises consumption to individuals present at an event held in the multi-use 
sports and events facility. The bill also repeals the requirement that beer and wine must be 
sold in a specified container, in addition to repealing the requirement of obtaining the 
written approval of the board before any beer and wine may be sold, served, or consumed 
in the parking lot or during other specified events. 
 
Under current law, the license holder may sell beer and wine from the time the stadium 
opens for the event until the event ends. The bill repeals this requirement and additionally 
establishes that the license holder must require all employees to complete an alcohol 
awareness training program and obtain a crowd control training certificate. 
 
Under current law, the license holder may not allow an individual to carry alcoholic 
beverages onto or from the licensed premise. 
 
Under current law, the annual license fee is $2,000, and the fee for a Sunday permit is $250. 
Under the bill, the annual license fee is increased to $2,500, and the Sunday permit fee is 
repealed. 
 
Under current law, “premises” includes the entire stadium facility. Under the bill, 
“premises” includes the entire multi-use sports and events facility. 
 
Alcohol Awareness Training 
 
Alcoholic beverages license holders are generally subject to alcohol awareness training 
requirements under State law. The program includes instruction on how alcohol affects an 
individual’s behavior and body; provides education on the dangers of drinking and driving 
and defines effective methods to (1) determine whether a customer is under the legal 
drinking age; (2) serve customers to minimize the chance of intoxication; and (3) stop 
service before a customer becomes intoxicated. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 920/ Page 3 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Though the bill repeals the Sunday permit, the bill increases the 
annual license fee for the multi-use sports and events BWL license from $2,000 to $2,500. 
Therefore, Washington County revenues increase by $250 annually, beginning in 
fiscal 2025, for each license issued under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 853 (Washington County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3