START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 989 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 989 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Montgomery County – Subdivision Plats – Conditions PG/MC 111–24 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Montgomery County Planning Board, or a designee of the board, 
to tentatively approve a subdivision plat subject to the completion of specified conditions. 
The tentative approval may not be entered on the subdivision plat or allow the subdivision 
plat to be filed or recorded. The board may not endorse a subdivision plat that is subject to 
specified conditions before all the conditions are completed. If the specified conditions in 
the tentative approval are completed, a postcompletion hearing before the board is not 
required before the subdivision plat is approved and submitted to the land records of 
Montgomery County. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
County Planning Boards – Regional District 
 
The Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission (M-NCPPC), established 
under Division II of the Land Use Article, serves various planning, zoning, development 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 989/ Page 2 
review, and parks and recreation functions in Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. 
M-NCPPC is a 10-member commission, consisting of 5 members from Montgomery County 
and 5 members from Prince George’s County, with the commissioners from each county 
serving as the Montgomery County Planning Board and the Prince George’s County 
Planning Board, respectively. 
 
The planning boards must exercise, within each board’s jurisdiction, the following powers:  
(1) planning; (2) zoning; (3) subdivision; (4) assignment of street names and house 
numbers; and (5) any related matter. These functions do not include the regional planning 
functions of the commission affecting the Maryland-Washington Regional District as a 
whole. The regional district consists of (1) the entire area of Montgomery County, subject 
to certain limitations (relating to certain municipalities not subject to the planning and 
zoning authority of the county, unless by agreement, and other municipalities that have 
certain, limited planning and zoning authority) and (2) the entire area of 
Prince George’s County, except for the City of Laurel as it existed on July 1, 2013. 
 
Subdivision Plat Approvals – Regional District 
 
In general, a subdivision plat of land in the regional district may not be admitted to the land 
records of Montgomery or Prince George’s counties, or received or recorded by the clerks 
of the courts of the respective county, unless (1) the plat has been submitted to and 
approved by the applicable county planning board and (2) the chair of the county planning 
board and the secretary-treasurer of the commission endorse an approval in writing on the 
plat. 
 
The appropriate county planning board must approve or disapprove a subdivision plat 
within 30 days after the plat is submitted to the board. If the board does not take action 
within 30 days, the plat is considered approved. The board must hold a hearing before 
taking action on a subdivision plat, unless (1) the board approves the plat exactly as the 
plat was submitted or (2) the applicant waives the hearing requirement in the application. 
Subdivision regulations may include provisions for (1) notice to owners of properties that 
would be substantially affected by approval of a subdivision plat; (2) public hearings on 
the applications; and (3) an appeal to the district council from a decision approving or 
disapproving a subdivision plat. 
 
Subdivision regulations may provide for tentative approval of a plat before improvements 
and installations; however, the tentative approval of a plat may not (1) be entered on the 
plat or (2) entitle the plat to be filed or recorded. Instead of requiring the completion of 
improvements or installation of utilities before the approval of a plat, the county planning 
board or county may accept security for the construction of improvements and installation 
of utilities at a time and according to specifications set by or in accordance with the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 989/ Page 3 
subdivision regulations. The county planning board or county may enforce the security by 
any appropriate legal or equitable remedy. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Planning; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3