START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1024

Chapter 1024

(House Bill 920)

AN ACT concerning

Washington County – Alcoholic Beverages – Multi–Use Sports and Events
Facility Beer, Wine, and Liquor License

FOR the purpose of altering the stadium beer and wine license in Washington County to
be a multi–use sports and events facility beer, wine, and liquor license; authorizing
the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on–premises consumption in the
multi–use sports and events facility; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages in
Washington County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 31–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 31–1005
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

31–102.

This title applies only in Washington County.

31–1005.

(a) In this section, “premises” includes the entire [stadium] MULTI–USE SPORTS
AND EVENTS facility [and the stadium parking lots].

(b) There is a [stadium] MULTI–USE SPORTS AND EVENTS FACILITY beer,
WINE, and [wine] LIQUOR license.

(c) The Board may issue the license to the owner of a professional baseball team
franchise that may be in any form of business organization, including partnership,

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1024 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

corporation, and limited liability company THAT WILL OPERATE AS A MULTI–USE
SPORTS AND EVENTS FACILITY.

(d) [(1)] The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, WINE, and [wine:

(i)] LIQUOR for on–premises consumption to individuals present at
an event held in the [stadium; and

(ii) in plastic, Styrofoam, or paper containers.

(2) The written approval of the Board is required before beer and wine may
be sold, served, or consumed:

(i) on a parking lot of the stadium; or

(ii) during an event other than a baseball game in which the team of
the license holder is playing] MULTI–USE SPORTS AND EVENTS FACILITY.

(e) The license holder [may sell beer and wine from the time the stadium opens
for the event until the event ends] SHALL REQUIRE ALL EMPLOYEES TO:

(1) COMPLETE AN ALCOHOL AWARENESS TRAINING PROGRAM; AND

(2) OBTAIN A CROWD CONTROL TRAINING CERTIFICATE.

(f) The license holder may not allow an individual to carry alcoholic beverages
onto or from the licensed premises.

(g) [(1)] The annual license fee is [$2,000] $2,500.

[(2) The fee for a Sunday permit is $250.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2