START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 981

Chapter 981

(House Bill 906)

AN ACT concerning

Garrett County – Sheriff’s Salary – Alteration

FOR the purpose of altering the salary of the Sheriff of Garrett County; repealing the
requirement for the Garrett County Salary Study Commission to study and issue a
report that contains recommendations relating to the salary of the Sheriff; and
generally relating to the salary of the Sheriff of Garrett County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–325(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–325(b)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Garrett County
Section 32.40
Article 12 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2005 Edition and September 2022 Supplement, as amended)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
The Public Local Laws of Garrett County
Section 32.43
Article 12 – Public Local Laws of Maryland
(2005 Edition and September 2022 Supplement, as amended)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

2–325.

(a) This section applies only in Garrett County.

(b) (1) The Sheriff of Garrett County shall receive an annual salary [of:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 981 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) $28,250 for calendar year 1991;

(ii) $30,500 for calendar year 1992;

(iii) $32,750 for calendar year 1993;

(iv) $35,000 for calendar year 1994; and

(v) For each subsequent year, the salary set by the County
Commissioners of Garrett County in accordance with Chapter 91 of the Public Local Laws
of Garrett County] THAT IS 80% OF THE SALARY OF THE STATE’S ATTORNEY OF
GARRETT COUNTY.

Article 12 – Garrett County

32.40.

There is a Garrett County Salary Study Commission.

32.43.

(A) The Commission shall study the salaries of the:

(1) County Commissioners;

(2) Board of Education;

(3) Board of Supervisors of Elections;

(4) Judges of the Orphans’ Court; AND

(5) Liquor Control Board[; and

(6) Sheriff].

(B) The Commission may recommend to the County Commissioners an increase
or decrease in the salary of the State’s Attorney, or any office in division (A) of this section.

(C) The Commission shall report its recommendations to the County
Commissioners on or before June 30, 1997, and on or before June 30 every fourth year
thereafter.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ pursuant
to Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend
or apply to the salary or compensation of the Sheriff of Garrett County while serving in a

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 981

term of office beginning before the effective date of this Act, but the provisions of this Act
concerning the salary or compensation of the Sheriff of Garrett County shall take effect at
the beginning of the next following term of office. This limitation does not apply to an
individual appointed or elected after the effective date of this Act to fill out an unexpired
term.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3