START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 992 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 992 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Delegated Authorities - Well and Septic Program Permits 
 
 
This bill requires a local health department (LHD) or county government to which the 
Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) has delegated authority to administer a 
well and septic program to submit a schedule of review times for well and septic program 
permits to MDE for approval by December 1, 2024. Beginning three months after the 
schedule is approved by MDE, and every three months thereafter, an LHD or county 
government must submit well and septic program permit data to MDE for review. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing local resources. 
Revenues are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Septic Systems Permitting 
 
MDE delegates the authority to issue permits to construct and repair conventional septic 
systems to local approving authorities. Pursuant to current regulations, a person may not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 992/ Page 2 
construct or attempt to construct a septic system without first obtaining a permit from the 
appropriate approving authority. A person also may not alter a septic system or cause it to 
receive any increase in flow or change in the character of wastewater unless permitted. A 
person must obtain an appropriate septic system permit, well construction permit, public 
or private water supply system permit, or public or private sewerage permit before 
constructing or altering any structure, residence, floating home, or commercial 
establishment that is served or planned to be served by a septic system or a private water 
supply system. Local approving authorities, generally LHDs, conduct inspections. 
 
Water Well Construction Permitting 
 
MDE’s water well construction program regulates the permitting and installation of water 
wells in the State, including for potable and nonpotable supply wells. Wells must be 
installed by a Maryland-licensed well driller, and the licensed well driller must obtain a 
well construction permit prior to drilling. MDE delegates authority to enforce the State’s 
water well construction regulations to LHDs and other local approving authorities. 
Licensed well drillers apply to the local approving authority to obtain a well construction 
permit prior to drilling. After obtaining a permit to drill, the well driller must also submit 
a completion report to the approving authority. If the well is to be used as a potable water 
supply, a Certificate of Potability is required before the well is put into service. 
 
Study and Report Related to Well and Septic Systems Permitting 
 
Chapter 577 of 2023 requires MDE, in consultation with the Department of Legislative 
Services and the University of Maryland Agriculture and Food Systems Extension 
Program, to study the implications of the delegation of MDE’s well and septic systems 
permitting authority to the Maryland Department of Health. MDE was required to submit 
an interim report of its findings and any recommendations for legislative or administrative 
changes to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1, 2023. The interim 
report can be found here. A final report is due by December 1, 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 835 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 992/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Association of County Health Officers; Baltimore City; Harford County; Department of 
Legislative Services 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3