START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 980 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 980 
(Delegate Rosenberg, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Opioid Restitution Advisory Council and Fund - Revisions 
 
 
This bill requires the Secretary of Health – within six months of receiving specified 
findings and recommendations from the Opioid Restitution Fund Advisory Council – to 
present to the advisory council the decisions for allocations from the Opioid Restitution 
Fund (ORF). The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must post to the MDH website 
the council’s findings and recommendations and the Secretary’s decisions. The bill 
expands the permitted uses of ORF to include supporting community-based nonprofit 
recovery organizations that provide nonclinical substance use recovery support services in 
the State. By December 1, 2024, MDH must examine and report to specified committees 
of the General Assembly on the best process for making all of the expenditures of all opioid 
settlement agreements entered into by the State, counties, and municipalities accessible to 
the public. The bill also makes other technical and conforming changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  While the bill alters the permitted uses of ORF, overall ORF revenues and 
expenditures are not materially affected. MDH can implement the bill with existing 
budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  To the extent that a local health department qualifies as a community-based 
recovery organization, revenues and expenditures may increase. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 537 of 2019 established ORF, a special fund to retain any revenues 
received by the State relating to specified opioid judgments or settlements, which may be 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 980/ Page 2 
used only for opioid-related programs and services. Chapter 270 of 2022 specifies that ORF 
may be used for programs, services, supports, and resources for evidence-based substance 
use disorder (SUD) prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction that have the 
purpose of currently authorized outcomes and activities. ORF may also be used for:   
 
 
evidence-informed SUD prevention, treatment recovery, or harm reduction pilot 
programs or demonstration studies that are not evidence based if the advisory 
council determines that emerging evidence supports funding or that there is a 
reasonable basis for funding with the expectation of creating an evidence-based 
program and approves the use of money for the pilot program or demonstration 
study; and 
 
evaluations of the effectiveness and outcomes reporting for SUD abatement 
infrastructure, programs, services, supports, and resources for which the fund is 
used. 
 
On July 21, 2021, a $26 billion global settlement was announced by opioid manufacturer 
Johnson & Johnson (Janssen Settlement Agreement) and McKesson, Amerisource Bergen, 
and Cardinal Health (Final Distributor Agreement). On September 8, 2021, Maryland 
Attorney General Brian E. Frosh announced Maryland’s participation in the global 
settlement. Maryland is expected to receive approximately $500 million as part of the 
settlement. A copy of the Janssen Settlement can be located here. A copy of the 
Final Distributor Agreement can be located here. In fiscal 2022, ORF received 
approximately $12 million from the $573 million global settlement agreement with 
McKinsey & Company for its role in marketing opioids, including OxyContin. The 
fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly directs $36.2 million to ORF, 
reflecting years one, two, and three of settlement payments from Janssen and distributors. 
 
Chapters 84 and 85 of 2022 require that settlement funds received in accordance with the 
Final Distributor Agreement of July 21, 2021, as amended, and the Janssen Settlement 
Agreement of July 21, 2021, as amended, be appropriated as agreed upon in the 
State-Subdivision Agreement of January 21, 2022, as amended. The Secretary must 
establish and administer a grant program for the distribution of funds to political 
subdivisions of the State pursuant to the specified State-Subdivision Agreement. 
 
The advisory council (staffed by the Office of Overdose Response – formerly the Opioid 
Operational Command Center) must, by November 1 each year, provide specific findings 
and recommendations to the Governor and the Secretary regarding the allocations of 
money from ORF, consistent with authorized uses of the fund and considering (1) the 
number of people per capita with a SUD in a jurisdiction; (2) disparities in access to care 
in a jurisdiction that may preclude persons; (3) the number of overdose deaths per capita 
in a jurisdiction; (4) the programs, services, supports, or other resources currently available 
to individuals with a SUD in a jurisdiction; and (5) disparities in access to care and health 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 980/ Page 3 
outcomes in a jurisdiction. The Governor must consult at least twice annually with the 
advisory council to identify recommended appropriations from ORF.  
 
In fiscal 2023, ORF revenues totaled $57.9 million, and expenditures (largely in the form 
of grants) totaled $26.9 million. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $81 million 
in grants from opioid settlement funds to local government and community organizations 
for opioid abatement efforts. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 751 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland 
Association of County Health Officers; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3