START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

Chapter 171

(House Bill 903)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Access to Attorneys, Advocates, and Consultants for Special
Education Program and Fund – Established

FOR the purpose of requiring certain information to be provided to the parents of a child
with a disability under certain circumstances; requiring certain public agencies to
compile, collect, and report certain information; establishing the Access to Attorneys,
Advocates, and Consultants for Special Education Program; establishing the Access
to Attorneys, Advocates, and Consultants for Special Education Fund; requiring
interest earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund; and generally relating to
the Access to Attorneys, Advocates, and Consultants for Special Education Program
and Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 8–405(b) and (e) and 8–413(b) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 8–413(a)(1), (5), and (6) and (l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 8–413(m) and 8–413.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)189. and 190.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)191.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

8–405.

(b) (1) When a team of qualified professionals and the parents meet for the
purpose of discussing the identification, evaluation, educational program, or the provision
of a free appropriate public education of a child with a disability:

(i) The parents of the child shall be afforded the opportunity to
participate and shall be provided reasonable notice in advance of the meeting; and

(ii) Reasonable notice shall be at least 10 calendar days in advance
of the meeting, unless an expedited meeting is being conducted to:

1. Address disciplinary issues;

2. Determine the placement of the child with a disability not
currently receiving educational services; or

3. Meet other urgent needs of a child with a disability to
ensure the provision of a free appropriate public education.

(2) (i) 1. At the initial evaluation meeting, the parents of the child
shall be provided:

A. In plain language, an oral and written explanation of the
parents’ rights and responsibilities in the individualized education program process and a
program procedural safeguards notice;

B. Written information that the parents may use to contact
early intervention and special education family support services staff members within the
local school system and a brief description of the services provided by the staff members;
[and]

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

C. Written information on the Special Education
Ombudsman and toll–free telephone number established under Title 6, Subtitle 5 of the
State Government Article; AND

D. WRITTEN INFORMATION ABOUT THE ACCESS TO
ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–413.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

2. If a parent’s native language is not English, the
information in subsubparagraph 1B [and], C, AND D of this subparagraph shall be
provided to the parent in the parent’s native language.

(ii) The parents may request the information provided under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph at any subsequent meeting.

(iii) If a child who has an individualized education program
developed in another school system moves into a different local school system, that local
school system shall provide the information required under subparagraph (i)1B [and], C,
AND D of this paragraph at the time of the first written communication with the parents
regarding the child’s individualized education program or special education services.

(iv) A local school system shall publish information that a parent
may use to contact early intervention and special education family support services staff
members within the local school system and a brief description of the services provided by
the staff members in a prominent place on the section of its website relating to special
education services.

(3) Failure to provide the information required under paragraph (2)(i)1B
[and], C, AND D of this subsection does not constitute grounds for a due process complaint
under § 8–413 of this subtitle.

(4) (i) A parent may request an independent educational evaluation at
public expense in accordance with regulations adopted by the Department if:

1. The parent disagrees with the educational evaluation of
the student that was conducted by the local school system; or

2. The parent submits to the local school system a written
request for an educational evaluation conducted by the local school system and the local
school system:

A. Does not respond to the request within 30 days as required
under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph; or

B. Approves the request but the educational evaluation
meeting does not occur, through no fault of the parent, within:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

I. 60 days after the date on which the request was received
by the local school system; or

II. If the State is under a state of emergency proclaimed by
the Governor, 90 days after the date on which the request was received by the local school
system.

(ii) The local school system shall provide a written response
approving or denying a request within 30 days of the date the request was made.

(iii) If the local school system approves a request, the written
response shall advise the parent of the process for arranging the evaluation at public
expense.

(iv) If the local school system denies a request, the local school system
shall file a due process complaint under § 8–413 of this subtitle within 30 days of the date
of the denial.

(5) (i) If, during an individualized education program team meeting, a
parent disagrees with the child’s individualized education program or the special education
services provided to the child, the individualized education program team shall provide the
parent with, in plain language:

1. An oral and a written explanation of the parent’s right to
request mediation in accordance with § 8–413 of this subtitle;

2. Contact information, including a telephone number that a
parent may use to receive more information about the mediation process; [and]

3. Information regarding pro bono representation and other
free or low–cost legal and related services available in the area; AND

4. WRITTEN INFORMATION ABOUT THE ACCESS TO
ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–413.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(ii) A parent may request the information provided under
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph at any individualized education program team meeting.

(6) (i) If the native language spoken by a parent who requests
information under paragraph (5) of this subsection is spoken by more than 1% of the
student population in the local school system, the parent may request that the information
be translated into the parent’s native language.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

(ii) If a parent makes a request under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, the individualized education program team shall provide the parent with the
translated document within 30 days after the date of the request.

(e) (1) (i) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, and
subject to subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of this paragraph, at least 5 business days before a
scheduled meeting of the individualized education program team or other multidisciplinary
education team for any purpose for a child with a disability, appropriate school personnel
shall provide the parents of the child with [an]:

1. AN accessible copy of each assessment, report, data chart,
draft individualized education program, or other document that either team plans to
discuss at the meeting;

2. NOTIFICATION OF THE RIGHT OF THE PARENT TO BE
ACCOMPANIED TO THE MEETING BY ANY INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS KNOWLEDGE OR
SPECIAL EXPERTISE REGARDING THE STUDENT; AND

3. WRITTEN INFORMATION ABOUT THE ACCESS TO
ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–413.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(ii) Subject to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, an assessment,
report, data chart, or other document prepared by a school psychologist or other medical
professional that either team plans to discuss at the meeting may be provided to the parents
of the child orally and in writing prior to the meeting.

(iii) The parents of a child may notify appropriate school personnel
that they do not want to receive the documents required to be provided under subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph.

(2) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, appropriate
school personnel are not required to comply with paragraph (1) of this subsection in the
event of an extenuating circumstance.

(ii) In the event of an extenuating circumstance, appropriate school
personnel who fail to comply with paragraph (1) of this subsection shall document the
extenuating circumstance and communicate that information to the parents of the child.

8–413.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(5) “Parent” means:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) A child’s natural or adoptive parents, a guardian, or a person
acting as a parent of a child, such as a relative or a stepparent with whom the child lives;

(ii) A foster parent with whom a child lives if the foster parent has
been granted limited guardianship for educational decision making purposes by the court
that placed the child in foster care;

(iii) Another individual who is legally responsible for the child’s
welfare; or

(iv) A parent surrogate appointed in accordance with § 8–412 of this
subtitle.

(6) “Public agency” means the State Department of Education, a local
school system, the Juvenile Services Education Program, or any State agency responsible
for providing education to students with disabilities, including the Maryland School for the
Blind and the Maryland School for the Deaf.

(b) (1) The parent of a child with a disability or a public agency may formally
request mediation at any time to resolve any disagreement between the parties regarding
the child’s special education services or program.

(2) If a parent files a due process complaint against a public agency
concerning the identification, evaluation, or educational placement of a student or the
provision of a free appropriate public education, any party shall be given the opportunity
to request mediation of those aspects of the decision subject to dispute.

(3) The request for mediation may not be used to deny or delay the parent’s
rights under federal law or this section.

(4) Any party to the mediation has the right to be accompanied and advised
by counsel.

(5) Mediation shall be conducted in accordance with departmental
regulations.

(6) A mediation agreement shall be in writing and is enforceable in a court
of competent jurisdiction in accordance with federal law.

(7) The Department shall make a staff member available to assist a parent
in understanding the mediation process.

(8) BEFORE MEDIATION BEGINS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL NOTIFY A
PARENT ABOUT THE ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS FOR
SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–413.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

(c) (1) Before conducting a due process hearing in accordance with subsection
(d) of this section, the public agency shall provide the parent with [an]:

(I) AN opportunity to resolve the due process complaint at a
resolution session in accordance with federal law; AND

(II) NOTIFICATION ABOUT THE ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS,
ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–413.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) A resolution session agreement shall be in writing and enforceable in a
court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with federal law.

(3) A written resolution agreement may be voided by the parties within 3
business days of execution in accordance with federal law.

(l) (1) The court may award reasonable attorney’s fees and related costs,
including expert witness fees and costs, to the parent of a child with a disability who is a
prevailing party in accordance with this subsection.

(2) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, attorney’s fees may not be
awarded and related costs may not be reimbursed for services performed after the date a
written offer of settlement is made to a parent if:

(i) The settlement offer is made more than 14 days before the start
of the proceeding;

(ii) The settlement offer is not accepted within 14 days; and

(iii) The court finds that the relief finally obtained by the parent is
not more favorable to the parent than the settlement offer.

(3) An award of attorney’s fees and related costs, including expert witness
fees and costs, may be made to a parent who is the prevailing party and who was
substantially justified in rejecting a settlement offer.

(M) (1) A PUBLIC AGENCY ANNUALLY SHALL COLLECT THE FOLLOWING
INFORMATION FOR EACH INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM, MEDIATION
PROCEEDING, AND DUE PROCESS PROCEEDING:

(I) THE NATURE OF THE DISPUTE; AND

(II) THE STUDENT’S:

1. GRADE LEVEL;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. SPECIAL EDUCATION PLACEMENT;

3. DISABILITY CATEGORY;

4. RACE;

5. ETHNICITY;

6. GENDER;

7. ENGLISH LEARNER STATUS; AND

8. FREE AND REDUCED PRICE MEALS STATUS.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COMPILE THE INFORMATION
COLLECTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND, ON OR BEFORE
NOVEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

8–413.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “ADVOCATE” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO, FOR
COMPENSATION, PROVIDES SUPPORT AND GUIDANCE DURING INDIVIDUALIZED
EDUCATION PROGRAM MEETINGS, MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS, OR DUE PROCESS
PROCEEDINGS TO:

1. A STUDENT WITH A DISABILITY; OR

2. THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF A STUDENT WITH A
DISABILITY.

(II) “ADVOCATE” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

1. AN ATTORNEY ACTING IN A LEGAL CAPACITY TO
REPRESENT A STUDENT WITH A DISABILITY; OR

2. A CONSULTANT.

(2) (3) “CONSULTANT” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A DEGREE OR
CERTIFICATION IN A FIELD THAT IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO SPECIAL EDUCATION OR

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

RELATED SERVICES WHOSE KNOWLEDGE CAN BE HELPFUL IN DETERMINING HOW
TO MEET A STUDENT’S SPECIAL EDUCATION NEEDS IN ACCORDANCE WITH FEDERAL
AND STATE LAW.

(3) (4) “ELIGIBLE STUDENT” MEANS A STUDENT WITH A
DISABILITY WHOSE PARENT HAS:

(I) A HOUSEHOLD INCOME OF NOT MORE THAN 150% OF THE
MARYLAND LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION INCOME GUIDELINES USED BY THE
MARYLAND VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE; AND

(II) MADE AT LEAST ONE ATTEMPT TO RESOLVE A
DISAGREEMENT WITH A PUBLIC AGENCY REGARDING THE CHILD’S SPECIAL
EDUCATION SERVICES OR PROGRAM.

(4) (5) “FUND” MEANS THE ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES,
AND CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION FUND.

(5) (6) “INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM” HAS THE SAME
MEANING AS PROVIDED STATED IN THE FEDERAL INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
EDUCATION ACT.

(6) (7) “PARENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–413 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

(7) (8) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS,
ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM.

(8) (9) “PUBLIC AGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 8–413 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THERE IS AN ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND
CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION PROGRAM.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO DIRECT RESOURCES AND
SERVICES TO ELIGIBLE STUDENTS TO PROVIDE ACCESS TO LEGAL, ADVOCACY, AND
CONSULTANT SERVICES AS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION.

(3) (I) THE PROGRAM SHALL BE ADMINISTERED BY THE
MARYLAND ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~LEGAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~
VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE.

(II) THE MARYLAND ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~LEGAL~~
~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE SHALL:
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. ADVERTISE THE PROGRAM;

2. SEEK QUALIFIED ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND
CONSULTANTS INTERESTED IN BEING INCLUDED ON A REFERRAL LIST TO BE
PROVIDED TO ELIGIBLE STUDENTS;

3. COMPILE AND MAINTAIN A REFERRAL LIST OF
QUALIFIED ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS;

4. DEVELOP SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, DEVELOP DEVELOP CRITERIA TO DETERMINE THE REQUIRED
QUALIFICATIONS OF ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS TO PARTICIPATE
IN THE PROGRAM;

5. DEVELOP, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE
DEPARTMENT, LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM SPECIAL EDUCATION DIRECTORS,
DISABILITY RIGHTS ADVOCATES, AND REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE JUDICIARY,
TRAINING FOR ADVOCATES AND CONSULTANTS ON FEDERAL AND STATE SPECIAL
EDUCATION LAW AND PROCEDURES;

6. DEVELOP AND DISTRIBUTE TO APPROPRIATE PUBLIC
AGENCIES THE WRITTEN INFORMATIONAL MATERIALS REQUIRED TO BE PROVIDED
TO PARENTS UNDER § 8–405 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

5. 7. ENSURE THAT PUBLIC AGENCIES PROVIDE
NOTIFICATION OF THE PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS
SECTION;

6. 8. PROVIDE THE REFERRAL LIST TO ELIGIBLE
STUDENTS WHO CONTACT THE MARYLAND VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE LEGAL
~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE;

7. 9. COMPILE DATA IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION
(F) OF THIS SECTION; AND

8. 10. STUDY AND EVALUATE:

A. THE SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE PROGRAM; AND

B. RESOURCES NEEDED TO INCREASE THE ACCESS OF
ELIGIBLE STUDENTS TO ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS IN SPECIAL
EDUCATION MATTERS.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

~~(III)~~ ~~1.~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MARYLAND~~ ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~
SHALL DEVELOP TRAINING CRITERIA TO TRAIN ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND
CONSULTANTS WHO SEEK TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM.

2. THE TRAINING DEVELOPED UNDER THIS
SUBPARAGRAPH SHALL TEACH ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS ABOUT
ALL RELEVANT ASPECTS OF STATE AND FEDERAL LAW RELATING TO INDIVIDUALS
WITH DISABILITIES IN A SCHOOL SETTING.

~~3.~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MARYLAND~~ ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~
SHALL CONSULT WITH SPECIAL EDUCATION DIRECTORS, DISABILITY RIGHTS
ADVOCATES, AND MEMBERS OF THE JUDICIARY IN DEVELOPING THE TRAINING.

4. AN ATTORNEY, ADVOCATE, OR CONSULTANT MAY NOT
PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAM UNLESS THE ATTORNEY, ADVOCATE, OR
CONSULTANT HAS COMPLETED THE TRAINING.

(4) (I) THE MARYLAND ~~LEGAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~
VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE MAY PROVIDE OR AUTHORIZE OTHER NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS TO PROVIDE TO ADVOCATES AND CONSULTANTS THE TRAINING
DEVELOPED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3)(II)5 OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) AN ADVOCATE OR A CONSULTANT SHALL COMPLETE THE
TRAINING PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH TO QUALIFY
TO PARTICIPATE IN AND RECEIVE PAYMENT UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(4) (5) THE PROGRAM MAY SERVE ONLY ELIGIBLE STUDENTS WHO
MEET AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:

(I) A MORE RESTRICTIVE OR LESS RESTRICTIVE PLACEMENT IS
BEING PROPOSED FOR THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT AND THE PARENT DISAGREES WITH
THE PROPOSAL;

(II) A REDUCTION IN INSTRUCTIONAL OR RELATED SERVICES IS
BEING PROPOSED FOR THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT AND THE PARENT DISAGREES WITH
THE PROPOSAL;

(III) THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT HAS BEEN SUSPENDED OR
OTHERWISE REMOVED FROM SCHOOL FOR MORE THAN 10 DAYS;

(IV) THE SCHOOL HAS REQUESTED A DUE PROCESS HEARING
AGAINST THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT OR PARENT;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT HAS BEEN RESTRAINED OR
PLACED IN SECLUSION MORE THAN 10 TIMES;

(VI) THE SCHOOL HAS PROPOSED TO ENROLL AN ELIGIBLE
STUDENT IN AN ALTERNATIVE EDUCATION PROGRAM AND THE PARENT DISAGREES
WITH THE PROPOSAL; OR

(VII) THE PARENT’S NATIVE LANGUAGE IS NOT ENGLISH AND
THE PARENT SEEKS ASSISTANCE WITH NAVIGATING THE SPECIAL EDUCATION
NEEDS OF THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT.

(C) ALL PUBLIC AGENCIES SHALL INCLUDE INFORMATION ABOUT THE
PROGRAM IN THE PARENT’S RIGHTS DOCUMENTS DISTRIBUTED TO FAMILIES IN THE
INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAM MEETINGS AND BEFORE MEDIATION OR
DUE PROCESS HEARINGS UNDER § 8–413 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) (1) THERE IS AN ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND
CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION FUND.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR
FAMILIES OF ELIGIBLE STUDENTS WITH LIMITED FINANCIAL RESOURCES TO ACCESS
LEGAL ASSISTANCE, ADVOCACY, AND CONSULTATION SERVICES IN SPECIAL
EDUCATION MATTERS.

(3) THE ~~MARYLAND~~ ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ DEPARTMENT
SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(4) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND;

(II) INTEREST EARNINGS;

(III) REIMBURSEMENTS FROM ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND
CONSULTANTS DUE TO RECOUPMENT OF FEES; AND

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

(IV) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(6) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR:

(I) SERVICES PROVIDED TO ELIGIBLE STUDENTS BY
ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND CONSULTANTS;

(II) DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF WRITTEN
INFORMATIONAL MATERIAL FOR PARENTS;

(II) (III) OUTREACH AND EDUCATION ACTIVITIES; AND

(III) (IV) ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES OF THE MARYLAND
VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE DEPARTMENT AND THE MARYLAND LEGAL
~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE.

(7) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE FUND.

(8) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(9) (I) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $2,000,000
$1,000,000 TO THE FUND.

(II) EXCLUDING EXPENDITURES FOR ADMINISTERING THE
PROGRAM, IT IS THE INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT:

1. APPROXIMATELY 25% OF THE ANNUAL
APPROPRIATION BE USED FOR PROVIDING REPRESENTATION OF ELIGIBLE
STUDENTS IN DUE PROCESS HEARINGS AND COURT PROCEEDINGS; AND

2. APPROXIMATELY 75% OF THE ANNUAL
APPROPRIATION BE USED FOR PROVIDING CONSULTATION, REPRESENTATION, OR
ADVOCACY OF ELIGIBLE STUDENTS.

(10) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE PROGRAM IS
SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

OTHERWISE WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR THE PROGRAM OR FOR ANY OTHER
CIVIL LEGAL SERVICES FUNDED IN THE STATE’S ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET.

(E) (1) AN ELIGIBLE STUDENT WHO IS INTERESTED IN SECURING THE
SERVICES OF AN ATTORNEY, AN ADVOCATE, OR A CONSULTANT UNDER THE
PROGRAM SHALL REGISTER WITH AND PROVIDE ANY INFORMATION REQUIRED BY
THE MARYLAND VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION
VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE.

(2) (I) AN ATTORNEY, AN ADVOCATE, OR A CONSULTANT WHO IS
INCLUDED ON THE REFERRAL LIST MAINTAINED BY THE MARYLAND VOLUNTEER
~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~LEGAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ VOLUNTEER LAWYERS
SERVICE MAY RECEIVE THE INDIVIDUAL’S CUSTOMARY RATE, UP TO $200 PER
HOUR, TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(II) ON QUARTERLY SUBMISSION OF PROOF OF SERVICES, THE
MARYLAND ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~LEGAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~CORPORATION~~
VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE SHALL DIRECTLY PAY THE ATTORNEY, ADVOCATE,
OR CONSULTANT ON BEHALF OF THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT UP TO THE LIMIT
DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (3)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(III) FUNDS RECEIVED BY AN ATTORNEY, AN ADVOCATE, OR A
CONSULTANT UNDER THE PROGRAM DO NOT NEED TO BE REPAID TO THE PROGRAM
UNLESS THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT IS THE PREVAILING PARTY IN A PROCEEDING AND
FEES HAVE BEEN AWARDED TO THE ELIGIBLE STUDENT.

(3) (I) PROGRAM FUNDS SHALL BE ALLOCATED ON A FIRST–COME,
FIRST–SERVED BASIS.

(II) AN ELIGIBLE STUDENT IS LIMITED TO A LIFETIME MAXIMUM
OF $20,000 OF SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(F) (1) THE MARYLAND ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~LEGAL~~
SERVICES CORPORATION VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE SHALL COLLECT THE
FOLLOWING DATA ON AN ANNUAL BASIS:

(I) TOTAL AMOUNT OF FUNDS DISBURSED FROM THE FUND;

(II) AMOUNT OF FUNDS DISBURSED DISAGGREGATED BY THE
NUMBER OF:

1. ELIGIBLE STUDENTS SERVED;

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 171

2. ATTORNEYS WHO PROVIDED SERVICES;

3. ADVOCATES WHO PROVIDED SERVICES; AND

4. CONSULTANTS WHO PROVIDED SERVICES; AND

(III) THE AMOUNT OF FUNDS DISBURSED DISAGGREGATED BY
THE TYPE OF SERVICE, INCLUDING:

1. DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEEDINGS, INCLUDING
MEDIATION, DUE PROCESS HEARINGS, AND COURT PROCEEDINGS; AND

2. ASSISTANCE AND SUPPORT SERVICES, INCLUDING
CONSULTANCY, ADVOCACY, AND LEGAL CONSULTANCY SERVICES; AND

(III) (IV) THE AMOUNT OF MONEY RETURNED TO THE FUND
DUE TO RECOUPMENT OF FEES.

(2) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE MARYLAND VOLUNTEER ATTORNEYS SERVICE LEGAL SERVICES
CORPORATION VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE SHALL COMPILE THE INFORMATION
COLLECTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND SUBMIT A REPORT
TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(G) THE MARYLAND ~~VOLUNTEER~~ ~~LAWYERS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~LEGAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~
CORPORATION VOLUNTEER LAWYERS SERVICE MAY ADOPT POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

189. the Teacher Retention and Development Fund; [and]

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 171 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

190. the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund; AND

191. THE ACCESS TO ATTORNEYS, ADVOCATES, AND
CONSULTANTS FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16