START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 248

Chapter 248

(House Bill 953)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Health Benefit Exchange – State–Based Young Adult Health
Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program – Amount of Annual Subsidies

FOR the purpose of altering the amount of funds the Maryland Health Benefit Exchange
is authorized to designate for annual subsidies under the State–Based Young Adult
Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program for certain fiscal years to include unspent
funds designated for subsidies for young adults in a previous calendar year; and
generally relating to the State–Based Young Adult Health Insurance Subsidies Pilot
Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 31–122(a), (d), (f), and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 31–122(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

31–122.

(a) In this section, “Pilot Program” means the State–Based Young Adult Health
Insurance Subsidies Pilot Program.

(d) (1) For calendar years 2022 through 2025, the Exchange, in consultation
with the Commissioner and as approved by the Board, shall establish subsidy eligibility
and payment parameters for the Pilot Program.

(2) In determining the subsidy eligibility and payment parameters
required under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Exchange shall consider:

(i) young adults at least 18 years old and under the age of 41 years;
and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 248 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) income groups between 133% and 400% of the federal poverty
level.

(e) (1) Subject to available funds AND PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, in each of fiscal years 2022 through 2026, the Exchange may designate funds
from the Fund to be used for the Pilot Program so that [not more than $20,000,000 in]
annual subsidies may be provided to young adults who meet the subsidy eligibility and
payment parameters established under subsection (d) of this section.

(2) FOR EACH OF CALENDAR YEARS 2024 AND 2025, THE FUNDS
DESIGNATED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY NOT EXCEED
$20,000,000 PLUS ANY UNSPENT FUNDS DESIGNATED FOR SUBSIDIES FOR YOUNG
ADULTS IN A PREVIOUS CALENDAR YEAR.

(f) The Exchange shall adopt regulations implementing the provisions of this
section.

(g) The Exchange shall adopt regulations to provide a subsidy to cover 100% of
the cost of the premium for young adults who have a 0% expected contribution under the
subsidy eligibility parameters established under subsection (d) of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act is an emergency
measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health or safety, has
been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of all the members elected to
each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take effect from the date it is
enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2