START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1032 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1032 
(Delegate Solomon, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Highways – Tourist Area and Corridor Signage Program 
 
 
This bill codifies and alters the Tourist Area and Corridor (TAC) Signage Program 
administered by the State Highway Administration (SHA). Under the bill, SHA must 
administer the program in collaboration with the Department of Commerce. The bill 
(1) establishes various requirements for SHA and Commerce regarding the administration 
of the program, including the preparation and review of signage plans; (2) requires an 
attraction to pay a fee to SHA for the review of signs; (3) authorizes SHA to charge an 
attraction a reasonable annual administrative fee; and (4) establishes provisions regarding 
program amendments, eligibility for signage, and limitations on the content of signs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $53,000 in FY 2025 
and $14,700 in FY 2026. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures increase by 
$86,400 in FY 2025; future years reflect annualization, inflation, and ongoing costs. 
TTF revenues increase correspondingly each year from fees. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$86,400 
$103,600 
$108,200 
$112,900 
$117,900 
GF Expenditure 
$53,000 
$14,700 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$86,400 
$103,600 
$108,200 
$112,900 
$117,900 
Net Effect 
($53,000) 
($14,700) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances and operations are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact for any small 
business that can advertise more effectively as a result of the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1032/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Tourist Area and Corridor Signage Program – Generally 
 
The stated purpose of the program is to create a system of supplemental guide signs to 
direct motorists to eligible individual attractions by directing the motorists first to groups 
of attractions. SHA and Commerce must develop standards and procedures for determining 
the eligibility of an attraction for a sign. If Commerce provides an initial approval of an 
attraction’s application based on the criteria developed under the bill, Commerce must, in 
coordination with the requesting attraction, prepare a signage plan and submit the signage 
plan to SHA for review. 
 
SHA must review the signage plan for compliance with federal, State, and local laws and 
regulations and right-of-way laws and regulations. In reviewing a signage plan, SHA may 
consult with other State agencies and offices. As part of the review process, SHA must 
investigate whether there is space available at the proposed site along the State highway 
for a sign for the attraction. Approval of a signage plan is subject to space availability based 
on SHA’s regulations and requirements. 
 
If SHA approves a signage plan and issues a required permit to the attraction, the attraction 
must design, fabricate, and install the signs in the signage plan using standards and 
specifications approved by SHA. The attraction must bear all costs for the design, 
fabrication, and installation of the signs in the signage plan.  
 
The attraction is responsible for maintaining, removing, and replacing signs at the direction 
of SHA if an existing approved sign is determined to be noncompliant with program 
requirements for reasons including damage, fading, or safety concerns. SHA may remove 
any attraction sign that does not comply with the requirements of the program. An 
attraction whose sign is removed for noncompliance must resubmit new or replacement 
signage for review and approval.  
 
Review and Administrative Fees 
 
An attraction that applies for a sign must pay an amount SHA considers appropriate for the 
review of each sign included in the signage plan and the issuance of all required permits. 
 
In addition, SHA may charge an attraction a reasonable annual administrative fee to 
administer and manage the program for the duration that each sign in the signage plan is 
installed. SHA may remove an attraction’s sign if the attraction fails to pay the annual 
administrative fee.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1032/ Page 3 
Program Amendments 
 
SHA may amend the program if it determines that the program may result in a sanction by 
the Federal Highway Administration, including a decrease in federal funds provided to the 
State for highway use. SHA must notify specified legislative committees at least 30 days 
before amending the program to avoid a sanction. 
 
Eligibility for Signage and Limitations on the Content of Signs 
 
To be eligible for signage, an attraction may not, based on a determination by SHA and 
Commerce, already be well-signed on a tourist area corridor. In addition, an attraction may 
not bring reputational harm to the State. Generally, a sign developed under the program 
may only include the name of the attraction, a directional arrow to guide individuals to the 
attraction, and the approximate mileage to the attraction from the location of the sign. 
However, a sign may include a generic symbol used to represent a category of attractions 
identified by Commerce if, on the request of Commerce, SHA determines that there is a 
generic symbol approved for use in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
 
Current Law:  SHA is responsible for more than 5,200 miles or approximately  
16,800 lane miles of road, 2,500 bridges, 3,500 small stream crossing structures, and  
80 miles of sound/noise barriers in the State. It also has responsibility for planning, 
designing, constructing, and maintaining these roads and bridges to safety and performance 
standards while considering sociological, ecological, and economic concerns. 
 
SHA currently administers a TAC Signage Program, which is intended to create a system 
of supplemental guide signs to direct motorists to attractions in the State. Under the 
program, and if space is available, an attraction may have a mainline sign directly on a 
major highway, a sign on the appropriate off-ramp, and, finally, a series of trailblazer 
markers that lead a driver directly to the attraction. Program signs exist alongside other 
directional signs, such as destination signs, specific services signs, and history signs. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  
 
State Highway Administration 
 
TTF expenditures for SHA increase by $86,397 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s  
October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program 
manager to administer the program in collaboration with Commerce, develop standards 
and procedures for program eligibility, and review signage plans. It includes a salary, fringe 
benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1032/ Page 4 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$79,141 
Operating Expenses 
     7,256 
Total FY 2025 TTF Expenditures 
$86,397 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
SHA advises that it plans to set the sign review fee required by the bill – and the annual 
administrative fee authorized by the bill – at a level to recover its administrative costs. 
Accordingly, TTF revenues increase correspondingly to TTF expenditures each year.  
 
Department of Commerce 
 
General fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $53,049 in fiscal 2025 and by 
$14,741 in fiscal 2026, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual program administrator during the 
first year of the program – when the workload is anticipated to be the heaviest – to work 
with SHA to develop standards and procedures for determining program eligibility, receive 
applications from attractions, and work with attractions to prepare signage plans. It 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Contractual Position (New) 
1.0 
 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$45,793 
$14,468 
Operating Expenses 
     7,256 
        273 
Total General Fund Expenditures 
$53,049 
$14,741 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
The fiscal 2026 estimate reflects termination of the contractual position at the end of the 
first quarter. Commerce advises that after the initial influx of applicants, existing staff can 
manage the workload associated with the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1038 and SB 734 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1032/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5