START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 962

Chapter 962

(House Bill 1056)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Pharmacy – Prohibition on Discrimination Against 340B Drug
Distribution

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a 340B manufacturer, ~~wholesale~~ ~~drug~~ ~~distributor,~~ ~~or~~
~~third–party~~ ~~logistics~~ ~~provider,~~ ~~or~~ ~~an~~ ~~agent~~ ~~or~~ ~~affiliate~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~340B~~ ~~manufacturer,~~
~~wholesale~~ ~~drug~~ ~~distributor,~~ ~~or~~ ~~third–party~~ ~~logistics~~ ~~provider,~~ from taking certain
direct or indirect actions to limit or restrict the acquisition or delivery of a 340B drug;
making a violation of this Act an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice within
the meaning of the Consumer Protection Act; requiring the Maryland Prescription
Drug Affordability Board to conduct a study of the 340B Program; and generally
relating to 340B drugs.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xl)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xli)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xlii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–101(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Health Occupations
Section 12–6C–09.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 962 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xl) Title 14, Subtitle 13 of the Public Safety Article; [or]

(xli) Title 14, Subtitle 45 of this article; or

(XLII)SECTION 12–6C–09.1 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS
ARTICLE; OR

Article – Health Occupations

12–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) “Board” means the State Board of Pharmacy.

12–6C–09.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COVERED ENTITY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 42 U.S.C. §
256B(A)(4).

(3) “PACKAGE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN 21 U.S.C. §
360EEE(11).

(4) (I) “340B DRUG” MEANS A DRUG THAT:

1. IS A COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUG UNDER 42 U.S.C. §
256B;

2. HAS BEEN SUBJECT TO AN OFFER FOR REDUCED
PRICES BY A 340B MANUFACTURER UNDER 42 U.S.C. § 256B(A)(1); AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 962

3. IS PURCHASED BY A COVERED ENTITY.

(II) “340B DRUG” INCLUDES A DRUG THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN
PURCHASED BUT FOR THE LIMITATION UNDER SUBSECTION (D) (C) OF THIS
SECTION.

(5) “340B MANUFACTURER” MEANS A MANUFACTURER, AS DEFINED
IN 42 U.S.C. § 1396R–8(K)(5), OF COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS THAT HAS SIGNED
A PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING AGREEMENT UNDER 42 U.S.C. § 256B(A)(1).

(B) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO:

~~(1)~~ ~~A~~ ~~340B~~ ~~MANUFACTURER;~~

(2) A WHOLESALE DRUG DISTRIBUTOR;

(3) A THIRD–PARTY LOGISTICS PROVIDER; AND

(4) AN AGENT OR AFFILIATE OF A 340B MANUFACTURER,
WHOLESALE DRUG DISTRIBUTOR, OR THIRD–PARTY LOGISTICS PROVIDER.

(C) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO BE:

(1) LESS RESTRICTIVE THAN ANY FEDERAL LAW THAT IS APPLICABLE
TO A PERSON REGULATED BY THIS SECTION; OR

(2) IN CONFLICT WITH APPLICABLE FEDERAL AND STATE LAWS AND
REGULATIONS.

(D) (C) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION A 340B MANUFACTURER MAY
NOT DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY DENY, RESTRICT, PROHIBIT, DISCRIMINATE
AGAINST, OR OTHERWISE LIMIT THE ACQUISITION OF A 340B DRUG BY, OR
DELIVERY OF A 340B DRUG TO, A PHARMACY THAT IS UNDER CONTRACT WITH OR
OTHERWISE AUTHORIZED BY A COVERED ENTITY TO RECEIVE 340B DRUGS ON
BEHALF OF THE COVERED ENTITY UNLESS THE RECEIPT OF 340B DRUGS IS
PROHIBITED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

(2) AN ENTITY SUBJECT TO THIS SECTION A 340B MANUFACTURER
MAY LIMIT THE DISTRIBUTION OF A 340B DRUG IF THE LIMITATION IS REQUIRED
UNDER 21 U.S.C. § 355–1.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 962 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) (D) (1) (I) A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (D) (C) OF THIS
SECTION:

(I) 1. SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, IS
AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN THE MEANING OF
TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE AND IS SUBJECT TO THE
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THE
COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

(II) 2. A. SHALL IF THE ALLEGED VIOLATION WAS
COMMITTED BY A PERSON THAT IS LICENSED OR PERMITTED BY THE BOARD, SHALL
BE JOINTLY OR SEPARATELY INVESTIGATED BY THE BOARD OR THE CONSUMER
PROTECTION DIVISION OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL; OR

B. IF THE ALLEGED VIOLATION WAS COMMITTED BY A
PERSON THAT IS NOT LICENSED OR PERMITTED BY THE BOARD, SHALL BE
INVESTIGATED BY THE CONSUMER PROTECTION DIVISION OF THE OFFICE OF THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL.

(II) AS PART OF AN INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (1)(I)2 OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE BOARD OR THE CONSUMER
PROTECTION DIVISION OF THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY
INVESTIGATE AN AFFILIATE OR A CONTRACTOR OF THE 340B MANUFACTURER,
INCLUDING A WHOLESALER OR THIRD–PARTY LOGISTICS PROVIDER.

(2) (I) IN ADDITION TO THE PENALTIES UNDER TITLE 13 OF THE
COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE, A CIVIL FINE MAY BE ASSESSED IN THE AMOUNT OF
$50,000 $5,000 PER VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (D) (C) OF THIS SECTION.

(II) A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION DOES NOT CREATE A
PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION UNDER § 13–408 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE.

(3) IF A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (D) (C) OF THIS SECTION IS
COMMITTED BY A PERSON LICENSED OR PERMITTED BY THE BOARD, THE BOARD
MAY IMPOSE DISCIPLINE, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF THE PERSON’S LICENSE
OR PERMIT.

(4) EACH PACKAGE OF 340B DRUGS SUBJECT TO A VIOLATION OF
SUBSECTION (D) (C) OF THIS SECTION SHALL CONSTITUTE A SEPARATE VIOLATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 962

(a) The Maryland Prescription Drug Affordability Board, in consultation with the
Maryland Department of Health:

(1) shall conduct a study on:

(i) the current implementation and scope of the 340B Program in
the State;

(ii) the implementation and impact of the implementation of Section
1 of this Act; and

(iii) the finances of the Program in the State, including how covered
entities reinvest savings realized from the Program; and

(2) may require covered entities and 340B manufacturers to report
information as necessary to complete the study.

(b) On or before July 1, 2026, the Maryland Prescription Drug Affordability Board
shall report its findings and recommendations from the study to the Senate Finance
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance
with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5