START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1002 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1002 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations Committee, 
et al.) (By Request - Office of the Attorney General) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Office of the Attorney General - Investigative Authority - Health Care Fraud 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Attorney General, a deputy Attorney General, or an assistant 
Attorney General designated by the Attorney General to issue a subpoena for the limited 
purpose of furthering an ongoing health care fraud investigation. A subpoena may require 
a person to (1) produce documentary material for inspection, copying, or reproduction; 
(2) answer, under oath and in writing, written interrogatories; (3) give sworn oral 
testimony; or (4) provide any combination of these items. A subpoena may be served in 
the same manner as a subpoena issued by a circuit court. If a person fails to obey a lawfully 
served subpoena issued under the bill, the Attorney General may report a failure to obey 
the subpoena to the circuit court with jurisdiction over the matter; the Attorney General 
must provide a copy of the subpoena and proof of service to the circuit court. After a 
hearing at which the person who allegedly failed to comply with a subpoena has an 
opportunity to be heard and represented by counsel, the court may grant appropriate relief. 
The bill may not be construed to allow the contravention, denial, or abrogation of a 
privilege or right recognized by law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill’s changes are generally procedural in nature, there is no 
meaningful impact on governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material fiscal or operational impact on 
the circuit courts.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1002/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Office of the Attorney General (OAG) Medicaid Fraud and Vulnerable 
Victims Unit (MFVVU) (1) investigates and prosecutes fraud by Medicaid health care 
providers and in the administration of the Medicaid program; (2) investigates and 
prosecutes crimes involving the abuse or neglect of vulnerable adults in the State; and 
(3) addresses the opioid crisis by investigating the diversion of pharmaceuticals and the 
inappropriate dispensing of opioids. MFVVU pursues investigations using a 
multidisciplinary team approach that utilizes attorneys, investigators, and auditors to 
unravel complex fraud schemes and address instances of abuse of residents in the State’s 
long-term care system. Cases may be pursued either criminally or civilly utilizing both the 
criminal statutes and the Maryland False Health Claims Act (MFHCA). MFVVU also 
participates with other states in collaborative efforts to address nationwide fraud schemes 
affecting multiple government health programs. 
 
Enacted under Chapter 4 of 2010, MFHCA prohibits a person from making a false or 
fraudulent claim for payment or approval by the State or the Maryland Department of 
Health under a State health plan or State health program and authorizes individuals to file 
private party causes of action on behalf of a governmental entity for false health claims 
made against the State. 
 
When a person submits a false claim in violation of MFHCA, the State may recover up to 
three times the amount of the damages sustained and up to $10,000 per violation. The false 
claim does not have to be submitted directly to a governmental entity but includes indirect 
payments, such as a subcontractor submitting a false claim to a prime contractor or 
contractors submitting claims to nongovernmental agencies that receive government funds. 
 
Additional Comments:  OAG advises that the subpoena powers granted under the bill will 
make OAG investigations into health care fraud more efficient and will clarify current 
inconsistencies between investigatory powers and health privacy laws. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1002/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3