START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1044 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1044 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Agency Workforce Policy for the 21st Century Act 
 
   
This bill repeals the requirement that an appointing authority send a copy of the selection 
plan and job announcement to the Secretary of Budget and Management at least one week 
prior to posting a job announcement for a vacant skilled service or professional service 
position in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS). The bill also repeals the 
requirement that an appointing authority wait until after the close of a position 
announcement to review qualified applicants for a skilled service or professional service 
position in SPMS. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances, although the bill creates operational efficiencies by removing 
requirements that may delay the hiring process for skilled service and professional service 
positions within SPMS.  
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not apply to local governments as employers. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:     
 
State Employees within the State Personnel Management System  
 
SPMS has four major employment categories designated in statute:  
 
 
executive service, which consists of chief administrators of principal units or 
comparable positions, including deputy secretaries or assistant secretaries;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1044/ Page 2 
 
management service, which consists of positions that involve direct responsibility 
for the oversight and management of personnel and financial resources and that 
require the exercise of discretion and independent judgment;  
 
professional service, which consists of positions that require advanced knowledge 
in a field of science or learning and that normally require a professional license, 
advanced degree, or both; and  
 
skilled service, which consists of all other positions. 
 
Skilled and Professional Service Positions within the State Personnel Management System 
 
The Secretary must review and audit recruitment and hiring practices of all appointing 
authorities at least once every three years. When a skilled service or professional service 
position is to be filled, the appointing authority must complete a position selection plan 
that includes specified information. Each unit within SPMS must fill vacant skilled service 
and professional service positions in accordance with a position selection plan. 
 
For a vacant position, the appointing authority must send a copy of the selection plan and 
job announcement to the Secretary of Budget and Management at least one week before 
posting the job announcement to assure public access. If current employees or contractual 
employees may be eligible for the position, then a job announcement must be posted for at 
least two weeks before the deadline for submitting applications. The position vacancy must 
be advertised for at least two weeks before the application deadline by making available a 
job announcement to all appropriate State agencies and using any other method to ensure 
a sufficient pool of applicants, including printed advertisements in newspapers and 
journals, paper and electronic bulletin board postings, and special notices. 
 
After the close of a position announcement, the appointing authority must review the 
applications received to determine the qualified applicants, prepare a register of qualified 
applicants in random order, and send a notice to unqualified applicants that they failed to 
meet the minimum qualifications for the position. After the close of a position 
announcement, the appointing authority must also send notice of a competitive 
examination at least 10 days before the test administration date if such an examination is 
required. If at least 2 but fewer than 10 applicants meet the minimum requirements for a 
position, the appointing authority may readvertise the position vacancy or make a selection 
from the register without the need for further selection testing. 
 
An appointing authority may forego the SPMS position selection plan and recruit for a 
skilled or professional service position if the appointing authority decides to recruit for the 
position, the position is difficult to fill, the recruitment must occur in a timely manner, and 
the Department of Budget and Management is notified. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1044/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Department of Aging; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s 
Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of 
Education; University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing 
and Community Development; Department of Human Services; Department of Juvenile 
Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Veterans Affairs; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Service and Civic 
Innovation; Maryland Insurance Administration; Maryland State Lottery and Gaming 
Control Agency; Public Service Commission; Maryland Stadium Authority; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3