START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1063 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1063 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Criminal Organizations - Underlying Crime 
 
 
This bill expands the meaning of “underlying crime” for the purposes of establishing a 
“pattern of organized criminal activity” applicable to related criminal prohibitions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund expenditures due to the bill’s 
expanded application of existing criminal penalty provisions. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local revenues from fines imposed in the 
circuit courts under the bill’s expanded application of existing penalty provisions. 
Expenditures are not materially affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expands what “underlying crime” means (for the purposes of 
establishing a “pattern of organized crime activity”) to include:   
 
 
use of a firearm in the commission of a crime under § 4-204 of the Criminal Law 
Article;  
 
contraband – in general under § 9-412 of the Criminal Law Article;  
 
a felony violation of Title 8 of the Criminal Law Article (fraud and related crimes);  
 
bribery under Title 9, Subtitle 2 of the Criminal Law Article;  
 
false statements under Title 9, Subtitle 5 of the Criminal Law Article; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1063/ Page 2 
 
impersonating a police officer under § 3-502 of the Public Safety Article; 
 
threat of mass violence under Title 3, Subtitle 10 of the Criminal Law Article; 
 
child pornography under § 11-207 or § 11-208 of the Criminal Law Article; 
 
a felony violation of Title 27, Subtitle 4 of the Insurance Article (insurance fraud); 
 
removal or falsification of vehicle identification number under § 14-107 of the 
Transportation Article; and 
 
abuse or neglect of a vulnerable adult under §§ 3-604 or 3-605 of the Criminal Law 
Article. 
 
Current Law:  Title 9, Subtitle 8 of the Criminal Law Article contains several prohibitions 
on engaging in activities as part of a criminal organization. For example, under § 9-804 of 
the Criminal Law Article, a person may not (1) participate in a criminal organization 
knowing that the members of the criminal organization engage in a pattern of organized 
crime activity and (2) knowingly and willfully direct or participate in an underlying crime 
(as defined in statute) or an act by a juvenile that would be an underlying crime if 
committed by an adult, committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association 
with a criminal organization. The statute further prohibits a criminal organization or an 
individual belonging to a criminal organization from (1) receiving proceeds known to have 
been derived directly or indirectly from an underlying crime and (2) using or investing, 
directly or indirectly, an aggregate of $10,000 or more of the proceeds from an underlying 
crime in the acquisition of real property or the establishment or operation of any enterprise. 
Finally, a criminal organization is prohibited from acquiring or maintaining, directly or 
indirectly, any interest in or control of any enterprise or real property through an underlying 
crime. A person may not conspire or attempt to violate these prohibitions. 
 
In general, violators are guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 15 years 
and/or a $1 million maximum fine. However, if the person’s participation in the criminal 
organization or an underlying crime on behalf of the organization resulted in the death of 
a victim, the person is guilty of a felony, punishable by imprisonment for up to 25 years 
and/or a $5 million fine. Sentences may or must be consecutive to other sentences imposed 
as specified. In addition, the court may order a person or criminal organization to be 
divested of any interest in an enterprise or real property; order the dissolution or 
reorganization of an enterprise; and order the suspension or revocation of any license, 
permit, or prior approval granted to the enterprise or person by a unit of the State or a 
political subdivision of the State. The statute contains additional provisions regarding 
divested assets connected to drug offenses and the Attorney’s General’s authority to 
prosecute a violation or act establishing a violation of the statute. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1063/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
General fund expenditures for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
may increase minimally as a result of the bill’s expanded application of existing 
incarceration penalties due to more people being committed to State correctional facilities. 
The number of people convicted under the bill is expected to be minimal. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,110 per month. Excluding overhead, the average cost of housing a new 
State incarcerated individual (including health care costs) is about $1,244 per month. 
Excluding all health care (which is a fixed cost under the current contract), the average 
variable costs total $336 per month. The State does not pay for pretrial detention time in a 
local correctional facility. Persons sentenced in Baltimore City are generally incarcerated 
in State correctional facilities. The Baltimore Pretrial Complex, a State-operated facility, 
is used primarily for pretrial detentions. 
 
Office of the Public Defender 
 
The Office of the Public Defender (OPD) advises that the bill’s provisions may result in 
costs for the agency due to additional cases and an increased level of effort in existing 
cases. While the impact of the bill on OPD caseloads is anticipated to be minimal, any 
increase in workloads for OPD resulting from the bill cannot be reliably estimated without 
actual experience under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1111 (Senator Muse) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; City of 
Annapolis; Office of the Attorney General; Maryland State Commission on Criminal 
Sentencing Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public 
Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Maryland Department of Health; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Comptroller’s Office; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1063/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4