START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1037 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1037 
(Delegate Taylor, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and Expanded 
Reentry Services - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Task Force on the Creation of a Division of Returning Citizens and 
Expanded Reentry Services, staffed by the Department of Public Safety and Correctional 
Services (DPSCS). The task force must (1) identify and assess the reentry services that 
exist in the State; (2) identify gaps in reentry services currently provided in the State; 
(3) assess the markers of successful reentry; (4) ensure that the recommendations of the 
task force equally consider returning citizens regardless of gender; (5) develop a plan to 
establish a Division of Returning Citizens within DPSCS for specified purposes; and 
(6) develop a plan to expand specified services for individuals in the State after release 
from incarceration. Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to 
reimbursement for expenses, as specified. By December 31, 2025, the task force must 
submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for task force members and staffing costs for 
DPSCS are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1037/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Release from Division of Correction 
 
The Commissioner of Correction must adopt regulations (1) establishing a release plan for 
incarcerated individuals upon release from confinement in a State correctional facility to 
help identify resources to assist incarcerated individuals following release, including the 
provision of transportation from the facility for an incarcerated individual upon release and 
(2) implementing provisions concerning issuance of an identification (ID) card to 
incarcerated individuals on release from confinement in a State correctional facility. The 
Commissioner of Correction must issue an ID card to an incarcerated individual before 
release from confinement in a State correctional facility. 
 
Current regulations specify that, when feasible, a parole release plan must be completed 
before a parole hearing. A release plan must include the name of the parolee’s employer or 
evidence of other legitimate means of financial support, the location at which the parolee 
will reside, and the nature of any community services necessary to meet the special needs 
of the parolee. In addition, current regulations specify the following elements of a release 
plan: 
 
 
evidence must be furnished to the Maryland Parole Commission (MPC) that the 
prospective parolee will be legitimately employed following release; however, the 
employment requirement may be waived by MPC where circumstances warrant a 
waiver; 
 
assurance should be given that necessary aftercare will be available to parolees who 
are ill or who have any other demonstrated problems in which special treatment may 
be necessary; 
 
parolees must be allowed, in the discretion of MPC, to return to their homes, or to 
go elsewhere, upon such terms and conditions as MPC prescribes; and 
 
gradual release may be completed through a community-based treatment facility 
(i.e., halfway house). (MPC may require such placement as a step in the release 
process.) 
 
The status of any detainers lodged against an incarcerated individual will be investigated 
so far as reasonably possible, before the parole hearing, and the Office of Public Defender 
must be notified and encouraged to assist the incarcerated individual in the disposition of 
the detainer. MPC may parole an incarcerated individual to meet detainers if the 
incarcerated individual is considered in other respects to meet the required parole criteria. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1037/ Page 3 
MPC will cooperate in making arrangements for concurrent supervision with other 
jurisdictions when it is feasible and when release on parole appears justified. 
 
MPC must cooperate in making arrangements for concurrent supervision with other 
jurisdictions when it is feasible and when release on parole appears justified. 
 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning 
 
The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Workforce Development and 
Adult Learning (DWDAL) oversees Correctional Education throughout Maryland’s State 
correctional facilities. DWDAL’s Office of Correctional Education provides career 
training opportunities “behind the fence.” Offerings vary by institution but include training 
in automotive skills, barbering, construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead 
to a portable, industry-recognized credential that contributes to an inmate’s employability 
after release. In addition to occupational programming, the Office of Correctional 
Education oversees academic and transitional courses throughout Maryland’s prisons. 
Academic programming includes GED preparation ahead of earning a Maryland 
high school diploma and English as a second language courses. Prior to release, inmates 
may complete transitional courses to ease their reentrance to society. These offerings 
include classes in parenting, employment readiness, financial literacy, and life skills. 
 
Chapter 485 of 2022, the Maryland New Start Act of 2022, established the New Start Grant 
Program in MDL to award grants to at least five eligible organizations to create or support 
existing entrepreneurship development programs that assist specified formerly imprisoned 
individuals or specified individuals approved for release by a correctional facility. The Act 
also authorized the Department of Commerce, in collaboration with the Governor’s Office 
of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs, to administer a microloan program to 
award collateral-free loans to these formerly or currently incarcerated individuals. The 
Governor must include an appropriation of at least $300,000 to the Maryland New Start 
Microloan Fund and at least $200,000 for the Maryland New Start Grant Program in the 
annual budget bill through fiscal 2028. 
 
MDL provides services to returning citizens through the Re-entry Navigator initiative. 
Re-entry Navigators are a team of employment specialists located within the American Job 
Centers across the State of Maryland who connect justice-involved job seekers with 
businesses by planning with pre-release individuals and supporting post-release job 
seekers. The navigators also continually establish a network of employer contacts who are 
interested in hiring their clients. More information on the Re-entry Navigator Program can 
be found on MDL’s website. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1037/ Page 4 
Performance Incentive Grant Fund 
 
The Performance Incentive Grant Fund within the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy is intended to make use of the savings from the implementation of Chapter 515 
of 2016, the Justice Reinvestment Act, to provide grants for specified programs and 
services, including providing for pretrial risk assessments, services to reduce pretrial 
detention, diversion programs, specialty courts, reentry programs, and ensuring that the 
rights of crime victims are protected and enhanced. Money expended from the fund for 
programs to reduce recidivism and control correctional costs is supplemental to and is not 
intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for such 
purposes. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$13.1 million for the fund. 
 
Additional Comments:  According to the DPSCS website, the Re-entry and Transition 
Services Unit within the department is responsible for the coordinated development and 
implementation of programs and services that will prepare incarcerated individuals for a 
successful return home after incarceration. The unit works with incarcerated individuals 
and strategically identifies resources and services to eliminate barriers to the transition 
process and re-entry into the community. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1036 (Senator West) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 12, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4