START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 696

Chapter 696

(House Bill 1003)

AN ACT concerning

Montgomery County – Clerk of the Circuit Court – Plat Recordation

PG/MC 110–24

FOR the purpose of authorizing a plat in Montgomery County to be drawn, recorded, and
maintained in electronic form in a manner approved by the State Archivist; and
generally relating to plat recordation in Montgomery County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 3–108(a) and (c)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 3–108(n)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 3–108(n) and 3–304
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

3–108.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the provisions of
this section are in addition to any other provisions of the Code, pertaining to recordation of
subdivision plats.

(2) The provisions of this section do not apply in Queen Anne’s County.

(c) (2) The plat shall be legible, drawn accurately and to scale and shall be
submitted for recordation using black ink on transparent mylar, or linen or black–line
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 696 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

photo process comparable to original quality that will conform to archival standards. The
State Highway Administration may substitute microfilm aperture cards showing property
or rights–of–way to be acquired or granted. Microfilm aperture cards must meet archival
standards for permanent records.

(N) IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, A PLAT SHALL BE DRAWN IN ACCORDANCE
WITH SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS SECTION OR DRAWN IN AN ELECTRONIC VERSION
IN A MANNER APPROVED BY THE STATE ARCHIVIST.

[(n)] (O) This section does not apply in Allegany, Harford, Montgomery, Prince
George’s, and Talbot counties, except to the extent any of these counties is expressly
mentioned in this section.

3–304.

(A) [The] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION, THE
clerk shall fasten securely one copy of each plat described under § 3–108 OF THIS TITLE in
a book provided for that purpose or shall record the plat.

(B) [He] THE CLERK promptly shall send one copy of each plat to the supervisor
of assessments of the county and one copy, with one half of the filing fee, to the State
Archivist, who shall number and file the plat as part of the records of [his] THE STATE
ARCHIVIST’S office and shall notify the clerk of the number given.

(C) The STATE Archivist shall mail or deliver, free of cost, to any supervisor of
assessments of the State, a copy of the plat on request.

(D) (1) Nothing in this section affects any recording fee of the clerk of the court
under any local legislation prescribing recording fees for subdivision plats.

(2) The clerk and the STATE Archivist shall keep accurate memoranda of
the filing fees.

(E) IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, THE CLERK MAY RECORD OR MAINTAIN THE
PLAT IN ELECTRONIC FORM IN A MANNER APPROVED BY THE STATE ARCHIVIST.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2