START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 746

Chapter 746

(House Bill 1065)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant
Program; establishing the Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant
Program Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; and generally relating to the Maryland
Entertainment District Security Grant Program.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 4–1701 through 4–1703 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 17. Maryland
Entertainment District Security Grant Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

SUBTITLE 17. MARYLAND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT SECURITY GRANT
PROGRAM.

4–1701.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION” MEANS A NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION
RECOGNIZED BY THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION IN WHICH IT IS LOCATED.

(C) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM.

4–1702.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 746 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT” MEANS A ONE–HALF SQUARE MILE
AREA IN THE STATE IN WHICH EITHER ONE OF THE FOLLOWING ARE IS PRESENT:

(I) A HIGH DENSITY OF ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSED TO SERVE
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR ON–SITE CONSUMPTION; OR

(II) A HIGH DENSITY OF ESTABLISHMENTS THAT ARE HOOKAH
BARS; OR

(II) (III) A HIGH DENSITY OF ESTABLISHMENTS THAT
REGULARLY HOST LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FOR THEIR PATRONS OR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC.

(3) “EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR” MEANS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES.

(B) THERE IS A MARYLAND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT SECURITY GRANT
PROGRAM.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATIONS, NONPROFIT ENTITIES, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS TO FUND
SECURITY OPERATIONS DURING TIMES OF HIGH PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC IN
ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS FROM WHICH A HIGHER THAN AVERAGE NUMBER OF
CALLS FOR POLICE ASSISTANCE IN RESPONSE TO REPORTED CRIME ARE PLACED.

(D) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL ESTABLISH:

(1) AN APPLICATION PROCESS FOR COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS AND
NONPROFIT ENTITIES LOCATED IN ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS, AND LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS WITH ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICTS LOCATED WITHIN THE
JURISDICTION, TO APPLY FOR GRANT FUNDING FROM THE PROGRAM;

(2) ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING RECIPIENTS FOR GRANT
FUNDING FROM THE PROGRAM; AND

(3) MINIMUM CRITERIA FOR AN ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT FOR THE
PURPOSE OF DETERMINING ELIGIBILITY FOR GRANT FUNDING FROM THE
PROGRAM, INCLUDING:

(I) THE DENSITY OF ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSED TO SERVE
ALCOHOL FOR ON–SITE CONSUMPTION, HOOKAH BARS, OR ESTABLISHMENTS THAT
REGULARLY HOST LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FOR THEIR PATRONS OR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 746

(II) THE AMOUNT OF PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC; AND

(III) THE NUMBER OF CALLS FOR POLICE ASSISTANCE IN
RESPONSE TO REPORTED CRIMES.

4–1703.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE MARYLAND ENTERTAINMENT
DISTRICT SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM FUND.

(B) THERE IS A MARYLAND ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT SECURITY GRANT
PROGRAM FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR GRANTS
AWARDED UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(D) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) (1) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND; AND

(II) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(2) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER, THE GOVERNOR MAY ANNUALLY APPROPRIATE UP TO $1,000,000 TO
THE FUND.

(G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY:

(1) TO FUND GRANTS TO COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS, NONPROFIT
ENTITIES, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS THROUGH THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) FOR COSTS TO ADMINISTER THE FUND.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 746 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(J) MONEY EXPENDED FROM THE FUND FOR THE PROGRAM IS
SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND IS NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF FUNDING THAT
OTHERWISE WOULD BE APPROPRIATED FOR THE PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4