START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1068 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1068 
(Delegate Feldmark) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation and Judicial Proceedings 
 
Income Tax - Opportunity for Filers to Register to Make Anatomical Gift 
 
 
This bill requires the Comptroller to implement procedures to offer an individual filing a 
Maryland resident individual income tax return electronically the opportunity to register to 
make an anatomical gift in accordance with the Maryland Anatomical Gift Act through a 
hyperlink to the anatomical gift donor registry established under the Act. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024, and applies to tax year 2024 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s requirement with existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under the Maryland Revised Anatomical Gift Act, a donor may make an 
anatomical gift (1) by authorizing a statement or symbol indicating that the donor has made 
an anatomical gift to be imprinted on the donor’s driver’s license or identification card; 
(2) by will; (3) during a terminal illness or an injury of the donor, by any form of 
communication addressed to at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested 
witness; or (4) by a donor card (or other record) or donor registry, as specified. The 
Secretary of Health is required, under the Act, to contract with a qualified nonprofit entity 
for the establishment, maintenance, and operation of a donor registry that is accessible 
24 hours a day and 7 days a week to, among other things, allow a donor to include on the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1068/ Page 2 
donor registry a statement or symbol that the donor has made or amended an anatomical 
gift. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 577 (Senator King) - Budget and Taxation and Judicial 
Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2