START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 875

Chapter 875

(House Bill 1081)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Automatic License Plate Readers – Captured Plate Data Storage
and Upload

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “historical data” to include automatic license
plate reader data stored by cloud computing; establishing that certain captured
automatic license plate reader data is the property of a certain law enforcement
agency and may not be sold for any purpose; establishing that certain captured
automatic license plate reader data may be uploaded to the Maryland Coordination
and Analysis Center; extending a certain offense relating to license plate reader data
to apply to a vendor contracted by a law enforcement agency; and generally relating
to automatic license plate readers.

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Safety~~
~~Section~~ ~~3–509(a)(1)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section ~~3–509(a)(6)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(b)~~ 3–509(a), (b), and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

3–509.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Active data” means:

1. data uploaded to individual automatic license plate reader
system units before operation; and

2. data gathered during the operation of an automatic license
plate reader system.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 875 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) “Active data” does not include historical data.

(3) “Automatic license plate reader system” means a system of one or more
mobile or fixed high–speed cameras used in combination with computer algorithms to
convert images of license plates into computer–readable data.

(4) (i) “Captured plate data” means the global positioning system
coordinates, dates and times, photographs, license plate numbers, and any other data
collected by or derived from an automatic license plate reader system.

(ii) “Captured plate data” includes active data and historical data.

(5) “Center” means the Maryland Coordination and Analysis Center.

(6) “CRIMINAL JUSTICE INFORMATION” MEANS INFORMATION
RELATING TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE COLLECTED, PROCESSED, OR PRESERVED BY A
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.

(6) (7) “Historical data” means any data collected by an automatic
license plate reader system and stored:

(I) in an automatic license plate reader database operated by OR
FOR the Maryland Coordination and Analysis Center or by OR FOR a law enforcement
agency; OR

(II) THROUGH CLOUD COMPUTING.

[(7)] (8) “Law enforcement agency” has the meaning stated in § 3–201(d)
of this title.

[(8)] (9) “Legitimate law enforcement purpose” means the investigation,
detection, or analysis of a crime or a violation of the Maryland vehicle laws or the operation
of terrorist or missing or endangered person searches or alerts.

(b) (1) A law enforcement agency may not use captured plate data unless the
agency has a legitimate law enforcement purpose.

(2) AUTOMATIC LICENSE PLATE HISTORICAL DATA CAPTURED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION:

(I) IS THE PROPERTY OF THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;
~~AND~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 875

(II) MAY NOT BE SOLD FOR ANY PURPOSE BY A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR VENDOR CONTRACTED BY A LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY, INCLUDING THE SALE OF SUBSCRIPTIONS OR LICENSES TO ACCESS DATA;

(III) MAY NOT BE ACCESSED BY A VENDOR CONTRACTED BY A
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY UNLESS ACCESS IS EXPRESSLY REQUESTED AND
AUTHORIZED BY THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY;

(IV) MAY NOT BE UPLOADED FOR ANY REASON BY THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR A VENDOR CONTRACTED BY THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY THAT STORES THE DATA TO ANY OTHER LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY OR
ENTITY, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THE AGENCY OR ENTITY IS LOCATED INSIDE OR
OUTSIDE THE STATE; AND

(V) MAY BE UPLOADED TO A DATABASE OWNED OR OPERATED
BY THE MARYLAND COORDINATION AND ANALYSIS CENTER.

[(2)] (3) An employee of a law enforcement agency OR THE VENDOR
CONTRACTED BY THE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY who violates this subsection is
subject to imprisonment not exceeding 1 year or a fine not exceeding $10,000 or both.

(c) (1) The Department of State Police and any law enforcement agency using
an automatic license plate reader system shall adopt procedures relating to the operation
and use of the system.

(2) The procedures shall include:

(i) which personnel in the Center or a law enforcement agency are
authorized to query captured plate data gathered by an automatic license plate reader
system;

(II) PROCEDURES TO PROTECT PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE INFORMATION COLLECTED AND STORED IN
AN AUTOMATIC LICENSE PLATE READER DATABASE;

[(ii)] (III) an audit process to ensure that information obtained
through the use of an automatic license plate reader system is used only for legitimate law
enforcement purposes, including audits of requests made by individual law enforcement
agencies [or], an individual law enforcement officer, OR A VENDOR CONTRACTED BY A
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; [and]

[(iii)] (IV) procedures and safeguards to ensure that Center staff
with access to the automatic license plate reader database are adequately screened and
trained; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 875 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) PROCEDURES TO CERTIFY WHETHER AN AUTOMATIC
LICENSE PLATE READER SYSTEM EXPERIENCED A DATA BREACH AND A
REQUIREMENT FOR ANY VENDOR OPERATING A DATABASE FOR A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY TO REPORT:

1. ANY BREACHES OF THE DATABASE;

2. THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES WHO HAVE ACCESS TO
THE DATABASE; AND

3. ANY UNAUTHORIZED RELEASES OF INFORMATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4