START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1053 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1053 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Nursing - Executive Director Qualifications 
 
 
This bill removes the requirement that the Executive Director of the State Board of Nursing 
(MBON) must be a registered nurse (RN) with a minimum of a master’s degree in nursing 
or the equivalent, in the judgement of MBON, in professional education and administrative 
experience. The bill generally takes effect July 1, 2025; if the termination date of 
Chapters 222 and 223 of 2023 are amended, the bill takes effect on the termination of 
Chapters 222 and 223.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed and/or certified by MBON to 
practice specified nursing duties in the State. MBON is responsible for the regulation and 
oversight of nursing professionals in the State, ensuring that nurses comply with federal 
and State laws governing the profession through the regulation and oversight of education 
and training programs and by taking disciplinary action against licensees and certificate 
holders when warranted. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1053/ Page 2 
MBON may employ an executive director who must be a RN with a minimum of a master’s 
degree in nursing, or the equivalent, in the judgment of the board, in professional and 
administrative experience. 
 
Chapters 222 and 223 extended MBON’s termination date by two years to July 1, 2025, 
during which the Secretary of Health is granted authority over specified infrastructure 
operations of the board. MBON special funds may not be used for such operations. 
Through June 30, 2025, the Secretary of Health is authorized to employ staff for the board 
in accordance with the State budget and designate a staff member who is an RN as the 
board’s executive director. Should the board’s termination date be further extended, 
authority over infrastructure operations reverts to MBON on July 1, 2025.  
 
Chapters 222 and 223 also required MBON to hire an external consultant to conduct an 
independent evaluation of the board and develop an action plan to implement the 
recommendations identified in the consultant’s report to the Senate Finance Committee 
and the House Health and Government Operations Committee by September 1, 2023. The 
report noted that there is substantial clinical, educational, examination, and judicial 
experience and expertise among current MBON leadership to reconsider the requirement 
for the board’s executive director to be an RN. Chapters 222 and 223 generally terminate 
on July 1, 2025. 
 
Additional Comments:  On January 3, 2023, the Executive Director of the Department of 
Legislative Services directed the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) to conduct a performance evaluation of MBON. In the 
evaluation, OPEGA found that the statutory requirement that MBON’s executive director 
be an RN differs from the other four largest health occupations boards in Maryland, which 
do not require their respective executive directors to hold a license or certification issued 
by the board. OPEGA recommended that the General Assembly consider repealing the 
requirement that the Executive Director of MBON be a licensed nurse and that MDH 
should convene a stakeholder workgroup to discuss the appropriate qualifications of an 
executive director. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1053/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3