START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 989

Chapter 989

(House Bill 1093)

AN ACT concerning

Anne Arundel County – Human Relations Commission – Subpoena Enforcement

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Human Relations Commission of Anne Arundel County
to seek relief in a certain manner if a party fails to comply with a subpoena; and
generally relating to the subpoena authority granted to the Human Relations
Commission of Anne Arundel County.

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 12–905
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

12–905.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY.

(B) (1) IF A PERSON FAILS TO OBEY A SUBPOENA SERVED BY THE ANNE
ARUNDEL COUNTY HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION:

(1) THE INDIVIDUAL AUTHORIZING THE SERVICE OF THE SUBPOENA
~~MAY~~ ~~AUTHORIZE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~SERVING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SUBPOENA~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CERTIFY~~ ~~THE~~
DEFAULT TO THE CLERK OF THE CIRCUIT COURT; AND

(I) THE COMMISSION MAY APPLY TO A CIRCUIT COURT IN ANY
COUNTY FOR AN ORDER REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE AND TESTIMONY OF
WITNESSES AND THE PRODUCTION OF BOOKS, PAPERS, RECORDS, ELECTRONICALLY
STORED INFORMATION, DOCUMENTS, AND TANGIBLE PROPERTY; AND

(2) ON CERTIFICATION OF THE DEFAULT, THE CLERK SHALL ISSUE A
BODY ATTACHMENT TO THE SHERIFF AGAINST THE PERSON NAMED IN THE
SUBPOENA, RETURNABLE ON THE DATE SPECIFIED IN THE ATTACHMENT, TO
COMPEL COMPLIANCE WITH THE SUBPOENA.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 989 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE COURT MAY ISSUE AN ORDER REQUIRING THE
ATTENDANCE AND TESTIMONY OF THE WITNESS AND THE PRODUCTION OF THE
BOOKS, PAPERS, RECORDS, ELECTRONICALLY STORED INFORMATION, DOCUMENTS,
AND TANGIBLE PROPERTY:

1. AFTER NOTICE TO THE PERSON SUBPOENAED AS A
WITNESS OR DIRECTED TO PRODUCE BOOKS, PAPERS, RECORDS, ELECTRONICALLY
STORED INFORMATION, DOCUMENTS, AND TANGIBLE PROPERTY; AND

2. ON A FINDING THAT THE ATTENDANCE AND
TESTIMONY OF THE WITNESS OR THE PRODUCTION OF THE BOOKS, PAPERS,
RECORDS, ELECTRONICALLY STORED INFORMATION, DOCUMENTS, AND TANGIBLE
PROPERTY IS RELEVANT OR NECESSARY FOR THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE
COMMISSION.

(2) AN ORDER ISSUED BY THE COURT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL BE SERVED ON THE PERSON TO WHOM IT IS DIRECTED BY THE SHERIFF OR
DEPUTY SHERIFF.

(3) A FAILURE TO OBEY AN ORDER ISSUED BY THE COURT UNDER
THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE PUNISHED BY THE COURT AS CONTEMPT OF COURT.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2