START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1083 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1083 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Alcoholic Beverages - Class 4 Limited Winery License - Requirements and 
Authorizations 
 
 
This bill alters cultivation and production requirements applicable to holders of 
Class 4 limited winery licenses by requiring certain agricultural products to be grown in 
Maryland, as specified. The bill also alters the standards for the purchase of specific wine 
by a license holder and requires the finished wine being purchased by the license holder to 
be made entirely of Maryland agricultural products fermented by a licensed manufacturer. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State revenues or expenditures. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  “Maryland-grown agricultural product” means any product 
produced or cultivated on a farm or vineyard in the State. However, it does not include 
(1) cannabis or (2) any other product containing tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), as defined 
under the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1083/ Page 2 
A Class 4 limited winery license may be issued by the Executive Director of the Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission and authorizes the sale and sampling of wine and 
pomace brandy produced by the license holder for consumption. 
 
Chapter 542 of 2018 required the holder of a Class 4 limited winery license to (1) own or 
have under contract at least 20 acres of grapes or other fruit in cultivation in the State for 
use in the production of wine or (2) if less than 20 acres are owned or under contract, ensure 
that at least 51% of the ingredients used in the annual production of wine are grapes or 
other fruit grown in the State. The bill alters the specific requirement for “grapes or other 
fruit in cultivation in the State” to instead require Maryland-grown agricultural products. 
 
Furthermore, a Class 4 license holder may (1) sell or serve specified types of food; 
(2) distill and bottle up to 1,900 gallons of pomace brandy made from available Maryland 
agricultural products; (3) purchase bulk wine and pomace brandy in a specified manner 
(the bill alters this provision to instead allow a license holder to purchase finished wine 
that was made entirely of Maryland agricultural products); (4) import, export, and transport 
its product; (5) store the product of other Class 4 limited wineries in a specified manner; 
and (6) produce wine and pomace brandy at a warehouse for which the license holder has 
been issued an individual storage permit if specified conditions are met. A Class 4 limited 
winery may only be located at the place stated on the license. Throughout the winemaking 
process, the licensee must maintain ownership of the wine or pomace brandy and ensure it 
returns to the location of the limited winery. The annual license fee is $200. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill’s potentially stricter requirements for Class 4 limited 
wineries may prohibit some licensees or potential licensees from renewing or obtaining a 
license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1001 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1083/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3