START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1086 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1086 
(Chair, Judiciary Committee)(By Request - Office of the 
Attorney General) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Compensation for Individuals Erroneously Convicted - Alterations 
 
 
This bill (1) alters the circumstances under which an individual who was erroneously 
convicted, sentenced, and confined may receive compensation; (2) alters the benefits 
available to these individuals; (3) requires the State to notify the individual in writing and 
provide specified information when it intends to introduce evidence to reduce or prevent 
an award of compensation to an individual who served a concurrent sentence for a lawful 
conviction and confinement; and (4) repeals obsolete provisions. The bill also extends 
eligibility for compensation to individuals who have been erroneously convicted of a 
conspiracy to commit a felony and meet specified existing statutory requirements; 
individuals in this category who were ineligible for compensation before July 1, 2024, may 
petition for an order of eligibility no later than July 1, 2026. The bill may not be applied 
or interpreted to require dismissal of a petition for compensation for erroneous 
conviction filed before the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase due to the bill’s extension of 
eligibility for compensation to individuals erroneously convicted of a conspiracy to commit 
a felony. Otherwise, the bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1086/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Petitions for Eligibility Determinations 
 
Under current law, an administrative law judge (ALJ) must issue an order that an individual 
is eligible for compensation and benefits from the State/Board of Public Works (BPW) for 
being erroneously convicted, sentenced, and confined (as described below) if: 
 
 
the individual has received a full pardon from the Governor stating that the 
individual’s conviction has been shown conclusively to be in error; or 
 
the ALJ finds by clear and convincing evidence that (1) the individual was 
convicted, sentenced, and subsequently confined for a felony; (2) the individual’s 
conviction for the felony was reversed or vacated and either the charges were 
dismissed or the individual was found not guilty on retrial; (3) the individual did 
not commit the felony for which they were convicted, sentenced, and subsequently 
confined and was not an accessory or accomplice to the felony; and (4) the 
individual did not commit or suborn perjury, fabricate evidence, or by the 
individual’s own conduct cause or bring about the conviction, which specifically 
does not include making a false confession or false admission or entering a guilty 
plea. 
 
The bill alters these requirements to (1) reflect expanded eligibility for individuals 
convicted of a conspiracy to commit a felony and (2) allow an ALJ to issue an order for 
compensation and benefits from the State if it is found by clear and convincing evidence 
that the individual’s conviction for a felony was reversed or vacated and the order 
reversing or vacating the judgment of conviction did not allow for retrial.  
 
Under current law, in determining the weight and admissibility of evidence presented by 
the parties, an ALJ may, in the interest of justice, give due consideration to the passage of 
time, death or unavailability of witnesses, the destruction of evidence, or any other factor. 
 
Currently, an individual may petition/file a request with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH) for an ALJ to issue an order of eligibility within two years after the date 
on which the Governor issued a pardon, the criminal charges against the individual were 
dismissed, or the individual was found not guilty on retrial. If the individual is deceased, 
the individual’s personal representative or the executor of the individual’s estate may 
request an order of eligibility. The bill authorizes an individual to file a petition within 
two years after the date on which an order reversing or vacating the judgment of conviction 
and not allowing for retrial was issued.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1086/ Page 3 
Under current law, an individual convicted, confined, and released from confinement 
before July 1, 2021, who has not previously received compensation from BPW, may 
petition for an order of eligibility no later than June 30, 2023. An individual who was 
awarded compensation from BPW on or before July 1, 2005, may request an order for 
supplemental compensation in the amount authorized under the bill on or before 
July 12, 2023. The bill repeals these provisions. 
 
Under current law, a petition for an order of eligibility must be served on the 
State’s Attorney in the county in which the conviction occurred and the Attorney General, 
or their designees. The State (represented by the Attorney General or designee), the 
State’s Attorney of the county where the crime was committed, or their designees must be 
parties to a proceeding before the ALJ.  
 
Under current law, an individual may not receive compensation for any period of 
confinement during which the individual was concurrently serving a sentence for a 
conviction for which the individual was lawfully convicted and confined. The bill requires 
the State to notify the individual in writing at least 15 days before a hearing on a petition 
of (1) the State’s intention to introduce evidence to reduce or prevent an award of 
compensation because of a concurrent sentence and (2) the number of days that the State 
claims the individual was incarcerated but not concurrently serving a sentence for a 
conviction of another offense for which the individual was lawfully convicted and 
confined. 
 
Under current law, if an ALJ issues an order of eligibility, the order must include the 
monetary award owed the individual; reasonable attorney’s fees and expenses associated 
with the eligibility determination action; benefits to be awarded to the individual, as 
described below; and, if the ALJ determines that it is in the interests of the individual, a 
recommendation for an expedited payment schedule. A copy of the order must be delivered 
to BPW and any State agency or service provider ordered to provide benefits. The decision 
to grant or deny an order of eligibility may be appealed by either party.    
 
Calculation of Compensation and Benefits – Base Payment 
 
Under current law, BPW must compensate an individual found to be eligible in an amount 
equal to the total number of days of wrongful confinement after the erroneous conviction 
multiplied by a daily rate based on the State’s most recent median household income in the 
year the order of eligibility is issued, as published in the American Community Survey of 
the U.S. Census Bureau, as specified. However, as noted above, the individual may not 
receive compensation for any period of confinement during which the individual was 
serving a concurrent sentence for another conviction for which the individual was lawfully 
convicted and confined. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1086/ Page 4 
Additional Benefits 
 
Under current law, the ALJ may also direct the appropriate State agency or service provider 
to provide the following to the individual, free of charge: 
 
 
a State identification card and any other document necessary for the individual’s 
health or welfare on the individual’s release from confinement; 
 
housing accommodations available on the individual’s release from confinement 
for up to five years;  
 
education and training relevant to life skills, job/vocational training, or financial 
literacy until the recipient elects to no longer receive the education and training;  
 
health care and dental care for at least five years after the individual’s release from 
confinement;  
 
access to enrollment at and payment of tuition and fees for attending a public senior 
higher education institution, a regional higher education center, or the 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) for a period of enrollment of up to 
five years; and 
 
reimbursement for court fines, fees, and restitution paid by the individual for the 
relevant crime. 
 
The bill alters the housing accommodations and health care and dental care benefits to run 
for a maximum of five years after the date the ALJ issued the order of eligibility. The bill 
also increases the duration of the higher education/community college benefit from 
five years to eight years. 
  
Adjustments for Other Funds Received 
 
If an eligible individual previously received a monetary award from a civil suit or entered 
into a settlement agreement with the State or a political subdivision of the State for the 
erroneous conviction, sentence, or confinement, the amount owed to the individual must 
be reduced by the amount of the monetary award or settlement, less any amount paid for 
attorney’s fees and costs for litigating the award or settlement. The individual must 
reimburse the State for an equivalent amount if the individual receives such a monetary 
award from a civil suit or enters into such a settlement agreement after receiving 
compensation under the bill. However, the amount of the reimbursement required may not 
exceed the amount of the monetary award received for damages in the civil suit or 
settlement agreement. The State may obtain a lien against the monetary award from a civil 
suit or settlement agreement to satisfy this obligation. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1086/ Page 5 
BPW Payments of Compensation 
 
After receiving an order of eligibility issued by an ALJ, BPW must pay the compensation, 
with an initial payment equal to the annual amount of the State’s most recent median 
household income to be paid within 60 days after receiving the ALJ’s order. Following this 
initial payment, BPW must pay the remainder of the compensation in installments paid 
over no more than six fiscal years or in accordance with an expedited payment schedule 
recommended by the ALJ. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase for compensation awarded to 
individuals convicted of a conspiracy to commit a felony. The magnitude of potential 
compensation for individuals eligible for compensation as a result of the bill cannot be 
reliably quantified at this time. According to the Office of the Attorney General (OAG), 
there are currently two individuals erroneously convicted of a conspiracy to commit a 
felony who would retroactively qualify for compensation under the bill. OAG did not 
respond to a request for additional information regarding the fiscal impact of awarding 
compensation to these individuals.  
 
Regarding the other provisions of the bill, based on information provided by BPW, the bill 
appears to alter eligibility criteria and procedures in response to particular situations that 
have arisen. In both situations, the individuals eventually received compensation. Given 
the number of individuals affected by the bill, the bill’s changes to benefits are not expected 
to materially affect State finances or operations. BCCC, Morgan State University, and the 
University System of Maryland do not anticipate a fiscal impact from the bill. 
 
OAH advises that it can train administrative law judges on the bill’s provisions and handle 
additional cases generated by the bill with existing budgeted resources.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 890 (Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Office of the Attorney General) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City Community 
College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; Board of Public 
Works; Office of Administrative Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1086/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6