START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1060 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1060 
(Carroll County Delegation) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Carroll County – Sheriff – Salary 
 
 
This bill increases, from $140,000 to $191,078.10, the annual salary of the Carroll County 
Sheriff beginning in 2026. Beginning in 2027, the sheriff must receive an annual salary of 
$212,309. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, the first salary increase takes effect at 
the beginning of the next term of office.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County expenditures increase by $47,000 in FY 2027 and by 
$84,100 annually thereafter. County revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The current salary of the Carroll County Sheriff is $140,000. 
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public officer from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1060/ Page 2 
Local Expenditures:  Carroll County expenditures increase by approximately $47,000 in 
fiscal 2027 and by $84,100 annually thereafter. This estimate includes fringe benefits (as 
provided by the county) and accounts for the first increase taking effect in December 2026, 
when the next term of office begins. As the bill establishes a salary of $212,309 beginning 
in 2027, the estimate accounts for that salary taking effect January 1, 2027.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 965 (Carroll County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2