START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1076 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1076 
(Delegate Roberts, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Blind and Visually Impaired Students - Textbook Equity 
 
   
This bill requires, by January 1, 2025, local boards of education to require publishers that 
sell pupil edition textbooks to provide an electronic file of the textbook in a specified 
standard to the National Instructional Materials Access Center (NIMAC) when the 
publisher provides the textbook. The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 
and local boards must enter into a memorandum of understanding to accomplish these 
purposes. Local boards must, by March 15 of each year, determine the instructional 
materials that will be used in the upcoming school year by students with individualized 
education programs (IEPs) and 504 plans under the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973. A 
local board must coordinate with the Instructional Resources Center (IRC) to provide the 
instructional materials in a specialized format to students who are blind or visually 
impaired, no later than the first day of classes of the upcoming school year. If a local board 
is unable to fulfill these requirements, the local board and the family of the student must 
develop and agree on a plan to remedy the delivery of the instructional materials no later 
than 45 days before the first day of classes of the upcoming school year. MSDE must 
provide support to IRC to ensure that textbooks and supplemental materials in a specialized 
format are available to blind and visually impaired students statewide. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $86,400 in FY 2025 for staffing. 
Out-year costs reflect annualization and inflation. Revenues are not affected.       
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
86,400 
103,600 
108,200 
112,900 
117,900 
Net Effect 
($86,400) 
($103,600) 
($108,200) 
($112,900) 
($117,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1076/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  To the extent that local school boards cannot arrange for instructional 
materials to be provided to students who are blind or visually impaired, their costs may 
increase significantly in order to acquire the instructional materials, according to plans 
developed with, and agreed to by, parents of those students. Local revenues are not 
affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Textbook publishers must provide the required electronic files in the 
National Instructional Materials Accessibility Standard (NIMAS) established by the 
federal Secretary for Education to be used in the preparation of electronic files suitable and 
used solely for efficient conversion into specialized formats.  
 
By October 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, IRC must report to MSDE on the accessibility 
and delivery of textbooks and supplemental materials during the previous school year. 
MSDE must post on its website the information received from IRC in these reports. By 
December 31, 2026, and annually thereafter, MSDE must report on its findings on the 
equity of textbooks and supplemental materials for blind and visually impaired students to 
the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:  In developing the IEP for a child who is blind or visually impaired, 
provisions must be made for instruction in braille and the use of braille unless the IEP team 
determines, after an evaluation of the child’s reading and writing skills, needs, and 
appropriate reading and writing media, that such instruction or use is not appropriate for 
the child. 
 
“Specialized formats” means braille, large print, audio, or digital text that is used by blind 
or visually impaired individuals. A child may not be denied the opportunity for instruction 
in braille reading and writing solely because the child has some remaining vision. Use of 
braille is not required if other reading and writing media are appropriate to the child’s 
educational needs. The use of other reading and writing media does not preclude the use of 
braille or the instruction of braille.  
 
Under Section 504 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, an organization that receives 
federal money, including public and many private schools, may not discriminate against a 
person on the basis of a disability. Section 504 requires schools to make a “reasonable 
accommodation” for students with disabilities to allow them to participate in school and 
school-related activities. Section 504 plans can be created to help students with disabilities 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1076/ Page 3 
receive accommodations that are not covered by their IEP. Students with disabilities who 
do not need the IEP may still receive accommodations through a Section 504 plan. 
 
The State Board of Education and the Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board 
must adopt certification standards for teachers of blind and visually impaired students. 
MSDE must collaborate with and provide support to IRC to develop procedures to 
coordinate the statewide availability of textbooks and supplementary instructional 
materials that may be accessed using specialized formats that use NIMAS. 
 
MSDE and local boards of education must include, in any procurement contract or other 
document or agreement used to purchase print instructional materials from a publisher, a 
provision that requires the publisher to:  
 
 
on or before the delivery of the print instructional materials, prepare and provide 
NIMAC electronic files containing the contents of the print instructional materials 
using NIMAS; or  
 
purchase instructional materials from that publisher that are produced in, or may be 
rendered in, specialized formats. 
 
IRC must make reasonable efforts to provide the instructional materials in specialized 
formats to students who are blind or visually impaired for use on the first day of classes 
each year or in a timely manner.  
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MSDE to provide ongoing support to IRC to ensure 
the availability of NIMAS files, which requires communicating with publishers and local 
education agencies to ensure the delivery and availability of electronic files. MSDE cannot 
absorb this responsibility with existing staff.  
 
Therefore, general fund expenditures increase by $86,397 in fiscal 2025, which accounts 
for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. The estimate reflects 
the cost to MSDE of hiring one education program specialist to oversee data collection, 
provide compliance monitoring, and issue reports. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$79,141 
Operating Expenses 
7,256 
Total FY 2025 MSDE Staff Expenditures 
$86,397 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1076/ Page 4 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that provide instructional materials to schools 
must provide electronic versions of those materials in the NIMAS format as required by 
the bill. Similarly, small businesses that produce instructional materials in specialized 
formats may benefit from increased demand for their materials. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1091 (Senator Watson, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - April 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 15, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4