START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1028

Chapter 1028

(House Bill 1089)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – ~~Class~~ ~~B~~ ~~Beer,~~ ~~Wine,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Liquor~~ ~~License~~ ~~–~~
~~Downtown~~ ~~Management~~ ~~District~~ Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor Licenses

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City to
issue a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license in a certain ~~Downtown~~ ~~Management~~
~~District~~ area; establishing the requirements for a holder of the license; and generally
relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–1606
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–1606.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “DOWNTOWN MANAGEMENT DISTRICT” HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 7–504.2(A) OF THE TAX – PROPERTY ARTICLE.

(B) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF LAW IN THIS TITLE, THE
BOARD MAY ISSUE A CLASS B BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE FOR USE BY A
RESTAURANT IN THE DOWNTOWN MANAGEMENT DISTRICT WARD 4, PRECINCTS 1
AND 2 THAT:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1028 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) HAS AVERAGE DAILY RECEIPTS FROM THE SALE OF FOOD THAT
ARE AT LEAST 51% OF THE TOTAL DAILY RECEIPTS OF THE RESTAURANT;

(2) HAS BEEN CLASSIFIED BY THE BALTIMORE CITY HEALTH
DEPARTMENT AS:

(I) A HIGH PRIORITY FOOD SERVICE FACILITY; OR

(II) A MODERATE PRIORITY FOOD SERVICE FACILITY; AND

(3) HAS EXECUTED A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE
DOWNTOWN PARTNERSHIP OF BALTIMORE.

(C) (B) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
THE HOLDER OF A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(2) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE HOLDER OF A LICENSE ISSUED
UNDER THIS SECTION A REFILLABLE CONTAINER PERMIT IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
12–1102 OF THIS TITLE.

(D) (C) A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED
FROM THE LOCATION OF ITS FIRST ISSUANCE.

(E) (D) IF A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION IS RENEWED, THE LICENSE
HOLDER SHALL FILE WITH THE BOARD AS PART OF ITS RENEWAL APPLICATION:

(1) A STATEMENT DETAILING THE AVERAGE DAILY RECEIPTS FROM
THE RESTAURANT;

(2) AN AFFIDAVIT FROM A CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT THAT
VERIFIES THAT THE LICENSE HOLDER MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION
(B)(1) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(3) ANY OTHER INFORMATION THAT THE BOARD REQUIRES.

~~(F)~~ (E) THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT ISSUE A NEW LICENSE UNDER THIS SECTION AFTER
JUNE 30, 2028; BUT

(2) MAY CONTINUE TO RENEW LICENSES ISSUED ON OR BEFORE JUNE
30, 2028.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1028

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3