START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1034 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1034 
(Baltimore City Delegation)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Sheriff) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore City Sheriff - Staffing 
 
 
This bill increases, from one to three, the number of assistant sheriffs that must be 
appointed by the Baltimore City Sheriff. The bill also specifically authorizes the Sheriff to 
appoint up to two social workers and, subject to existing provisions relating to collective 
bargaining, any additional sworn or civilian personnel if the funding for the personnel is 
provided in the ordinance of estimates or any other source. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Baltimore City finances, as 
discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis  
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore City Sheriff must appoint specified employees, including 
an undersheriff or chief deputy sheriff, 1 assistant sheriff, 3 deputy sheriff majors, 3 deputy 
sheriff captains, 6 deputy sheriff lieutenants, 1 secretary sheriff, and 1 fiscal clerk sheriff. 
The sheriff may appoint up to a maximum of (1) 9 deputy sheriff sergeants; (2) 103 deputy 
sheriffs; (3) 2 domestic violence clerks; and (4) 2 domestic violence advocates. 
 
Statutory provisions set forth a process by which full-time sworn law enforcement officers 
who are deputy sheriffs at the rank of lieutenant or below and court security officers within 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1034/ Page 2 
the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office may seek recognition to organize and bargain 
collectively in regard to specified matters. For example, sworn law enforcement officers 
and court security officers may seek recognition in order to organize and bargain 
collectively in good faith with the Baltimore City Mayor and the Baltimore City Council 
concerning merit step increases and those benefits that are determined, offered, 
administered, controlled, or managed by the Mayor and the City Council. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Although the bill requires the appointment of 2 additional assistant 
sheriffs and authorizes the appointment of additional personnel, subject to collective 
bargaining and if funding is provided in the ordinance of estimates or any other source, 
Baltimore City advises that the bill has no fiscal impact. Baltimore City further notes that 
the bill provides flexibility for appointing additional staff but does not directly affect the 
budget or the city’s process for authorizing changes to the budget. Finally, Baltimore City 
advises that the fiscal 2024 budget for the Baltimore City Sheriff’s Office includes 
212 positions, 40 of which are currently vacant. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 486 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1160 (Senator Carter)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2