START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1048 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1048 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Behavioral Health Advisory Council and Commission on Behavioral Health Care 
Treatment and Access - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill generally requires the Behavioral Health Advisory Council and the 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access to work in conjunction with 
one another, as specified, including by (1) coordinating with one another on their annual 
reports and (2) meeting jointly at least three times per year at mutually determined times 
and places. The bill also alters the membership and terms of the council, alters the 
membership of the commission, and requires the commission to make specified 
recommendations regarding the integration of somatic and behavioral health services in 
Medicaid. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. Provisions related to the commission 
terminate June 30, 2027, subject to the taking effect of the commission’s termination 
provision under Section 8 of Chapters 290 and 291 of 2023.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.)  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1048/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Behavioral Health Advisory Council 
 
Chapter 328 of 2015 established the council to promote and advocate for the enhancement 
of behavioral health services across the State for individuals who have behavioral health 
disorders and their family members. The council must meet at least six times per year and 
submit an annual report by December 31 each year. 
 
The bill requires that the council coordinate with the commission in submitting its annual 
report to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 31 each year. The bill also 
modifies the membership of the council and changes the length of the terms of its members 
appointed by the Governor from three to four years. 
 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access 
 
Chapters 290 and 291 established the commission to make recommendations to provide 
appropriate, accessible, and comprehensive behavioral health services that are available on 
demand to individuals in the State across the behavioral health continuum. 
 
Under the bill, the commission must additionally make recommendations (in coordination 
with the council) regarding Medicaid, including (1) the continuation of the State’s 
behavioral health carve-out and (2) the financing structure and quality oversight necessary 
to integrate somatic and behavioral health services and ensure compliance with the federal 
Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act. The commission, in coordination with the 
council, must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on its findings and 
recommendations regarding Medicaid by July 1, 2025. The bill also adds two members to 
the commission, specifically the Secretary of Aging (or their designee) and a representative 
of the Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association. 
 
The commission is statutorily mandated to establish particular workgroups that must meet 
at least twice per year and include members of the commission. The established 
workgroups may also include individuals invited by the commission to serve on the 
workgroup. By December 1 each year, the workgroups must report and make 
recommendations to the commission. 
 
Under the bill, the established workgroups may also include individuals invited by the 
council. Beginning in 2024, workgroups must report and make recommendations to the 
council (in addition to the commission) by July 1 (rather than December 1). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1048/ Page 3 
The commission must meet at least three times annually and report its findings and 
recommendations by January 1 each year. The annual report must include funding and 
legislative recommendations that are consistent with providing appropriate, accessible, and 
comprehensive behavioral health services that are available on demand to individuals in 
the State across the behavioral health spectrum. Any legislative recommendations that 
require funding must also include an estimate of the funding required and information that 
supports the estimate. 
 
Under the bill, the commission must meet jointly with the council at least three times per 
year as mutually determined. The commission must coordinate with the council in 
submitting its annual report to the Governor and the General Assembly by January 1 each 
year.  
 
Innovation in Behavioral Health Model 
 
Uncodified language in the bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly that MDH 
must (1) evaluate the Innovation in Behavioral Health Model announced by the federal 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) on January 18, 2024, and (2) consider 
applying to CMS to participate in the model.   
 
Background:   
 
Additional Recommendations Regarding Medicaid 
 
MDH advises that the State currently carves out Medicaid financing of behavioral health 
services from its Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs). However, according to 
an issue brief published in December 2021, by the Kaiser Family Foundation, behavioral 
health services are increasingly being integrated within Medicaid MCO contracts due to 
new federal policy options to address behavioral health issues in Medicaid. MDH further 
advises that there are both risks and benefits to integrating funding for behavioral health 
services within Medicaid, necessitating an assessment of how the State should proceed. 
 
Commission on Behavioral Health Care Treatment and Access 
 
The commission met twice during its inaugural year, first on November 9, 2023, and again 
on December 18, 2023. The commission’s initial report was due January 1, 2024. 
 
Behavioral Health Advisory Council 
 
While the council did not meet in 2023, it has published a meeting schedule for 2024, which 
includes two meeting dates during the 2024 legislative session:  January 16, and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1048/ Page 4 
March 19, 2024. The 2019 annual report, published on September 30, 2020, is the most 
recent from the council. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 212 (Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental 
- Health) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; University 
System of Maryland; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Kaiser Family Foundation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1048/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Behavioral Health Advisory Council and Commission on Behavioral 
Health Care Treatment and Access - Alterations 
 
 
Bill Number 
HB1048 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Office of the Secretary 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A  
 

END OF PAGE 5