START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1093 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1093 
(Delegate Bagnall) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Anne Arundel County - Human Relations Commission - Subpoena Enforcement 
 
 
This bill authorizes, if a person fails to obey a subpoena served by the 
Anne Arundel County Human Relations Commission, the commission to apply to a 
circuit court for an order requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the 
production of specified materials and property. The circuit court may issue an order once 
specified requirements are met; failure to obey an order may be punished by the court as 
contempt of court. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a person fails to obey a subpoena served by the Anne Arundel County 
Human Relations Commission, the commission may apply to a circuit court in any county 
for an order requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of 
books, papers, records, electronically stored information, documents, and tangible 
property. The circuit court may issue such an order (1) after notice to the person 
subpoenaed and (2) on a finding that the attendance and testimony of the witness or the 
production of the specified materials/property is relevant or necessary for the proceedings 
of the commission. An order issued under the bill must be served on the person to whom it 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1093/ Page 2 
is directed by the sheriff or deputy sheriff. The bill’s provisions are applicable only in 
Anne Arundel County. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Anne Arundel County – Express Powers Act 
 
Anne Arundel County is a charter county. Title 10, Subtitle 2 of the Local Government 
Article describes the express powers granted to charter counties under Article XI-A, § 2 of 
the Maryland Constitution. The Express Powers Act grants powers to charter counties to 
legislate and administer over local affairs. Generally, a charter county may enact, repeal, 
or amend any local law within the scope of the express powers given. A charter county 
may also pass any ordinance, resolution, or bylaw that does not conflict with public general 
law, provided that the overall health, safety, good government, and general welfare of the 
local community are maintained. 
 
Anne Arundel County Human Relations Commission – In General 
 
The purpose of the Anne Arundel County Human Relations Commission, as established in 
county code, is to promote and enhance the ability of all Anne Arundel County residents 
to pursue their lives free of discrimination. Among other powers, the commission may 
(1) receive, mediate, and adjudicate complaints of discrimination in housing; (2) initiate 
and investigate matters relating to discrimination in housing; and (3) conduct public 
hearings in accordance with local law. 
 
Subpoenas Issued by the Anne Arundel County Human Relations Commission 
 
Under the Anne Arundel County Code, the commission is authorized to hold hearings 
regarding alleged discrimination in housing. At the request of the commission or a party, 
the human relations officer may issue one or more subpoenas to compel the attendance of 
witnesses and to require the production of records and other materials in connection with 
a civil investigation, inquiry, or hearing. A subpoena may be served by the sheriff or by 
any person at least age 18 who is not a party to the proceeding. If a person fails to obey a 
subpoena, the individual authorizing the issuance of the subpoena may authorize the 
individual issuing the subpoena to certify the default to the clerk of the circuit court. The 
clerk must promptly issue a body attachment directed to the sheriff against the person 
named, compelling the person to obey the subpoena, returnable on the day named in the 
attachment. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1093/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1038 (Anne Arundel County Senators) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3