START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1004 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1004 
(Delegate Forbes)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Average Final Compensation - 
Compensation Adjustments 
 
 
This bill establishes that, with respect to the calculation of average final compensation 
(AFC) for virtually all members of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS), a 
salary increase may not be considered an extraordinary salary increase if it is related to a 
review and adjustment to the compensation for a position classification to (1) address 
inequities in compensation among employees in the same position classification or 
(2) increase the compensation for the position classification to be more consistent with 
market compensation for the position. The bill further requires affected SRPS members 
that receive a salary increase related to a review and adjustment of compensation, as 
described, to submit a specified form to the State Retirement Agency (SRA). The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill likely has no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or 
contribution rates, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill likely has no discernible effect on local pension liabilities or 
contribution rates, as discussed below. No effect on revenues. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies to members of the Employees’ Pension System, 
Employees’ Retirement System, Teachers’ Pension System, Teachers’ Retirement System, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1004/ Page 2 
Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System, Correctional Officers’ Retirement System, 
State Police Retirement System, and Local Fire and Police System. It does not apply to 
members of the Judges’ Retirement System or the Legislative Pension Plan (as those plans 
do not calculate AFC). 
 
A member who receives a salary increase due to a review and adjustment of compensation 
that meets either of the bill’s criteria must, at the time of retirement, submit a form to SRA 
that (1) is completed by the member’s employer and (2) certifies that the member received 
a salary increase due to a review and adjustment of compensation, as specified. The 
member must submit the form to SRA within 30 days from the date of SRA’s written notice 
that the member has received an extraordinary salary increase. 
 
Current Law:  In general, except as described below, for SRPS members hired before 
July 1, 2011, a member’s AFC does not include an extraordinary salary increase that occurs 
in the last three years of employment. Also, except as described below, for SRPS members 
hired on or after July 1, 2011, a member’s AFC does not include an extraordinary salary 
increase that occurs in the last five years of employment. 
 
SRA regulations establish that a salary increase is an extraordinary salary increase if it is 
more than 20% of a member’s average earnable compensation in any of the last three or 
five years of employment (depending on the date of hire). 
 
The exclusion of an extraordinary salary increase from the calculation of AFC does not 
apply if the increase results from the member’s (1) promotion or (2) election or 
appointment to a public office. It also does not apply if the increase results in the member’s 
allowance increasing by $25 or less per month, or if the Board of Trustees of SRPS 
determines that the increase is not an extraordinary salary increase under specified 
conditions. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  SRA advises that it receives very few reports of extraordinary 
salary increases each year. For instance, in fiscal 2023, it received only one report. 
Recently, SRA received salary increase data from two State agencies that conducted 
compensation studies resulting in salary increases for one or more employee 
classifications, which would otherwise be considered extraordinary salary increases for 
individuals who are near retirement. However, the increases affected only 14 employees 
eligible for retirement. 
 
Given the limited number of potential instances of extraordinary salary increases, and that 
statute already authorizes the SRPS Board to declare a salary increase to not be an 
extraordinary salary increase, the bill likely has little or no effect on State pension 
liabilities. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1004/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 880 (Senator Jackson)(Chair, Joint Committee on Pensions) - 
Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; State Retirement 
Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3