START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 679

Chapter 679

(House Bill 1024)

AN ACT concerning

Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission – Connection Pipe Emergency
Replacement Loan Program – Expansion

PG/MC 101–24

FOR the purpose of expanding the Connection Pipe Emergency Replacement Loan Program
to include certain sewer pipes and diagnostic actions; altering the maximum amount
of a loan that may be made under the Program; altering the total amount of loans
that the Program may provide or have outstanding; altering the amount of funding
and fiscal years for which the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission must
include funding for the Program in the Commission’s budget; and generally relating
to the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission Connection Pipe Emergency
Replacement Loan Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 23–205
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 539 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

23–205.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Fund” means the Connection Pipe Emergency Replacement Fund.

(3) (i) “Pipe” means a water OR SEWER service pipe connection located
on a Commission customer’s property that connects from the Commission’s service
connection to a customer’s residence.

(ii) “Pipe” includes polybutylene pipes.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 679 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) “Program” means the Connection Pipe Emergency Replacement Loan
Program.

(b) The Commission shall establish a Connection Pipe Emergency Replacement
Loan Program.

(c) The purpose of the Program is to provide loans to residential customers to
DIAGNOSE AND finance the replacement of malfunctioning pipes.

(d) The Program shall include:

(1) eligibility requirements for participation in the Program, including
eligibility requirements for:

(i) customers applying to receive a loan through the Program;

(ii) the type of connection pipe that is being installed to replace the
existing connection pipe; [and]

(iii) the type of malfunction and pipe replacement emergency that
qualifies for the Program; AND

(IV) THE TYPE OF DIAGNOSTIC ACTION THAT QUALIFIES FOR
THE PROGRAM;

(2) a requirement that a customer receive notification or have certification
that there is an active leak in [a] THE pipe THAT WILL BE REPLACED;

(3) loan terms and conditions, including an interest rate repayment
schedule and an administrative processing fee;

(4) a requirement that the replacement of malfunctioning pipes OR A
DIAGNOSTIC ACTION TAKEN under the Program be performed by a plumber licensed by
the Commission; and

(5) a prohibition on the Commission replacing malfunctioning pipes under
the Program.

(e) (1) The Program shall provide loans to customers on a first–come,
first–served basis.

(2) A loan made under the Program may not exceed [$5,000] $10,000.

(3) A customer may not receive more than one loan at a time under the
Program.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 679

(f) (1) Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, the Program shall require a
customer to repay a loan provided under the Program:

(i) through a separate charge on the customer’s water and sewer
bill; or

(ii) by another method determined by the Commission.

(2) The Commission may not set a charge greater than an amount that
allows the Commission to recover the costs associated with:

(i) financing the loan; and

(ii) administering the Program.

(3) A person who acquires property subject to a charge under this section
assumes the obligation to pay the charge.

(g) (1) (I) Subject to paragraph (4) of this subsection, a loan provided under
the Program shall be a lien against the property on which [the] A malfunctioning pipe has
been replaced [that continues] OR A DIAGNOSTIC ACTION HAS BEEN TAKEN.

(II) A LIEN UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH
SHALL CONTINUE until the loan is paid in full to the Commission.

(2) The Commission shall be [a] THE sole holder of the lien established
under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(3) (i) The Commission shall record a lien established under this
subsection in the land records of the county where the property is located.

(ii) A lien established under this subsection shall secure payment of
a loan, including the principal, interest, late charges, cost of collection, and reasonable
attorney’s fees.

(iii) Enforcement of a lien established under this subsection shall be
in accordance with the Maryland Contract Lien Act.

(4) A lien established under this subsection may not take priority over a
lien, mortgage, deed of trust, or other security interest that is:

(i) already attached to the property at the time the lien established
under this subsection is recorded; or

(ii) given to secure a loan to:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 679 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. purchase the property subject to the lien established
under this subsection; or

2. refinance a loan that is already attached to the property
at the time the lien established under this subsection is recorded.

(5) The Program may not provide, or at any time have outstanding, more
than [$1,000,000] $2,000,000 total in loans.

(h) The Commission shall include [$100,000] $200,000 annually in the
Commission’s budget for the Program for fiscal years 2020 through [2029] 2034.

(i) (1) There is a Connection Pipe Emergency Replacement Fund.

(2) The purpose of the Fund is to provide funding for the Program.

(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Fund shall be
administered solely by the Commission or the Commission’s designee.

(4) The Fund consists of:

(i) money appropriated by the Commission from ratepayer funds
only;

(ii) any investment earnings of the Fund; and

(iii) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the Fund.

(5) The Fund may be used only for:

(i) providing loans through the Program; and

(ii) the administration of the Program.

Chapter 539 of the Acts of 2018

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2018. It shall remain effective for a period of [11] 16 years and, at the end of June 30,
[2029] 2034, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 679

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5