START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 889

Chapter 889

(House Bill 1078)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Remote Ultrasound Procedures and
Remote Fetal Nonstress Tests

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Medical Assistance Program to provide remote
ultrasound procedures and remote fetal nonstress tests under certain circumstances;
and generally relating to the Maryland Medical Assistance Program and remote
ultrasound procedures and remote fetal nonstress tests.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–103(a)(2)(ii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–141.5
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–103.

(a) (1) The Secretary shall administer the Maryland Medical Assistance
Program.

(2) The Program:

(ii) Shall provide, subject to the limitations of the State budget,
comprehensive medical, dental, and other health care services, INCLUDING SERVICES

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 889 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

PROVIDED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 15–141.5 OF THIS SUBTITLE, for all eligible
pregnant women whose family income is at or below 250 percent of the poverty level for the
duration of the pregnancy and for 1 year immediately following the end of the woman’s
pregnancy, as permitted by the federal law;

15–141.5.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (B) AND (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE
PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE REMOTE ULTRASOUND PROCEDURES AND REMOTE
FETAL NONSTRESS TESTS USING CURRENT PROCEDURAL TERMINOLOGY CODES IF:

(1) THE PATIENT IS IN A RESIDENCE OR A LOCATION OTHER THAN
THE OFFICE OF THE PATIENT’S PROVIDER; AND

(2) THE PROVIDER FOLLOWS THE SAME STANDARD OF CARE THAT
THE PROVIDER WOULD FOLLOW WHEN PROVIDING THE SERVICES ON–SITE.

(B) THE PROGRAM SHALL REQUIRE THAT A PROVIDER OFFERING A
REMOTE ULTRASOUND PROCEDURE OR REMOTE FETAL NONSTRESS TEST USE
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY:

(1) TO COLLECT ANY HEALTH DATA FROM THE PATIENT AND
ELECTRONICALLY TRANSMIT THE INFORMATION IN A SECURE MANNER TO A
HEALTH CARE PROVIDER IN A DIFFERENT LOCATION FOR INTERPRETATION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS;

(2) THAT IS COMPLIANT WITH THE FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE
PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1996; AND

(3) THAT IS APPROVED BY THE FEDERAL FOOD AND DRUG
ADMINISTRATION.

(C) (1) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROVIDE REIMBURSEMENT FOR A REMOTE
FETAL NONSTRESS TEST IN THE SAME MANNER AS AN ON–SITE FETAL NONSTRESS
TEST.

(2) A REMOTE FETAL NONSTRESS TEST FOR WHICH REIMBURSEMENT
IS PROVIDED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL REQUIRE THE USE
OF REMOTE MONITORING SOLUTIONS THAT ARE CLEARED BY THE FEDERAL FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION FOR ON–LABEL USE FOR MONITORING:

(I) FETAL HEART RATE;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 889

(II) MATERNAL HEART RATE; AND

(III) UTERINE ACTIVITY.

(D) THE PROGRAM SHALL ISSUE GUIDANCE FOR PROGRAM PROVIDERS TO
CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3