START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1024 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1024 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission - Connection Pipe Emergency 
Replacement Loan Program - Expansion  
PG/MC 101-24 
 
 
This bill expands the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission (WSSC) Connection 
Pipe Emergency Replacement Loan Program to include sewer pipes and diagnostic actions, 
as specified. The bill increases, from $5,000 to $10,000, the maximum loan that a customer 
is eligible to receive under the program. The bill increases, from $1.0 million to 
$2.0 million, the maximum total loans that WSSC may provide or have outstanding at any 
one time. The bill also increases, from $100,000 to $200,000, the amount WSSC must 
include in the program’s annual budget. The bill extends, from June 30, 2029, to 
June 30, 2034, the termination date of Chapter 539 of 2018. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024. 
 
Fiscal Summary 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  WSSC expenditures increase by $100,000 annually in FY 2025 through 
2034 for additional funding to the loan program. Revenues increase upon repayment of 
loans. WSSC may not provide or have outstanding more than $2.0 million in total loans at 
any one time. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 539 required WSSC to establish a Connection Pipe Emergency 
Replacement Loan Program to provide loans to residential customers to finance the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1024/ Page 2 
replacement of malfunctioning pipes. The loan program must include (1) eligibility 
requirements for participation in the program, including eligibility requirements for 
customers applying to receive a loan through the program, the type of connection pipe that 
is being installed to replace the existing connection pipe, and the type of malfunction and 
pipe replacement emergency that qualifies for the program; (2) a requirement that a 
customer receive notification or have certification that there is an active leak in a pipe; 
(3) loan terms and conditions, including an interest rate repayment schedule and an 
administrative processing fee; (4) a requirement that the replacement of malfunctioning 
pipes under the program be performed by a plumber licensed by the commission; and (5) a 
prohibition on the commission from replacing malfunctioning pipes under the program.  
 
Loans under the program may not exceed $5,000, and a customer may not receive more 
than one loan at a time.  
 
Customers who are provided loans must repay a loan through a separate charge on the 
customer’s water and sewer bill or by another method determined by the commission. 
WSSC may not set a charge greater than an amount that allows the commission to recover 
the costs associated with financing the loan and administering the program. A person who 
acquires property subject to a charge assumes the obligation to pay the charge. 
 
Each loan provided under the program must be a lien against the property on which the 
malfunctioning pipe has been replaced that continues until the loan is paid in full to the 
commission. The commission is the sole holder of the lien. WSSC is required to record a 
lien in the land records of the county where the property is located. 
 
Chapter 539 also established the Connection Pipe Emergency Replacement Fund, 
administered by WSSC, to provide funding for the connection pipe emergency replacement 
loan program. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated by the commission from 
ratepayer funds only; (2) any investment earnings of the fund; and (3) any other money 
from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only for 
providing loans through the program and the administration of the program. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  WSSC expenditures increase by $100,000 annually in fiscal 2025 
through 2034, due to the bill requiring WSSC to increase annual funding to the program. 
WSSC revenues increase upon repayment of the loans through the charge imposed on 
customer water and sewer bills. The amount of the increase cannot be reliably estimated 
but depends on the number of customers using the loan program and the repayment 
schedule of each loan. Under the bill, individual loans may not exceed $10,000 and WSSC 
may not provide or have outstanding more than $2.0 million in total loans at any one time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1024/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Washington 
Suburban Sanitary Commission; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3