START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 350

Chapter 350

(House Bill 1016)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – School Construction Master Plan Workgroup

FOR the purpose of establishing the Frederick County School Construction Master Plan
Workgroup; and generally relating to the Frederick County School Construction
Master Plan Workgroup.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Frederick County School Construction Master Plan Workgroup.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(1) two members of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate, based on the recommendation of the chair of the Frederick County Delegation;

(2) two members of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of
the House, based on the recommendation of the chair of the Frederick County Delegation;

(3) the County Executive of Frederick County, or the County Executive’s
designee;

(4) two members of the Frederick County Council, appointed by the
President of the County Council;

(5) two members of the Frederick County Board of Education, appointed by
the President of the County Board of Education; and

(6) one member of the Interagency Commission on School Construction.

(c) The members of the Workgroup shall elect the chair of the Workgroup.

(d) The Frederick County Board of Education shall provide staff for the
Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 350 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) Based on its review of the 2023 update to the Educational Facilities Master
Plan, the Workgroup shall:

(1) comprehensively evaluate all school facility needs in the Frederick
County Public Schools portfolio;

(2) explore and evaluate solutions to balance the fiscal demands of the
educational needs of Frederick County school construction priorities; and

(3) consider cost saving or cost sharing opportunities for Frederick County
to fund and afford:

(i) new school projects;

(ii) maintain existing buildings; or

(iii) renovations to aging schools to better meet educational needs.

(g) On or before December 31, 2024, the Workgroup shall report its findings and
recommendations to the County Executive of Frederick County, the Frederick County
Council, the Frederick County Board of Education, the Interagency Commission on School
Construction, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the
Frederick County House and Senate Delegations.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
30, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2