START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 799

Chapter 799

(House Bill 1051)

AN ACT concerning

Maternal Health – Assessments, Referrals, and Reporting
(Maryland Maternal Health Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of establishing requirements on local health departments and certain
health care providers and facilities regarding maternal health, including
requirements regarding prenatal risk assessment forms and postpartum infant and
maternal referral forms; ~~prohibiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~from~~
~~providing~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Assistance~~ ~~Program~~ ~~reimbursement~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~or~~ ~~freestanding~~
~~birthing~~ ~~center~~ ~~unless~~ ~~the~~ ~~facility~~ ~~complies~~ ~~with~~ ~~certain~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act;~~
requiring the Secretary of Health, in collaboration with the Maryland Health Care
Commission, to develop a Maryland Report Card for Birthing Facility Maternity
Care; requiring ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~study~~ ~~of~~ ~~incidents~~ ~~of~~ ~~severe~~
~~maternal~~ ~~morbidity~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ hospitals and freestanding birthing centers to
participate in the Severe Maternal Morbidity Surveillance Program for a certain
purpose; and generally relating to maternal health.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–101(a), (h), and (i), 19–301(a) and (f), and 19–3B–01(a) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–155, 19–310.4, and 19–3B–03.1; and 24–2401 and 24–2402 to be under
the new subtitle “Subtitle 24. Report Card for Birthing Facility Maternity
Care”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

15–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(h) “Program” means the Maryland Medical Assistance Program.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 799 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) “Program recipient” means an individual who receives benefits under the
Program.

15–155.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PRENATAL RISK ASSESSMENT FORM” MEANS A
STANDARDIZED FORM DEVELOPED BY THE DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES GUIDELINES FOR USE BY
A LICENSED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER TO EVALUATE RISK FACTORS FOR THE
HEALTH OF A PREGNANT PATIENT.

(B) A PROVIDER WHO RECEIVES REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE PROGRAM
FOR PROVIDING OBSTETRIC SERVICES TO A PATIENT SHALL COMPLETE A PRENATAL
RISK ASSESSMENT FORM FOR THE PATIENT:

(1) DURING DURING THE INITIAL VISIT WITH THE PATIENT; AND

(2) DURING THE THIRD TRIMESTER OF THE PATIENT’S PREGNANCY.

(C) AFTER COMPLETING A PRENATAL RISK ASSESSMENT FORM IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE PROVIDER SHALL
SUBMIT THE FORM TO THE LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOR THE COUNTY IN
WHICH THE PATIENT RESIDES.

(D) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, EACH LOCAL HEALTH
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT A REPORT THAT INCLUDES THE
NUMBER AND TYPE OF REFERRALS MADE TO PATIENTS THAT WERE BASED ON THE
INFORMATION FROM THE PRENATAL RISK ASSESSMENT FORM COMPLETED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR A PROVIDER TO
SUBMIT A PRENATAL RISK ASSESSMENT FORM ELECTRONICALLY.

19–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(f) “Hospital” means an institution that:

(1) Has a group of at least 5 physicians who are organized as a medical
staff for the institution;

(2) Maintains facilities to provide, under the supervision of the medical
staff, diagnostic and treatment services for 2 or more unrelated individuals; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 799

(3) Admits or retains the individuals for overnight care.

19–310.4.

(A) IF A NEWBORN IS DELIVERED IN A HOSPITAL FOLLOWING A HIGH–RISK
PREGNANCY, THE HOSPITAL SHALL:

(1) COMPLETE A POSTPARTUM INFANT AND MATERNAL REFERRAL
FORM AND SUBMIT THE FORM TO THE LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOR THE
COUNTY IN WHICH THE BIRTHING PARENT RESIDES;

(2) PROVIDE TO THE BIRTHING PARENT RESOURCES AND
INFORMATION SPECIFIC TO THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE BIRTHING PARENT,
INCLUDING INFORMATION REGARDING THE RISKS, SIGNS, PREVENTIVE MEASURES,
AND TREATMENT NEEDS FOR POSTPARTUM COMPLICATIONS, INCLUDING
CARDIOVASCULAR CONDITIONS, CHRONIC DISEASE, SUBSTANCE MISUSE, AND
MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS; AND

(3) CALL THE BIRTHING PARENT WITHIN 12 AT LEAST 24, BUT NOT
LATER THAN 48, HOURS AFTER DISCHARGING THE PARENT TO EVALUATE THE
PARENT’S STATUS AND, AS NECESSARY, PROVIDE INFORMATION ABOUT
POSTPARTUM COMPLICATIONS.

(B) ON OR BEFORE MAY OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, EACH LOCAL HEALTH
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT A REPORT THAT INCLUDES THE
NUMBER AND TYPE OF REFERRALS MADE BASED ON THE REFERRAL FORMS
SUBMITTED TO THE LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT PROVIDE MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM REIMBURSEMENT TO A HOSPITAL FOR SERVICES RELATED TO THE
DELIVERY OF A NEWBORN FOLLOWING A HIGH–RISK PREGNANCY UNLESS THE
HOSPITAL COMPLIES WITH SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION.

19–3B–01.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(d) (1) “Freestanding birthing center” means a facility that provides nurse
midwife services under Title 8, Subtitle 6 of the Health Occupations Article.

(2) “Freestanding birthing center” does not include:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 799 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) A hospital regulated under Subtitle 2 of this title; or

(ii) The private residence of the mother.

19–3B–03.1.

(A) IF A NEWBORN IS DELIVERED IN A FREESTANDING BIRTHING CENTER
FOLLOWING A HIGH–RISK PREGNANCY, THE FREESTANDING BIRTHING CENTER
SHALL:

(1) COMPLETE A POSTPARTUM INFANT AND MATERNAL REFERRAL
FORM AND SUBMIT THE FORM TO THE LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOR THE
COUNTY IN WHICH THE BIRTHING PARENT RESIDES;

(2) PROVIDE TO THE BIRTHING PARENT RESOURCES AND
INFORMATION SPECIFIC TO THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE BIRTHING PARENT,
INCLUDING INFORMATION REGARDING THE RISKS, SIGNS, PREVENTIVE MEASURES,
AND TREATMENT NEEDS FOR POSTPARTUM COMPLICATIONS, INCLUDING
CARDIOVASCULAR CONDITIONS, CHRONIC DISEASE, SUBSTANCE MISUSE, AND
MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS; AND

(3) CALL THE BIRTHING PARENT WITHIN 12 AT LEAST 24, BUT NOT
LATER THAN 48, HOURS AFTER DISCHARGING THE PARENT TO EVALUATE THE
PARENT’S STATUS AND, AS NECESSARY, PROVIDE INFORMATION ABOUT
POSTPARTUM COMPLICATIONS.

(B) ON OR BEFORE MAY OCTOBER 1 EACH YEAR, EACH LOCAL HEALTH
DEPARTMENT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT A REPORT THAT INCLUDES THE
NUMBER AND TYPE OF REFERRALS MADE BASED ON THE REFERRAL FORMS
SUBMITTED TO THE LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT PROVIDE MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM REIMBURSEMENT TO A FREESTANDING BIRTHING CENTER FOR SERVICES
RELATED TO THE DELIVERY OF A NEWBORN FOLLOWING A HIGH–RISK PREGNANCY
UNLESS THE FREESTANDING BIRTHING CENTER COMPLIES WITH SUBSECTION (A)(1)
OF THIS SECTION.

SUBTITLE 24. REPORT CARD FOR BIRTHING FACILITY MATERNITY CARE.

24–2401.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 799

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANING
INDICATED.

(B) “BIRTHING FACILITY” MEANS A FREESTANDING BIRTHING CENTER OR
A HOSPITAL THAT PROVIDES OBSTETRIC CARE.

(C) “FREESTANDING BIRTHING CENTER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
19–3B–01 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(D) “HOSPITAL” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 19–301 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(E) “REPORT CARD” MEANS THE MARYLAND REPORT CARD FOR BIRTHING
FACILITY MATERNITY CARE DEVELOPED UNDER § 24–2402 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

24–2402.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (B) AND (C) OF THIS SECTION, THE
SECRETARY, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE
COMMISSION, SHALL:

(1) DEVELOP A MARYLAND REPORT CARD FOR BIRTHING FACILITY
MATERNITY CARE; AND

(2) COLLECT THE NECESSARY INFORMATION TO COMPLETE AN
ANNUAL REPORT CARD FOR EACH BIRTHING FACILITY IN THE STATE.

(B) THE REPORT CARD SHALL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION
FOR EACH BIRTHING FACILITY, DISAGGREGATED BY RACE AND AGE IN ACCORDANCE
WITH BEST PRACTICES FOR DATA SUPPRESSION:

(1) THE NUMBER AND RATE OF VAGINAL DELIVERIES PERFORMED;

(2) THE NUMBER AND RATE OF CESAREAN DELIVERIES PERFORMED;

(3) THE AGE–ADJUSTED RATE OF COMPLICATIONS AND THE TOTAL
NUMBER OF COMPLICATIONS EXPERIENCED BY A PATIENT RECEIVING OBSTETRIC
CARE FOR:

(I) A VAGINAL DELIVERY AT THE BIRTHING FACILITY,
INCLUDING MATERNAL HEMORRHAGE, LACERATION, INFECTION, OR ANY OTHER
COMPLICATION AS REQUIRED BY THE SECRETARY; OR

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 799 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) A CESAREAN DELIVERY AT THE BIRTHING FACILITY,
INCLUDING MATERNAL HEMORRHAGE, INFECTION, OPERATIVE COMPLICATION, OR
ANY OTHER COMPLICATION AS REQUIRED BY THE SECRETARY; AND

(4) QUALITATIVE MEASURES BASED ON PATIENT INPUT REGARDING
THE PATIENT’S RECEIPT OF RESPECTFUL OBSTETRIC CARE.

(C) THE REPORT CARD SCORE SHALL BE BALANCED FOR THE RISKS
ASSOCIATED WITH THE LEVEL OF ACUITY CARE PROVIDED FOR OBSTETRIC
PATIENTS SERVED BY THE BIRTHING FACILITY.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL INCLUDE THE MOST RECENT REPORT CARD
ON THE DEPARTMENT’S WEBSITE.

(E) (1) AT LEAST ANNUALLY ONCE EVERY 3 YEARS, THE SECRETARY
SHALL:

(I) REVIEW THE CRITERIA EVALUATED IN THE REPORT CARD;
AND

(II) REVISE THE COMPLICATIONS OR OTHER FACTORS TO BE
INCLUDED IN THE REPORT CARD.

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL CONSIDER EXPERT GUIDANCE WHEN
REVIEWING THE CRITERIA EVALUATED IN THE REPORT CARD.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) ~~The~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health,~~ ~~in~~ ~~collaboration~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Hospital~~ ~~Association~~ ~~and~~ ~~local~~ ~~health~~ ~~departments,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~study~~ ~~the~~ ~~incidents~~ ~~of~~ ~~Severe~~
~~Maternal~~ ~~Morbidity~~ ~~(SMM)~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ Each hospital and freestanding birthing center
shall participate in the Severe Maternal Morbidity Surveillance and Review Program to:

(1) identify the contextual drivers ~~and~~ ~~trends~~ ~~in~~ ~~the,~~ risk factors ~~associated~~
~~with~~ ~~individuals~~ ~~experiencing,~~ and causes of SMM; ~~and~~

(2) study quality improvement efforts of hospitals and freestanding
birthing centers regarding SMM based on the reviews; and

(3) make recommendations to reduce the ~~incidents~~ prevalence of SMM in
the State.

(b) On or before December 1, 2025, the ~~Department~~ Severe Maternal Morbidity
Surveillance and Review Program shall report the findings and recommendations from the

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 799

study conducted under subsection (a) of this section to the Governor and, in accordance
with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall take
effect July 1, 2025.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall take
effect October 1, 2024.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in
Sections 3 and 4, this Act shall take effect ~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7