START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1017 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1017 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Boundary of the Frederick County Soil Conservation District - Alteration 
 
  
This bill consolidates the two soil conservation districts in Frederick County (the Catoctin 
Soil Conservation District and the Frederick Soil Conservation District) into 
one Frederick County Soil Conservation District with boundaries corresponding to the 
boundaries of Frederick County. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State expenditures for the 
Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) to provide financial, technical, and staffing 
assistance with respect to soil conservation district operations in Frederick County. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Consolidating the two soil conservation districts in Frederick County is not 
anticipated to materially affect county operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There are 24 soil conservation districts in 23 counties (Frederick County 
contains two districts) established in statute and continued with boundaries corresponding 
to county boundaries, except for Frederick County, and include all land and water and 
incorporated areas. Chapter 621 of 2021 authorized a Baltimore City soil conservation 
district to be established and continued with boundaries corresponding to the boundaries 
of Baltimore City, although the district has yet to be established. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1017/ Page 2 
Frederick County is the only county in the State with two soil conservation districts:   
(1) the Catoctin Soil Conservation District, within the area of Frederick County bounded 
by the Washington-Frederick County line, the Potomac River, and the eastern and northern 
boundaries of the Catoctin Creek watershed; and (2) the Frederick Soil Conservation 
District, comprising the balance of Frederick County land and water area. 
 
The governing body of each soil conservation district consists of five supervisors who must 
be interested and knowledgeable in the conservation of soil, water, and related natural 
resources. One of the supervisors is appointed by the county governing body and four are 
appointed by the State Soil Conservation Committee. Of the four supervisors appointed by 
the committee, one is appointed from a list of three district residents submitted by the 
county farm bureau, one is appointed from a list of three district residents submitted by the 
county extension service, and the remaining two are appointed from among residents of 
the district.  
 
A soil conservation district constitutes a political subdivision of the State and a public body 
corporate and politic, exercising public powers. The supervisors have various authority, 
including the authority to (1) conduct surveys, investigations, and research relating to the 
character of soil erosion and the preventive and control measures needed; (2) disseminate 
information concerning preventive and control measures; (3) conduct demonstration 
projects; (4) carry out preventive and control measures; (5) develop comprehensive plans 
for conserving soil resources and controlling and preventing soil erosion within the district; 
and (6) approve and disapprove sediment control plans for clearing, grading, transporting, 
or otherwise distributing soil pursuant to provisions of the Environment Article; soil 
conservation districts are designated as approval authorities under those provisions.  
 
The Governor must include in the annual budget bill an amount sufficient to employ not 
less than 110 field personnel in the soil conservation districts. Beginning in fiscal 2011, the 
mandated appropriation for the 24 soil conservation districts is $10.0 million. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDA provides department staff and other assistance to soil 
conservation districts in partnership with county governments and the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes 134 positions and $15.6 million 
in general and reimbursable funds for MDA in support of the soil conservation districts, 
primarily for personnel costs. The two Frederick County districts share a district office. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1017/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1153 (Frederick County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Budget and Management; U.S. Department of Agriculture; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3