START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 749

Chapter 749

(House Bill 1076)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Blind and Visually Impaired Students – Textbook Equity

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ establishing requirements for each county board of education,
~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date~~ ~~each~~ ~~year,~~ ~~to~~ ~~determine~~ regarding the provision of the
instructional materials that will be used in the upcoming school year for certain
students; requiring the county board to coordinate with the Instructional Resources
Center within the State Department of Education to provide instructional materials
in a specialized format to blind or visually impaired students not later than a certain
day in the upcoming school year; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~to~~ ~~cover~~ ~~the~~ ~~cost~~ ~~to~~
~~produce~~ ~~certain~~ ~~instructional~~ ~~materials~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~not~~ ~~available~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~specialized~~ ~~format;~~
requiring certain textbook publishers to provide an electronic file of certain textbooks
to the National Instructional Materials Access Center at a certain time; requiring
the Instructional Resources Center to submit a report on or before a certain date
each year; requiring the Department to report certain findings to the Governor and
General Assembly on or before a certain date each year; and generally relating to
textbook equity for blind and visually impaired students.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 8–408(a)(1), (3) through (7), (9), and (10)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 8–408(b) and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 8–408(e) and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

8–408.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 749 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(3) “Braille” means the system of reading and writing through touch
commonly known as Standard English Contracted Braille.

(4) “Child who is blind or visually impaired” means a child who:

(i) Has a visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with
correcting lenses or has a limited field of vision so that the widest diameter of the visual
field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees;

(ii) Has a medically indicated expectation of visual deterioration; or

(iii) Has a medically diagnosed limitation in visual functioning that
restricts the child’s ability to read and write standard print at levels expected of other
children of comparable ability and grade level.

(5) “Individualized education program” and “IEP team” have the same
meaning as provided by the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.

(6) “National Instructional Materials Access Center” means the center
established under § 674(e) of the federal Individuals with Disabilities Education
Improvement Act of 2004.

(7) “NIMAS” means the National Instructional Materials Accessibility
Standard established by the federal Secretary for Education under 20 U.S.C. 1412 to be
used in the preparation of electronic files suitable and used solely for efficient conversion
into specialized formats.

(9) “Print instructional materials” means printed textbooks and related
printed core materials that are written and published primarily for use in elementary
school and secondary school instruction and are required by the Department or county
board for use by students in the classroom.

(10) “Specialized formats” means braille, large print, audio, or digital text
that is used by blind or visually impaired individuals.

(b) (1) In developing the individualized education program for a child who is
blind or visually impaired, provisions shall be made for instruction in braille and the use of
braille unless the IEP team determines, after an evaluation of the child’s reading and
writing skills, needs, and appropriate reading and writing media, including an evaluation
of the child’s future needs for instruction in braille or the use of braille, that such
instruction or use is not appropriate for the child.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 749

(i) A child may not be denied the opportunity for instruction in
braille reading and writing solely because the child has some remaining vision.

(ii) This section does not require the exclusive use of braille if other
reading and writing media are appropriate to the child’s educational needs. The use of other
reading and writing media does not preclude the use of braille or the instruction of braille.

(2) For the purpose of achieving successful implementation of this
subsection, the State Board and the Professional Standards and Teacher Education Board
shall adopt certification standards for teachers of blind and visually impaired students.

(3) (i) The Department shall collaborate with and provide support to
the Instructional Resources Center to develop procedures to coordinate the statewide
availability of textbooks and supplementary instructional materials that may be accessed
using specialized formats that use NIMAS.

(ii) 1. The procedures developed under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph shall require the Department and a county board to include, in any procurement
contract or other document or agreement used to purchase print instructional materials
from a publisher, a provision that requires the publisher to:

A. On or before the delivery of the print instructional
materials, prepare and provide the National Instructional Materials Access Center
electronic files containing the contents of the print instructional materials using NIMAS;
or

B. Purchase instructional materials from that publisher that
are produced in, or may be rendered in, specialized formats.

2. A publisher may not be required to provide an electronic
copy of any instructional material copyrighted before July 1, 2007.

(iii) The State Board shall coordinate with the National Instructional
Materials Access Center to facilitate the timely transfer to the Instructional Resources
Center of:

1. Electronic files or instructional materials sent by
publishers for the Instructional Resources Center to convert the instructional materials
into specialized formats; and

2. Electronic files or instructional materials purchased from
a publisher in a specialized format.

(iv) Beginning on July 1, 2007, the Instructional Resources Center
shall make reasonable efforts to provide the instructional materials in specialized formats

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 749 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

to students who are blind or visually impaired for use on the first day of classes each year
or in a timely manner.

(V) 1. ON OR BEFORE JANUARY MARCH 15, 2025, AND EACH
JANUARY MARCH 15 THEREAFTER, EACH COUNTY BOARD SHALL DETERMINE THE
INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS THAT WILL BE USED IN THE UPCOMING SCHOOL YEAR
BY STUDENTS WITH INDIVIDUALIZED EDUCATION PROGRAMS UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION AND PLANS UNDER SECTION 504 OF THE FEDERAL
REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973.

2. THE COUNTY BOARD SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE
INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES CENTER TO PROVIDE THE INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS IN A SPECIALIZED FORMAT TO THE STUDENTS WHO ARE BLIND OR
VISUALLY IMPAIRED NOT LATER THAN THE FIRST DAY OF CLASSES OF THE
UPCOMING SCHOOL YEAR.

3. IF THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ARE NOT
AVAILABLE IN A SPECIALIZED FORMAT AT THE INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES
CENTER AND CANNOT BE OTHERWISE OBTAINED, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COVER
THE COST TO PRODUCE THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS IN BRAILLE OR LARGE
PRINT IF THE COUNTY BOARD IS UNABLE TO FULFILL THE REQUIREMENTS UNDER
SUBSUBPARAGRAPHS 1 AND 2 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, THE COUNTY BOARD AND
THE FAMILY OF THE STUDENT MUST DEVELOP AND AGREE ON A PLAN TO REMEDY
THE DELIVERY OF THE INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS NOT LATER THAN 45 DAYS
BEFORE THE FIRST DAY OF CLASSES OF THE UPCOMING SCHOOL YEAR.

(4) (I) Beginning in fiscal year 2008 and annually thereafter, the
Governor shall include $150,000 in the annual budget submission for the Instructional
Resources Center established by the Department.

(II) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THE
INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES CENTER TO ENSURE THAT TEXTBOOKS AND
SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS IN A SPECIALIZED FORMAT ARE
AVAILABLE TO BLIND AND VISUALLY IMPAIRED STUDENTS STATEWIDE.

(5) On or before September 1, 2012, the State Board shall establish
standards for the mastery of braille for use in English, language arts, and mathematics
instruction of blind and visually impaired students in pre–kindergarten through grade 12.

(6) (I) BEGINNING ON JANUARY 1, 2025, A PUBLISHER THAT
SELLS PUPIL EDITION TEXTBOOKS IN THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE TO THE NATIONAL
INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ACCESS CENTER AN ELECTRONIC FILE OF THE
TEXTBOOK IN THE NIMAS STANDARD IN A TIMELY MANNER COUNTY BOARD SHALL
REQUIRE IN ANY CONTRACT WITH A PUBLISHER OF PUPIL EDITION TEXTBOOKS,

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 749

THAT THE PUBLISHER PROVIDE AN ELECTRONIC FILE OF THE TEXTBOOK IN THE
NIMAS STANDARD TO THE NATIONAL INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ACCESS
CENTER AT THE SAME TIME THAT THE PUBLISHER PROVIDES THE TEXTBOOKS.

(II) THE DEPARTMENT, COUNTY BOARDS, AND THE NATIONAL
INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS ACCESS CENTER AND COUNTY BOARDS SHALL ENTER
INTO A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING TO ACCOMPLISH THE PURPOSES OF
THIS PARAGRAPH.

(E) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2026, AND EACH OCTOBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES CENTER SHALL SUBMIT TO THE
DEPARTMENT A REPORT ON THE ACCESSIBILITY AND DELIVERY OF TEXTBOOKS AND
SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DURING THE PREVIOUS SCHOOL
YEAR, INCLUDING:

(I) THE NUMBER OF ELECTRONIC FILES PUBLISHERS
PROVIDED TO NIMAS; AND

(II) THE NUMBER OF STUDENTS REQUESTING INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS;

(III) THE GRADE LEVEL OF STUDENTS REQUESTING
INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS;

(IV) THE NUMBER OF REQUESTS FOR INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS IN A SPECIALIZED FORMAT THAT COULD BE FULFILLED; AND

(V) THE NUMBER OF REQUESTS FOR INSTRUCTIONAL
MATERIALS IN A SPECIALIZED FORMAT THAT COULD NOT BE FULFILLED AND AN
EXPLANATION REGARDING WHY THE REQUEST COULD NOT BE FULFILLED.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL POST ON ITS WEBSITE THE
INFORMATION RECEIVED FROM THE INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES CENTER IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

(F) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2026, AND EACH DECEMBER 31
THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT ITS FINDINGS ON THE EQUITY OF
TEXTBOOKS AND SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALS FOR BLIND AND VISUALLY IMPAIRED
STUDENTS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

[(e)] (G) The State Board shall adopt regulations:

(1) Consistent with § 7–910 of this article; and
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 749 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) To implement the provisions of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6