START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 1052 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1052 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - 46th Alcoholic Beverages District - 
Revisions 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to (1) issue up to 
a total of 10 new Class B-D-7 licenses and a total of up to 2 new Class A-7 licenses in a 
specific geographic area in the 46th alcoholic beverages district in Baltimore City, subject 
to a transfer restriction, as specified and (2) waive the requirement that a Class D beer, 
wine, and liquor (BWL) license holder operating a restaurant not have a dining room 
adjacent to a bar in order to remain open after the closing hour for that class of license. The 
bill adds two exceptions to the general prohibition against the transfer or issuance of a 
license within 300 feet of a place of worship or school for specified areas in the 
46th alcoholic beverages district. The bill also specifies that certain licenses issued to 
specified locations may not expire for purposes of transfer or renewal, or may be converted, 
and that the board may not authorize a transfer of a license in a specified location, as 
specified. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and provisions related to the expiration, 
transfer, and conversion of specified licenses terminate July 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2025, to 
the extent the board issues additional licenses in specified geographic areas of the 
46th alcoholic beverages district, and to the extent a transfer, renewal, or conversion of a 
license occurs as a result of the bill.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1052/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
New Licenses – Specific Geographic Area 
 
The bill authorizes the board to issue up to 10 new Class B-D-7 licenses, and up to 2 new 
Class A-7 licenses, in the area bounded on the north by Interstate 95, on the east by the 
South Locust Point Terminal, and on the south and west by the Patapsco River, of the 
46th alcoholic beverages district in Baltimore City. A Class B-D-7 license and a 
Class A-7 license may not be transferred outside of the specified geographic area, and the 
board may not authorize the transfer of a license into the specified geographic area. 
 
Distance Restrictions from a Place of Worship or School – Specific Geographic Areas 
 
The bill specifies that the board may waive the distance restrictions for an application to 
issue or transfer a license within 300 feet of a place of worship or school, if certain 
requirements are met, in specified geographic areas in the 46th alcoholic beverages district. 
The board may issue or transfer a license in the geographic area (1) at the intersection of 
Eastern Avenue and South Highland Avenue, as specified, if the board has executed a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with a community association in the area regarding 
the nature of the establishment, and enforces the MOU against any license holder that 
obtains a license in the specific geographic area, and seeks to renew or transfer the license, 
and (2) at the intersection of Eastern Avenue and South Newkirk Street, as specified, only 
if the license holder has received a letter of support from a place of worship or school that 
is within the bounded area.  
 
Expiration, Transfer, and Conversion of Licenses 
 
The bill specifies a Class B-D-7 license issued for a premises: 
 
 
on the 2800 block of O’Donnell Street must be considered unexpired until 
July 1, 2024, for the purpose of completing a transfer of ownership at this location; 
 
in the 1600 block of Eastern Avenue must be considered unexpired until 
July 1, 2025, for the purpose of completing a transfer of ownership and transfer of 
location to a premises in the 600 block of South Caroline Street; and 
 
in the 600 block of South Luzerne Avenue must be considered unexpired until 
July 1, 2025, for the purpose of being renewed. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1052/ Page 3 
The bill also specifies that: 
 
 
a Class B license issued for a premises in the 3500 block of Boston Street must be 
considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, for the purpose of completing a transfer of 
ownership and a transfer of location to a premises in the 3600 block of 
Boston Street; however, if the Class B license transferred to the 3600 block of 
Boston Street was originally issued as a Class B-D-7 license, the license holder may 
apply to the board to convert the Class B license back to a Class B-D-7 license; a 
holder of a Class D beer and light wine license on the 3200 block of Eastern Avenue 
may apply to the board to convert to a Class D BWL license, as specified; and 
 
the board may not authorize a transfer of a license in ward 24, precinct 5 to a person 
or a location that has received funding awarded under a legislative bond initiative. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Class B-D-7 License 
 
The board may issue a Class B-D-7 license if it determines, upon consideration of the 
number of beer, wine, and liquor outlets in the affected area and the outlets’ days of sale, 
that the license is reasonably necessary for public convenience. A Class B-D-7 license 
authorizes the licensee to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on- and off-premises consumption. 
The annual license fee is $1,320, and the renewal fee is $50. 
 
Class A-7 License 
 
Chapter 537 of 2018 authorized the board to issue a Class A-7 BWL license. The license 
authorizes the holder to sell, for off-premises consumption, beer, wine, and liquor at retail 
at the place described in the license on Monday through Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 
midnight. The annual license fee is $1,500, and the renewal fee is $50. A license holder 
who holds a valid Class B-D-7 license issued on or before July 1, 2018, may apply to the 
board to exchange the license for a Class A-7 license if the license holder first obtains 
approval by resolution of the Baltimore City Council. 
 
Distance Restrictions from a Place of Worship or School 
 
The board generally may not issue a new license or approve the transfer of an existing 
license to a building within 300 feet of the nearest place of worship or school. The board 
may waive the distance restrictions for an application to issue or transfer a license into a 
specified geographic area if the board (1) has executed a MOU with a community 
association in the area and (2) enforces the MOU against any license holder that obtains a 
license in the specific geographic area and seeks to renew or transfer the license.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1052/ Page 4 
After-hours Restrictions and Exemptions 
 
Generally, a licensed premises must end all operations, including the serving of alcoholic 
beverages and food and providing entertainment, at the closing hour for that class of 
licensed premises, as specified. The board may grant an exception for remaining open after 
hours to specified licensees, and a pharmacy, as specified. Specifically, a holder of a 
Class D BWL license that operates a restaurant meets the exception for remaining open 
after hours if (1) it is used only for serving food to patrons seated in a dining room that is 
not adjacent to a bar and (2) the restaurant is located in the 46th Legislative District in the 
Legislative Districting Plan of 2022.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the board issues a new Class B-D-7 license, revenues 
increase by $1,920 at the time of application and $1,370 annually thereafter. This estimate 
is based on a one-time $600 application fee, a $50 renewal fee, and an annual 
$1,320 licensing fee. Further, to the extent the board issues a new Class A-7 BWL license, 
revenues increase by $2,100 at the time of application and $1,550 annually thereafter. The 
estimate is based on a one-time $600 application fee, a $50 renewal fee, and an annual 
$1,500 licensing fee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1100 (Senator Ferguson) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4