START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 988

Chapter 988

(House Bill 1060)

AN ACT concerning

Carroll County – Sheriff – Salary

FOR the purpose of altering the annual salary of the Sheriff of Carroll County ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~equal~~
~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~salary~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~Police~~ ~~lieutenant~~ ~~colonel,~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~highest~~
~~available~~ ~~step~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~lieutenant~~ ~~colonel~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~Police~~ ~~pay~~ ~~plan~~
~~beginning~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~year;~~ ~~providing~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~change~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~annual~~ ~~salary~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~Sheriff~~ ~~of~~ ~~Carroll~~ ~~County~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~ and generally relating to
the salary of the Sheriff of Carroll County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–320(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 2–320(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

2–320.

(a) This section applies only in Carroll County.

(b) (1) The Sheriff of Carroll County shall receive an annual salary of[:

(1) $110,000 beginning December 3, 2019;

(2) $125,000 beginning December 6, 2022; and

(3)] $140,000 beginning December 5, 2023[, and thereafter].

(2) BEGINNING IN 2026, THE SALARY FOR THE SHERIFF SHALL BE
EQUAL TO THE SALARY OF A DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE LIEUTENANT

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 988 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

COLONEL, AT THE HIGHEST AVAILABLE STEP FOR A LIEUTENANT COLONEL AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE PAY PLAN IN EFFECT ON THE DAY BEFORE THE DAY
THAT THE SHERIFF BEGINS THE NEW TERM OF OFFICE $191,078.10.

(3) BEGINNING IN 2030 AND EVERY 4 YEARS THEREAFTER, THE
SALARY OF THE SHERIFF OF CARROLL COUNTY SHALL BE THE LESSER OF:

(I) THE SALARY OF A DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE
LIEUTENANT COLONEL, AT THE HIGHEST AVAILABLE STEP FOR A LIEUTENANT
COLONEL AT THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE POLICE PAY PLAN IN EFFECT ON THE DAY
BEFORE THE DAY THAT THE SHERIFF BEGINS A TERM OF OFFICE IN THAT YEAR; OR

(II) A 110% OF THE SALARY OF THE SHERIFF ON THE DAY
BEFORE THE DAY THAT THE SHERIFF BEGINS A NEW TERM OF OFFICE 2027, THE
SALARY FOR THE SHERIFF SHALL BE $212,309.

(4) ANY CHANGE IN THE SALARY PAID UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF
STATE POLICE PAY PLAN DURING THE TERM OF OFFICE OF THE SHERIFF MAY NOT
APPLY TO THE INCUMBENT SHERIFF, BUT THE CHANGED RATE SHALL TAKE EFFECT
AT THE BEGINNING OF THE NEXT FOLLOWING TERM OF OFFICE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, in accordance with Article
III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution, this Act may not be construed to extend or apply to
the salary or compensation of the Sheriff of Carroll County while serving in a term of office
beginning before the effective date of this Act, but the provisions of this Act concerning the
salary or compensation of the Sheriff of Carroll County shall take effect at the beginning of
the next following term of office. This limitation does not apply to an individual appointed
or elected after the effective date of this Act to fill out an unexpired term.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2