START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 262

Chapter 262

(House Bill 1047)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Self–Administered Sexual Assault Evidence Collection
Kits

FOR the purpose of providing that a party in a criminal trial involving an allegation of ~~a~~
~~sexual~~ ~~crime~~ sexually assaultive behavior may not introduce ~~evidence~~ information
that physical evidence of ~~a~~ ~~sexual~~ ~~crime~~ sexually assaultive behavior was obtained
using certain materials; providing that selling, offering for sale, or distributing a
certain self–administered sexual assault evidence collection kit is an unfair,
deceptive, or abusive trade practice; establishing the Forensic Nurse Examiner
Training Grant Program; establishing the Forensic Nurse Examiner Training Grant
Program Fund as a special, nonlapsing fund; prohibiting the limitation or waiver of
certain rights and warranties on certain products used to collect evidence of a sexual
assault; and generally relating to self–administered sexual assault evidence
collection kits.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xl)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xli)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xlii); and 14–4601 through 14–4604 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 46. Self–Administered Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 10–925
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 262 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–926(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 11–926(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xl) Title 14, Subtitle 13 of the Public Safety Article; [or]

(xli) Title 14, Subtitle 45 of this article; or

(XLII)TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 46 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

SUBTITLE 46. SELF–ADMINISTERED SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION
KITS.

14–4601.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE FORENSIC NURSE EXAMINER TRAINING
GRANT PROGRAM.

(C) “QUALIFIED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
11–926 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE.

(D) “SELF–ADMINISTERED SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT”
MEANS MATERIALS ADVERTISED OR MARKETED AS A MEANS FOR A PERSON OTHER

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 262

THAN A QUALIFIED HEALTH CARE PROVIDER TO COLLECT PHYSICAL EVIDENCE OF
A SEXUAL CRIME.

(E) “SEXUAL CRIME” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 10–925 OF THE
COURTS ARTICLE.

14–4602.

(A) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A SELF–ADMINISTERED SEXUAL
ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT THAT IS ISSUED BY THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH.

(B) A PERSON MAY NOT SELL, OFFER FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTE A
SELF–ADMINISTERED SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE COLLECTION KIT.

(C) (1) A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION IS:

(I) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE
WITHIN THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(II) SUBJECT TO THE ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
PROVISIONS CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(2) (I) IN ADDITION TO ANY PENALTY IMPOSED UNDER TITLE 13
OF THIS ARTICLE, A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO A CIVIL
PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING $1,000 FOR EACH VIOLATION.

(II) THE CIVIL PENALTY UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH IS RECOVERABLE BY THE STATE IN A CIVIL ACTION OR AN
ADMINISTRATIVE CEASE AND DESIST ACTION UNDER § 13–403(A) AND (B) OF THIS
ARTICLE OR AFTER AN ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING HAS BEEN HELD UNDER §
13–403(D)(3) AND (4) OF THIS ARTICLE.

(D) ONLY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL MAY ENFORCE THIS SECTION.

(E) ALL FINES, PENALTIES, AND DAMAGES COLLECTED FOR VIOLATIONS OF
THIS SECTION SHALL BE DEPOSITED INTO THE FORENSIC NURSE EXAMINER
TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–4604 OF THIS
SUBTITLE.

14–4603.

(A) THERE IS A FORENSIC NURSE EXAMINER TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 262 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST NONPROFIT ENTITIES
THAT PROVIDE RESOURCES FOR VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT IN THE STATE TO
FUND TRAINING FOR NURSES IN THE STATE TO DEVELOP SKILLS IN CONDUCTING
FORENSIC EXAMINATIONS OF VICTIMS OF SEXUAL ASSAULT.

(C) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL ESTABLISH:

(1) AN APPLICATION PROCESS FOR NONPROFIT ENTITIES AND
HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS AND COLLEGES IN THE STATE TO APPLY FOR
GRANT FUNDING FROM THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR SELECTING RECIPIENTS FOR GRANT
FUNDING FROM THE PROGRAM.

14–4604.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE FORENSIC NURSE EXAMINER
TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM FUND.

(B) THERE IS A FORENSIC NURSE EXAMINER TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM
FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FUNDING FOR GRANTS
AWARDED UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(D) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) REVENUE DISTRIBUTED TO THE FUND UNDER § 14–4602 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; AND

(2) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 262

(G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY TO FUND GRANTS TO NONPROFIT
ENTITIES THROUGH THE PROGRAM.

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

10–925.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “SEXUAL CRIME” MEANS:

(1) AN OFFENSE UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
~~ARTICLE;~~

(2) THE SEXUAL ABUSE OF A MINOR UNDER § 3–604 OF THE
CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE; OR

(3) THE SEXUAL ABUSE OF A VULNERABLE ADULT UNDER § 3–802 OF
THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “SEXUALLY ASSAULTIVE BEHAVIOR” HAS THE
MEANING STATED IN § 10–923 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) EVIDENCE INFORMATION THAT PHYSICAL EVIDENCE OF A SEXUAL
~~CRIME~~ SEXUALLY ASSAULTIVE BEHAVIOR WAS OBTAINED USING MATERIALS THAT
WERE SOLD, OFFERED FOR SALE, OR DISTRIBUTED IN A MANNER THAT WOULD
CONSTITUTE A VIOLATION OF § 14–4602 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE IS NOT
ADMISSIBLE IN A CRIMINAL OR CIVIL PROCEEDING INVOLVING AN ALLEGATION OF
A SEXUAL CRIME SEXUALLY ASSAULTIVE BEHAVIOR.

(C) THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO REQUIRE A COURT TO ADMIT
PHYSICAL EVIDENCE.

Article – Criminal Procedure

11–926.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 262 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(J) (1) ANY AGREEMENT, CONDITION OF ACCESS OR USE, OR POLICY
THAT LIMITS OR WAIVES ANY SUBSTANTIVE OR PROCEDURAL RIGHT OR REMEDY TO
A CLAIM AGAINST ANY PERSON WHO PROVIDES A VICTIM OR ANOTHER PERSON WITH
ANY SERVICE, PRODUCT, INFORMATION, OR OTHER MEANS TO COLLECT EVIDENCE
OF A SEXUAL ASSAULT IS NULL AND VOID AS BEING AGAINST THE PUBLIC POLICY OF
THE STATE.

(2) ANY DISCLAIMER OF ANY WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NONINFRINGEMENT
REGARDING ANY SERVICE, PRODUCT, INFORMATION, OR OTHER MEANS TO COLLECT
EVIDENCE OF A SEXUAL ASSAULT IS NULL AND VOID AS BEING AGAINST THE PUBLIC
POLICY OF THE STATE.

[(j)] (K) The Attorney General shall adopt regulations for uniform statewide
implementation of this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ is an emergency measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the
public health or safety, has been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of
all the members elected to each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take
effect from the date it is enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6