START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1092 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1092 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
9-1-1 Trust Fund - Purposes - Training in Telecommunications 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
 
 
This bill expands the stated purpose of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funding 
for telecommunications cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) training. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) advises 
that CPR training is already an allowable expense of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund and, therefore, 
the bill is clarifying in nature and does not affect special fund expenditures from the  
9-1-1 Trust Fund. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
Any local expenditures for counties that provide telecommunications CPR training to 
public safety answering point (PSAP) personnel are reimbursable by the 9-1-1 Trust Fund. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland’s 9-1-1 System and the Maryland 9-1-1 Board 
 
The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through PSAPs, which are generally owned 
and operated by local governments. 9-1-1 specialists working within PSAPs answer, 
redirect, and take action on 9-1-1 calls received based on the location of the originating  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1092/ Page 2 
9-1-1 call. State and local governments are preparing for “next generation” 
9-1-1 technology that will allow PSAPs to access not only more accurate information about 
caller location but also other information that will assist emergency personnel in 
communicating with callers and responding more efficiently. Legislation has been enacted 
in recent years to, among other things:   
 
 
transfer the Maryland 9-1-1 Board that is responsible for administering the 
9-1-1 Trust Fund and overseeing the State’s 9-1-1 system from the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services to MDEM; 
 
expand the uses of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funding for 
9-1-1 specialist training activities; and 
 
increase funding for the State’s 9-1-1 system. 
 
The Maryland 9-1-1 Board’s other responsibilities include (1) dispersing funds to local 
governments from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund for authorized costs; (2) reviewing and approving 
or disapproving requests for reimbursement of the costs of enhancing 9-1-1 systems; 
(3) ensuring the inspection of PSAPs; (4) auditing counties to ensure that 9-1-1 Trust Funds 
are being used for authorized purposes; (5) establishing training standards for PSAP 
personnel based on national best practices and related to Next Generation 9-1-1; and 
(6) consulting with the Maryland Cybersecurity Council to establish cybersecurity 
standards for PSAPs. 
 
9-1-1 Trust Fund 
 
The 9-1-1 Trust Fund is funded through a State 9-1-1 fee and county 9-1-1 fee. Telephone 
companies, wireless carriers, and other 9-1-1 accessible service providers collect and remit 
the fees monthly to the Comptroller for deposit into the fund. The State 9-1-1 fee is 
distributed to counties at the discretion of the Maryland 9-1-1 Board in response to county 
9-1-1 system enhancement requests. The county fee, the prepaid wireless 9-1-1 fee 
remittances, and any investment earnings of the fund are all distributed quarterly to each 
county in prorated amounts according to the level of fees collected in each jurisdiction. 
 
The stated purpose of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund includes reimbursing expenses for specified 
activities such as (1) the operation and maintenance of 9-1-1 systems; (2) PSAP facilities; 
(3) public education materials; (4) the training of county personnel working in or directly 
supporting a PSAP; and (5) 9-1-1 specialist recruitment activities.  
 
Additional Comments:  MDEM advises that there are many high-quality CPR trainings 
available for PSAP employees, including free trainings available through the International 
Association of Emergency Dispatch.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1092/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 649 (Senator Kagan) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Baltimore City; Harford and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3