START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1003 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1003 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Montgomery County - Clerk of the Circuit Court - Plat Recordation  
PG/MC 110-24 
 
  
This bill authorizes, in Montgomery County, a plat to be drawn in an electronic version in 
a manner approved by the State Archivist. The bill also authorizes the clerk of the 
Montgomery County Circuit Court to record or maintain a plat in electronic form in a 
manner approved by the State Archivist. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Montgomery County operations or 
finances or the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, if a landowner in the State subdivides his/her land for 
commercial, industrial, or residential use, a plat of the subdivision must be recorded in the 
land records of the county where the land is located. Provided the landowner complies with 
the recordation requirements specified in the Real Property Article, the clerk of the court 
must generally accept and record the plat. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1003/ Page 2 
The plat must be legible, accurately drawn to scale, and submitted for recordation in 
black ink on transparent mylar, or linen or black-line photo process comparable to original 
quality that conforms to archival standards. 
 
The clerk of the circuit court of a county must fasten a copy of each plat in a book provided 
for that purpose or record the plat. The clerk must also send a copy to the county’s 
supervisor of assessments and one copy to the State Archivist who must also record the 
plat. The State Archivist must provide a copy of the plat to any supervisor of assessments 
of the State upon request. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Archives; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2