START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 458

Chapter 458

(House Bill 1032)

AN ACT concerning

Highways – Tourist Area and Corridor Signage Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Tourist Area and Corridor Signage Program; requiring
the State Highway Administration, in collaboration with the Department of
Commerce, to administer the Program ~~and~~ ~~establish~~ ~~an~~ ~~Eligibility~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~to~~
~~review~~ ~~attraction~~ ~~applications;~~ requiring the Administration to notify certain
committees of the General Assembly if the Program is amended; and generally
relating to the Tourist Area and Corridor Signage Program.

BY adding to
Article – Transportation
Section 8–755 to be under the new part “Part VIII. Tourist Area and Corridor
Signage Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Transportation

8–753. RESERVED.

8–754. RESERVED.

PART VIII. TOURIST AREA AND CORRIDOR SIGNAGE PROGRAM.

8–755.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “DEPARTMENT” MEANS THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE TOURIST AREA AND CORRIDOR
SIGNAGE PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A TOURIST AREA AND CORRIDOR SIGNAGE PROGRAM.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 458 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO CREATE A SYSTEM OF
SUPPLEMENTAL GUIDE SIGNS TO DIRECT MOTORISTS TO ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL
ATTRACTIONS BY DIRECTING THE MOTORISTS FIRST TO GROUPS OF ATTRACTIONS.

(D) THE ADMINISTRATION, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT
OF COMMERCE, SHALL:

(1) ADMINISTER ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) ESTABLISH AN ELIGIBILITY COMMITTEE TO REVIEW ATTRACTION
~~APPLICATIONS.~~

(E) (1) (I) THE ELIGIBILITY COMMITTEE ADMINISTRATION AND THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL DEVELOP STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES FOR DETERMINING
THE ELIGIBILITY OF AN ATTRACTION FOR A SIGN.

(II) IF THE ELIGIBILITY COMMITTEE APPROVES DEPARTMENT
PROVIDES AN INITIAL APPROVAL OF AN ATTRACTION’S APPLICATION BASED ON THE
CRITERIA ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
ADMINISTRATION SHALL INVESTIGATE WHETHER THERE IS SPACE AVAILABLE FOR
A SIGN FOR THE ATTRACTION.

(III) APPROVAL OF A SIGN IS SUBJECT TO SPACE AVAILABILITY
BASED ON ADMINISTRATION REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.

(2) (I) THE ADMINISTRATION THE DEPARTMENT, IN
COORDINATION WITH THE REQUESTING ATTRACTION, SHALL PREPARE A SIGNAGE
PLAN ~~FOR~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~SIGNS~~ ~~IT~~ ~~DETERMINES~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~FEASIBLE~~ AND SUBMIT THE SIGNAGE
PLAN TO THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ADMINISTRATION FOR REVIEW.

(2) (I) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL REVIEW THE SIGNAGE PLAN
FOR COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS AND
RIGHT–OF–WAY LAWS AND REGULATIONS.

(II) IN REVIEWING A SIGNAGE PLAN, THE DEPARTMENT OF
COMMERCE ADMINISTRATION MAY CONSULT WITH OTHER STATE AGENCIES AND
OFFICES.

(III) 1. AS PART OF THE REVIEW REQUIRED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL
INVESTIGATE WHETHER THERE IS SPACE AVAILABLE AT THE PROPOSED SITE ALONG
THE STATE HIGHWAY FOR A SIGN FOR THE ATTRACTION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 458

2. APPROVAL OF A SIGNAGE PLAN IS SUBJECT TO SPACE
AVAILABILITY BASED ON THE ADMINISTRATION’S REGULATIONS AND
REQUIREMENTS.

(3) (I) 1. IF THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
ADMINISTRATION APPROVES A SIGNAGE PLAN AND ISSUES A REQUIRED PERMIT TO
THE ATTRACTION, THE ADMINISTRATION ATTRACTION SHALL DESIGN, FABRICATE,
AND INSTALL THE SIGNS IN THE SIGNAGE PLAN WITHIN 3 MONTHS AFTER THE
~~APPROVAL~~ USING STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS APPROVED BY THE
ADMINISTRATION.

2. THE ATTRACTION SHALL BEAR ALL COSTS FOR THE
DESIGN, FABRICATION, AND INSTALLATION OF THE SIGNS IN THE SIGNAGE PLAN.

(II) AN APPLICANT ATTRACTION THAT APPLIES FOR A SIGN
SHALL PAY AN AMOUNT THE ADMINISTRATION CONSIDERS APPROPRIATE FOR THE
REVIEW OF EACH SIGN INCLUDED IN THE SIGNAGE PLAN AND THE ISSUANCE OF ALL
REQUIRED PERMITS.

(F) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY REQUEST THAT THE APPLICANT DESIGN
~~AND~~ ~~INSTALL~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SIGNS~~ ~~APPROVED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SIGNAGE~~ ~~PLAN~~ ~~USING~~ ~~VENDORS~~ ~~AND~~
SPECIFICATIONS APPROVED BY THE ADMINISTRATION.

(G) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY CHARGE AN APPLICANT ATTRACTION
A REASONABLE ANNUAL ADMINISTRATIVE FEE TO ADMINISTER AND MANAGE THE
PROGRAM FOR THE DURATION THAT EACH SIGN IN THE SIGNAGE PLAN IS
INSTALLED.

(2) EACH SIGN INSTALLED ON BEHALF OF AN APPLICANT

(I) AN ATTRACTION’S SIGN MAY BE REMOVED BY THE
ADMINISTRATION IF THE APPLICANT ATTRACTION FAILS TO PAY THE ANNUAL
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.

(II) THE ATTRACTION SHALL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
MAINTAINING, REMOVING, AND REPLACING SIGNS AT THE DIRECTION OF THE
ADMINISTRATION IF AN EXISTING APPROVED SIGN IS DETERMINED TO BE
NONCOMPLIANT WITH PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS FOR REASONS INCLUDING
DAMAGE, FADING, OR SAFETY CONCERNS.

(III) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY REMOVE ANY ATTRACTION SIGN
THAT DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE PROGRAM.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 458 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) AN ATTRACTION WHOSE SIGN IS REMOVED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL RESUBMIT NEW OR REPLACEMENT
SIGNAGE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL.

(H) (G) (1) THE ADMINISTRATION MAY AMEND THE
PROGRAM IF THE ADMINISTRATION DETERMINES THAT THE PROGRAM MAY RESULT
IN A SANCTION BY THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION, INCLUDING A
DECREASE IN FEDERAL FUNDS PROVIDED TO THE STATE FOR HIGHWAY USE.

(2) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL NOTIFY THE FOLLOWING
LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES AT LEAST 30 DAYS BEFORE ANY AMENDMENTS ARE
MADE TO THE PROGRAM AS A RESULT OF A POTENTIAL DECREASE IN FEDERAL
FUNDS PROVIDED FOR HIGHWAY USE IN THE STATE AMENDING THE PROGRAM TO
AVOID A SANCTION:

(I) THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE;

(II) THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE;

(III) THE HOUSE ENVIRONMENT AND TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE; AND

(IV) THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE.

(I) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR A SIGN, AN ATTRACTION SHALL, AT A MINIMUM:

(I) PROVIDE RECREATIONAL, HISTORICAL, CULTURAL, OR
LEISURE ACTIVITIES TO THE PUBLIC;

(II) BE PRIMARILY A NONRETAIL ATTRACTION, WITH NOT MORE
THAN 20% OF THE INTERIOR SQUARE FOOTAGE OF THE ATTRACTION DEVOTED TO
RETAIL SALES;

(III) BE OPEN TO RANDOM DAILY VISITATION WITHOUT
ADVANCED RESERVATIONS OR A REQUIRED EXTENDED ATTENDANCE;

(IV) IF LOCATED IN A DESIGNATED URBAN AREA, MEET
MINIMUM VISITOR ATTENDANCE MEASURES ESTABLISHED BY THE ELIGIBILITY
~~COMMITTEE;~~

(V) BE OPEN AT LEAST:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 458

1. 5 HOURS PER DAY;

2. 4 DAYS PER WEEK, INCLUDING SATURDAY OR
~~SUNDAY;~~

3. 25 HOURS PER WEEK; AND

4. 8 MONTHS EACH YEAR;

(VI) 1. PUBLISH A BROCHURE OR HOST A WEBSITE THAT
PROVIDES THE ATTRACTION’S HOURS OF OPERATION; AND

2. POST THE HOURS OF OPERATION AT THE
ATTRACTION LOCATION, CONSISTENT WITH THE HOURS OF OPERATION PUBLISHED
IN THE ATTRACTION’S BROCHURE OR ON ITS WEBSITE;

(VII) PROVIDE PUBLIC ACCESS TO ON–SITE RESTROOMS, WATER,
TELEPHONES, AND PARKING;

(VIII) PROVIDE AN INTERPRETER OR A GUIDE, A PRINTED
SELF–GUIDED TOUR, OR INTERPRETATIVE SIGNING DURING ALL HOURS OF
OPERATION; AND

(IX) MEET FEDERAL AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT
REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSIBILITY.

(2) (I) THE ELIGIBILITY COMMITTEE MAY APPROVE AN
~~APPLICATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ATTRACTION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~DOES~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~MEET~~ ~~ALL~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
REQUIREMENTS UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE ELIGIBILITY
COMMITTEE DETERMINES THAT THE ATTRACTION IS IMPORTANT TO THE STATE OR
THE LOCAL ECONOMY.

(II) AN ATTRACTION APPROVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL BE LISTED ON THE PROGRAM’S
~~WEBSITE.~~

(III) THE ELIGIBILITY COMMITTEE MAY WAIVE THE
REQUIREMENT THAT AN ATTRACTION BE OPEN AT LEAST 8 MONTHS EACH YEAR FOR
SEASONAL ATTRACTIONS.

(J) (H) (1) TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR SIGNAGE, AN ATTRACTION MAY NOT,
BASED ON A DETERMINATION BY THE ELIGIBILITY COMMITTEE ADMINISTRATION
AND THE DEPARTMENT, ALREADY BE WELL–SIGNED ON A TOURIST AREA
CORRIDOR.
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 458 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE FOLLOWING CATEGORIES OF ATTRACTIONS ARE ELIGIBLE
AN ATTRACTION MAY NOT BRING REPUTATIONAL HARM TO THE STATE.

(I) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A
SIGN DEVELOPED UNDER THE PROGRAM MAY INCLUDE ONLY THE FOLLOWING
ELEMENTS:

(I) THE NAME OF THE ATTRACTION;

(II) A DIRECTIONAL ARROW TO GUIDE INDIVIDUALS TO THE
ATTRACTION; AND

(III) THE APPROXIMATE MILEAGE TO THE ATTRACTION FROM
THE LOCATION OF THE SIGN.

(2) A SIGN MAY INCLUDE A GENERIC SYMBOL USED TO REPRESENT A
CATEGORY OF ATTRACTIONS IDENTIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT IF, ON THE
REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT, THE ADMINISTRATION DETERMINES THAT THERE
IS A GENERIC SYMBOL APPROVED FOR USE IN THE MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICES.

FOR SIGNAGE WITH GENERIC SYMBOLS APPROVED FOR USE:

~~(I)~~ ~~VISITOR~~ ~~CENTERS;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~GOLF~~ ~~COURSES;~~

~~(III)~~ ~~ANTIQUES~~ ~~ROWS;~~

~~(IV)~~ ~~MARINAS;~~

~~(V)~~ ~~WINERIES;~~

(VI) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
BREWERIES AND DISTILLERIES; AND

(VII) ANY ADDITIONAL CATEGORY IDENTIFIED BY THE
~~ELIGIBILITY~~ ~~COMMITTEE.~~

(3) THE ADMINISTRATION AND THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
~~SHALL~~ ~~DETERMINE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERIC~~ ~~SYMBOLS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~CRITERIA~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~BREWERY~~ ~~AND~~
~~DISTILLERY~~ ~~ELIGIBILITY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CONSULTATION~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~GEOGRAPHICALLY~~ ~~DIVERSE~~ ~~SET~~
OF COMMUNITY STAKEHOLDERS, INCLUDING:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 458

(I) STATE LEADERS IN THE BREWING AND DISTILLING
~~INDUSTRIES;~~

(II) LOCAL ELECTED OFFICIALS;

(III) LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OFFICIALS; AND

(IV) LEADERS IN THE TOURISM INDUSTRY.

(K) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL PRIORITIZE DESIGNING AND INSTALLING
~~SIGNS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~APPLICANTS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WERE~~ ~~APPROVED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~SIMILAR~~
ADMINISTRATION SIGNAGE PROGRAM BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, IN THE ORDER OF
APPROVAL AS FEASIBLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7