START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

Chapter 934

(House Bill 1063)

AN ACT concerning

Criminal Organizations – ~~Criminal~~ ~~Prohibitions,~~ ~~Civil~~ ~~Actions,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Forfeiture~~
Underlying Crime

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~ ~~statute~~ ~~of~~ ~~limitations~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~civil~~ ~~action~~ ~~for~~
~~damages~~ ~~resulting~~ ~~from~~ ~~certain~~ ~~participation~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~criminal~~ ~~organization;~~ ~~altering~~
~~certain~~ ~~definitions~~ ~~of~~ ~~“criminal~~ ~~organization”~~ ~~and~~ ~~“underlying~~ ~~crime”;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~
~~filing~~ ~~of~~ ~~and~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~civil~~ ~~action~~ ~~for~~ ~~injunctive~~ ~~relief~~ ~~and~~
~~damages~~ ~~arising~~ ~~out~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~participation~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~criminal~~ ~~organization;~~ ~~establishing~~
~~procedures~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~forfeiture~~ ~~of~~ ~~property~~ ~~connected~~ ~~to~~ ~~certain~~ altering the definition
of “underlying crime” that is applicable to certain prohibitions against participation
in a criminal organization; and generally relating to criminal organizations.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Courts~~ ~~and~~ ~~Judicial~~ ~~Proceedings~~
~~Section~~ ~~5–122~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2020~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 9–801
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 9–804
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Criminal~~ ~~Law~~
~~Section~~ ~~9–808~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Criminal~~ ~~Procedure~~
~~Section~~ ~~13–601~~ ~~through~~ ~~13–637~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~6.~~ ~~Violations~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Criminal~~ ~~Organizations~~ ~~Law”~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(2018~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Courts~~ ~~and~~ ~~Judicial~~ ~~Proceedings~~

~~5–122.~~

A CIVIL ACTION FOR DAMAGES RESULTING FROM PARTICIPATION IN A
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATION BROUGHT UNDER § 9–808 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
ARTICLE SHALL BE BROUGHT WITHIN 5 YEARS AFTER THE CONDUCT IN VIOLATION
OF § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE TERMINATES.

Article – Criminal Law

9–801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Coerce” means to compel or attempt to compel another by threat of harm or
other adverse consequences.

(c) “Criminal organization” means an enterprise, INCLUDING AN INFORMAL
ASSOCIATION, whose members:

(1) individually or collectively engage in a pattern of organized crime
activity;

(2) have as one of their primary objectives or activities the commission of
one or more underlying crimes, including acts by juveniles that would be underlying crimes
if committed by adults; and

(3) have in common an overt or covert organizational or command
structure.

(d) “Enterprise” includes:

(1) a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, business trust, or other
legal entity; or

(2) any group of individuals associated in fact although not a legal entity.

(e) “Pattern of organized crime activity” means the commission of, attempted
commission of, conspiracy to commit, or solicitation of two or more underlying crimes or

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

acts by a juvenile that would be an underlying crime if committed by an adult, provided the
crimes or acts were not part of the same incident.

(f) “Solicit” has the meaning stated in § 11–301 of this article.

(g) “Underlying crime” means:

(1) a crime of violence as defined under § 14–101 of this article;

(2) a violation of § 3–203 (second degree assault), § 3–1102 (sex trafficking),
§ 3–1103 (forced marriage), § 4–203 (wearing, carrying, or transporting a handgun), §
4–204 (USE OF A FIREARM IN THE COMMISSION OF A CRIME), §
7–113 (embezzlement by fiduciary), or § 7–315 (theft – telecommunications–related) of this
article, § 9–102 (subornation of perjury), § 9–202(a) (bribery of juror), § 9–302 (inducing
false testimony or avoidance of subpoena), § 9–303 (retaliation for testimony), § 9–305
(intimidating or corrupting juror), § 9–306 (obstruction of justice), § 9–307 (destruction of
evidence), § 9–412 (CONTRABAND – IN GENERAL), § 9–413 (contraband – for escape), §
9–416 (contraband – controlled dangerous substance), or § 9–417 (contraband –
telecommunications–related) of this title, or § 11–304 (receiving earnings of prostitute), §
11–307 (house of prostitution), or § 12–104 (gaming offenses) of this article;

(3) a felony violation of § 3–701 (extortion), § 4–503 (manufacture or
possession of destructive device), § 5–602 (distribution of CDS), § 5–603 (manufacturing
CDS or equipment), § 5–604(b) (creating or possessing a counterfeit substance), § 5–606
(false prescription), § 6–103 (second degree arson), § 6–202 (first degree burglary), § 6–203
(second degree burglary), § 6–204 (third degree burglary), § 7–104 (theft), or § 7–105
(unauthorized use of a motor vehicle) of this article;

(4) a felony violation of § 5–133 of the Public Safety Article;

(5) THE COMMON LAW MISDEMEANOR OF MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE;

(6) FRAUD AND RELATED CRIMES UNDER A FELONY VIOLATION OF
TITLE 8 OF THIS ARTICLE (FRAUD AND RELATED CRIMES);

(7) (6) BRIBERY UNDER SUBTITLE 2 OF THIS TITLE;

(8) (7) FALSE STATEMENTS UNDER SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS TITLE;

(9) (8) IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER UNDER § 3–502 OF THE
PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE;

(10) (9) THREAT OF MASS VIOLENCE UNDER TITLE 3, SUBTITLE 10
OF THIS ARTICLE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(11) (10) INDECENCY AND OBSCENITY UNDER TITLE 11, SUBTITLE 1
OR SUBTITLE 2 A VIOLATION OF § 11–207 OR § 11–208 OF THIS ARTICLE (CHILD
PORNOGRAPHY);

(12) (11) INSURANCE FRAUD UNDER A FELONY VIOLATION OF TITLE
27, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE INSURANCE ARTICLE (INSURANCE FRAUD);

(13) A VIOLATION OF THE MARYLAND CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT
UNDER TITLE 13 OF THE COMMERCIAL LAW ARTICLE;

(14) (12) REMOVAL OR FALSIFICATION OF VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION
NUMBER UNDER § 14–107 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE;

(15) (13) ABUSE OR NEGLECT OF A VULNERABLE ADULT UNDER §
3–604 OR § 3–605 OF THIS ARTICLE;

[(5)] (16) (14) a crime under the laws of another state or of the United
States that would be a crime listed in items (1) through [(4)] (15) (13) of this subsection if
committed in this State; or

[(6)] (17) (15) the attempted commission of, conspiracy to commit, or
solicitation of a crime or act listed in items (1) through [(5)] (16) (14) of this subsection.

9–804.

(a) A person may not:

(1) participate in a criminal organization knowing that the members of the
criminal organization engage in a pattern of organized crime activity; and

(2) knowingly and willfully direct or participate in an underlying crime, or
act by a juvenile that would be an underlying crime if committed by an adult, committed
for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with a criminal organization.

(b) A criminal organization or an individual belonging to a criminal organization
may not:

(1) receive proceeds known to have been derived directly or indirectly from
an underlying crime; and

(2) use or invest, directly or indirectly, an aggregate of $10,000 or more of
the proceeds from an underlying crime in:

(i) the acquisition of a title to, right to, interest in, or equity in real
property; or

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(ii) the establishment or operation of any enterprise.

(c) A criminal organization may not acquire or maintain, directly or indirectly,
any interest in or control of any enterprise or real property through an underlying crime.

(d) A person may not conspire to violate subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section.

(e) A person may not violate subsection (a) of this section that results in the death
of a victim.

(f) (1) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, a
person who violates this section is guilty of a felony and on conviction is subject to
imprisonment not exceeding 15 years or a fine not exceeding $1,000,000 or both.

(ii) A person who violates subsection (e) of this section is guilty of a
felony and on conviction is subject to imprisonment not exceeding 25 years or a fine not
exceeding $5,000,000 or both.

(2) (i) A sentence imposed under paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection for
a first offense may be separate from and consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for
any crime based on the act establishing a violation of this section.

(ii) A sentence imposed under paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection for
a second or subsequent offense, or paragraph (1)(ii) of this subsection shall be separate from
and consecutive to a sentence for any crime based on the act establishing a violation of this
section.

(iii) A consecutive sentence for a second or subsequent offense shall
not be mandatory unless the State notifies the person in writing of the State’s intention to
proceed against the person as a second or subsequent offender at least 30 days before trial.

(3) In addition to the other penalties provided in this subsection, on
conviction the court may:

(i) order a person or criminal organization to be divested of any
interest in an enterprise or real property;

(ii) order the dissolution or reorganization of an enterprise; and

(iii) order the suspension or revocation of any license, permit, or prior
approval granted to the enterprise or person by a unit of the State or a political subdivision
of the State.

(g) (1) This subsection applies to a violation of § 5–602, § 5–603, § 5–604(b), §
5–606, § 5–612, § 5–613, § 5–614, or § 5–617 of this article.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Assets divested under this section and derived from the commission of,
attempted commission of, conspiracy to commit, or solicitation of a crime described in
paragraph (1) of this subsection, either in whole or in part:

(i) if the State investigated and prosecuted a violation described in
paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be deposited in the Addiction Treatment Divestiture
Fund established under § 8–6D–01 of the Health – General Article; or

(ii) if a local jurisdiction investigated and prosecuted a violation
described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be used by the local jurisdiction:

1. to support alternatives to incarceration, reentry programs,
and addiction treatment services for persons with substance–related disorders;

2. to combat criminal organizations through education,
training, and resources; or

3. to provide assistance to victims of criminal
organization–related crimes; and

(iii) if more than one jurisdiction participated in an investigation or
a prosecution of a violation described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall be divided
in the manner agreed on by the jurisdictions and used as provided in item (i) or (ii) of this
paragraph.

(h) A person may be charged with a violation of this section only by indictment,
criminal information, or petition alleging a delinquent act.

(i) (1) The Attorney General, at the request of the Governor or the State’s
Attorney for a county in which a violation or an act establishing a violation of this section
occurs, may:

(i) aid in the investigation of the violation or act; and

(ii) prosecute the violation or act.

(2) In exercising authority under paragraph (1) of this subsection, the
Attorney General has all the powers and duties of a State’s Attorney, including the use of
the grand jury in the county, to prosecute the violation.

(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in circumstances in which
violations of this section are alleged to have been committed in more than one county, the
respective State’s Attorney of each county, or the Attorney General, may join the causes of
action in a single complaint with the consent of each State’s Attorney having jurisdiction
over an offense sought to be joined.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(j) Notwithstanding any other provision of law and provided at least one criminal
organization activity of a criminal organization allegedly occurred in the county in which a
grand jury is sitting, the grand jury may issue subpoenas, summon witnesses, and
otherwise conduct an investigation of the alleged criminal organization’s activities and
offenses in other counties.

~~9–808.~~

(A) AN AGGRIEVED PERSON OR THE STATE MAY FILE A COMPLAINT IN
CIRCUIT COURT TO ENJOIN A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) A COURT MAY, AFTER MAKING DUE PROVISIONS FOR THE RIGHTS OF
INNOCENT PERSONS, GRANT A COMPLAINT FILED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION BY ISSUING APPROPRIATE ORDERS AND JUDGMENTS, INCLUDING:

(1) ORDERING A DEFENDANT TO DIVEST ANY INTEREST IN AN
ENTERPRISE, REAL PROPERTY, OR PERSONAL PROPERTY;

(2) IMPOSING REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS ON THE FUTURE
ACTIVITIES OR INVESTMENTS OF A DEFENDANT, INCLUDING PROHIBITING THE
~~DEFENDANT~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~ENGAGING~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SAME~~ ~~TYPE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ENDEAVOR~~ ~~AS~~ ~~THE~~
ENTERPRISE IN WHICH THE DEFENDANT WAS ENGAGED IN VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF
THIS SUBTITLE;

(3) ORDERING THE DISSOLUTION OR REORGANIZATION OF AN
~~ENTERPRISE;~~

(4) ORDERING THE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE,
PERMIT, OR PRIOR APPROVAL GRANTED TO AN ENTERPRISE BY A STATE AGENCY;
~~AND~~

(5) ORDERING THE FORFEITURE OF THE CHARTER OF A
CORPORATION ORGANIZED UNDER STATE LAW, OR THE REVOCATION OF
~~AUTHORIZATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~FOREIGN~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CONDUCT~~ ~~BUSINESS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
STATE, ON A FINDING THAT:

(I) THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR A MANAGERIAL AGENT
ACTING ON BEHALF OF THE CORPORATION, IN CONDUCTING AFFAIRS OF THE
CORPORATION, HAS AUTHORIZED OR ENGAGED IN CONDUCT IN VIOLATION OF §
9–804 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) FOR THE PREVENTION OF FUTURE CRIMINAL ACTIVITY, THE
~~PUBLIC~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~REQUIRES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CHARTER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~BE~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~FORFEITED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CORPORATION~~ ~~BE~~ ~~DISSOLVED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~AUTHORIZATION~~
TO CONDUCT BUSINESS IN THE STATE BE REVOKED.

(C) (1) IN AN ACTION UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COURT SHALL GRANT
~~RELIEF~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CONFORMITY~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRINCIPLES~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~GOVERN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GRANTING~~ ~~OF~~
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF FROM THREATENED LOSS OR DAMAGE IN OTHER CIVIL CASES,
IF NO SHOWING OF SPECIAL OR IRREPARABLE DAMAGE TO THE PLAINTIFF IS MADE.

(2) ON THE EXECUTION OF PROPER BOND AGAINST DAMAGES FOR AN
~~INJUNCTION~~ ~~IMPROVIDENTLY~~ ~~GRANTED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~SHOWING~~ ~~OF~~ ~~IMMEDIATE~~ ~~DANGER~~ ~~OF~~
SIGNIFICANT LOSS OR DAMAGE, THE COURT MAY ISSUE A TEMPORARY RESTRAINING
~~ORDER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~PRELIMINARY~~ ~~INJUNCTION~~ ~~BEFORE~~ ~~A~~ ~~FINAL~~ ~~DETERMINATION~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~
~~MERITS.~~

(D) A PERSON WHO IS INJURED AS A RESULT OF A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF
THIS SUBTITLE:

(1) HAS A CIVIL CAUSE OF ACTION AGAINST THE VIOLATOR FOR
THREE TIMES THE ACTUAL DAMAGES SUSTAINED AND, WHERE APPROPRIATE,
PUNITIVE DAMAGES; AND

(2) IS ENTITLED TO RECOVER ATTORNEY’S FEES IN THE TRIAL AND
~~APPELLATE~~ ~~COURTS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~INVESTIGATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LITIGATION~~ ~~REASONABLY~~
~~INCURRED.~~

(E) THE PLAINTIFF OR DEFENDANT MAY DEMAND A JURY TRIAL IN ANY
CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION.

(F) A CRIMINAL CONVICTION FOR A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~ESTOP~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEFENDANT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~SUBSEQUENT~~ ~~CIVIL~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~UNDER~~
THIS SUBTITLE OR CIVIL FORFEITURE PROCEEDING UNDER TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 6
OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE ARTICLE AS TO ALL MATTERS PROVED IN THE
CRIMINAL PROCEEDING.

(G) (1) THE APPLICATION OF ONE CIVIL REMEDY UNDER THIS SECTION
~~DOES~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~PRECLUDE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~APPLICATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~CIVIL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~REMEDY~~
FOR A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) CIVIL REMEDIES UNDER THIS SECTION ARE SUPPLEMENTAL TO
ANY OTHER REMEDY AVAILABLE.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Criminal~~ ~~Procedure~~

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

SUBTITLE 6. VIOLATIONS OF THE CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW.

~~13–601.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER” MEANS:

(1) FOR BALTIMORE CITY, THE MAYOR;

(2) FOR A CHARTER COUNTY, THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OR, IF THERE
IS NO COUNTY EXECUTIVE, THE COUNTY COUNCIL;

(3) FOR A CODE COUNTY, THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS;

(4) FOR A COMMISSION COUNTY, THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS; OR

(5) FOR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, THE LEGISLATIVE BODY
ESTABLISHED BY MUNICIPAL CHARTER.

(C) “CONVICTED” MEANS FOUND GUILTY.

(D) “CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW” MEANS TITLE 9, SUBTITLE 8 OF THE
~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~ARTICLE.~~

(E) “FINAL DISPOSITION” MEANS DISMISSAL, ENTRY OF A NOLLE
PROSEQUI, MARKING OF A CRIMINAL CHARGE “STET” ON THE DOCKET, ENTRY OF A
NOT GUILTY VERDICT, PRONOUNCEMENT OF SENTENCE, OR IMPOSITION OF
PROBATION UNDER § 6–220 OF THIS ARTICLE.

~~(F)~~ ~~“FORFEITING~~ ~~AUTHORITY”~~ ~~MEANS:~~

(1) THE UNIT OR PERSON DESIGNATED BY AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
STATE’S ATTORNEY FOR A COUNTY AND THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE
~~GOVERNING~~ ~~BODY~~ ~~HAVING~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ ~~OVER~~ ~~ASSETS~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~
TO ACT ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNING BODY REGARDING THOSE ASSETS; OR

(2) IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS A UNIT OF THE STATE, A UNIT OR
PERSON THAT THE ATTORNEY GENERAL OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S DESIGNEE
DESIGNATES BY AGREEMENT WITH A STATE’S ATTORNEY, COUNTY ATTORNEY, OR
MUNICIPAL ATTORNEY TO ACT ON BEHALF OF THE STATE REGARDING ASSETS
SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE BY THE STATE.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(G)~~ ~~“GOVERNING~~ ~~BODY”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(1) THE STATE, IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS A UNIT OF THE STATE;

(2) A COUNTY, IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS A UNIT OF A COUNTY;

(3) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS A
UNIT OF A MUNICIPALITY; AND

(4) BALTIMORE CITY, IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS THE BALTIMORE
~~POLICE~~ ~~DEPARTMENT.~~

(H) “LIEN” INCLUDES A MORTGAGE, A DEED OF TRUST, A PLEDGE, A
SECURITY INTEREST, AN ENCUMBRANCE, AND A RIGHT OF SETOFF.

(I) “LIENHOLDER” MEANS A PERSON WHO HAS A LIEN OR A SECURED
INTEREST ON PROPERTY CREATED BEFORE THE SEIZURE.

(J) “LOCAL FINANCIAL AUTHORITY” MEANS:

(1) IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS A UNIT OF A COUNTY, THE
TREASURER OR DIRECTOR OF FINANCE OF THE COUNTY; OR

(2) IF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY IS A UNIT OF A MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION, THE TREASURER OR DIRECTOR OF FINANCE OF THE MUNICIPAL
~~CORPORATION.~~

(K) (1) “OWNER” MEANS A PERSON HAVING A LEGAL, EQUITABLE, OR
POSSESSORY INTEREST IN PROPERTY.

~~(2)~~ ~~“OWNER”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(I) A CO–OWNER;

(II) A LIFE TENANT;

(III) A REMAINDERMAN TO A LIFE TENANCY IN REAL PROPERTY;

(IV) A HOLDER OF AN INCHOATE INTEREST IN REAL PROPERTY;
~~AND~~

(V) A BONA FIDE PURCHASER FOR VALUE.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(L) “PROCEEDS” MEANS PROFITS DERIVED FROM A VIOLATION OF THE
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW OR PROPERTY OBTAINED DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY FROM THOSE PROFITS.

~~(M)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~“PROPERTY”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(I) REAL PROPERTY AND ANYTHING GROWING ON OR
ATTACHED TO REAL PROPERTY;

(II) MOTOR VEHICLES; AND

~~(III)~~ ~~MONEY.~~

(2) “PROPERTY” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) AN ITEM UNLAWFULLY IN THE POSSESSION OF A PERSON
~~OTHER~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~WHEN~~ ~~USED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CONNECTION~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW; OR

(II) A LESSOR’S INTEREST IN PROPERTY SUBJECT TO A BONA
FIDE LEASE, UNLESS THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY CAN SHOW THAT THE LESSOR
PARTICIPATED IN A VIOLATION OF THE CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW OR THAT
THE PROPERTY WAS THE PROCEEDS OF A VIOLATION OF THE CRIMINAL
~~ORGANIZATIONS~~ ~~LAW.~~

(N) (1) “REAL PROPERTY” MEANS LAND OR AN IMPROVEMENT TO LAND.

~~(2)~~ ~~“REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(I) A LEASEHOLD OR ANY OTHER LIMITED INTEREST IN
~~PROPERTY;~~

(II) AN EASEMENT; AND

(III) A REVERSIONARY INTEREST IN A 99–YEAR GROUND LEASE
RENEWABLE FOREVER.

(O) “SEIZING AUTHORITY” MEANS A LAW ENFORCEMENT UNIT IN THE
STATE THAT IS AUTHORIZED TO INVESTIGATE VIOLATIONS OF THE CRIMINAL
ORGANIZATIONS LAW AND THAT HAS SEIZED PROPERTY UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

~~13–602.~~

THE FOLLOWING ARE SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 13–603 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A MOTOR
VEHICLE USED IN CONNECTION WITH A VIOLATION OF AND CONVICTION UNDER §
9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

(2) MONEY USED IN CONNECTION WITH A VIOLATION OF AND
CONVICTION UNDER THE CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW, FOUND IN CLOSE
~~PROXIMITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~OR~~ ~~AT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SCENE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ARREST~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW; AND

(3) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 13–603 OF THIS SUBTITLE, REAL
PROPERTY USED IN CONNECTION WITH A VIOLATION OF AND CONVICTION UNDER §
9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

~~13–603.~~

(A) PROPERTY OR AN INTEREST IN PROPERTY DESCRIBED IN § 13–602(1)
OR (3) OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE FORFEITED IF THE OWNER ESTABLISHES BY
A PREPONDERANCE OF THE EVIDENCE THAT THE VIOLATION OF THE CRIMINAL
ORGANIZATIONS LAW WAS COMMITTED WITHOUT THE OWNER’S ACTUAL
~~KNOWLEDGE.~~

(B) (1) A MOTOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE IN THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS
~~AS~~ ~~A~~ ~~COMMON~~ ~~CARRIER~~ ~~OR~~ ~~A~~ ~~MOTOR~~ ~~VEHICLE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~HIRE~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~SEIZED~~ ~~OR~~
~~FORFEITED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~UNLESS~~ ~~IT~~ ~~APPEARS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OTHER~~
~~PERSON~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CHARGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MOTOR~~ ~~VEHICLE~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONSENTING~~ ~~PARTY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRIVY~~
TO A VIOLATION OF THE CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW.

(2) A MOTOR VEHICLE MAY NOT BE FORFEITED UNDER THIS
~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ACT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OMISSION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~SHOWS~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~COMMITTED~~ ~~OR~~
~~OMITTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~A~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~WHILE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~THAN~~
~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~POSSESSED~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MOTOR~~ ~~VEHICLE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~VIOLATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~FEDERAL~~
LAW OR THE LAW OF ANY STATE.

(C) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, REAL PROPERTY USED
~~AS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRINCIPAL~~ ~~FAMILY~~ ~~RESIDENCE~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~ ~~FORFEITED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~
~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~UNLESS~~ ~~ONE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNERS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~CONVICTED~~
OF A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR OF AN ATTEMPT OR
CONSPIRACY TO VIOLATE § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

(D) REAL PROPERTY USED AS THE PRINCIPAL FAMILY RESIDENCE BY
~~SPOUSES~~ ~~AND~~ ~~HELD~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SPOUSES~~ ~~AS~~ ~~TENANTS~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ENTIRETY~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~BE~~
FORFEITED UNLESS:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(1) THE PROPERTY WAS USED IN CONNECTION WITH A VIOLATION OF
§ 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR WITH AN ATTEMPT OR A CONSPIRACY
TO VIOLATE § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE; AND

(2) BOTH SPOUSES ARE CONVICTED OF A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF
THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR OF AN ATTEMPT OR CONSPIRACY TO VIOLATE §
9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

~~13–604.~~

PERSONAL PROPERTY SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE UNDER THIS SUBTITLE MAY
BE SEIZED:

(1) ON A WARRANT ISSUED BY A COURT THAT HAS JURISDICTION
OVER THE PROPERTY; AND

(2) WITHOUT A WARRANT WHEN:

(I) THE SEIZURE IS INCIDENT TO AN ARREST OR A SEARCH
UNDER A SEARCH WARRANT;

(II) THE SEIZURE IS INCIDENT TO AN INSPECTION UNDER AN
ADMINISTRATIVE INSPECTION WARRANT;

(III) THE PROPERTY SUBJECT TO SEIZURE HAS BEEN THE
SUBJECT OF A PRIOR JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF THE STATE IN A CRIMINAL
INJUNCTION OR FORFEITURE PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(IV) THERE IS PROBABLE CAUSE TO BELIEVE THAT THE
PROPERTY IS DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY DANGEROUS TO HEALTH OR SAFETY.

~~13–605.~~

(A) A SEIZING AUTHORITY THAT SEIZES MONEY UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
IMMEDIATELY SHALL:

(1) PHOTOGRAPH THE MONEY AND RECORD THE QUANTITY OF EACH
DENOMINATION OF COIN OR CURRENCY SEIZED; AND

(2) DEPOSIT THE MONEY TO THE ACCOUNT OF THE APPROPRIATE
LOCAL FINANCIAL AUTHORITY.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) A PHOTOGRAPH TAKEN UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION MAY
~~BE~~ ~~SUBSTITUTED~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~MONEY~~ ~~AS~~ ~~EVIDENCE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~
~~PROCEEDING.~~

~~13–606.~~

(A) PROPERTY SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE:

(1) IS NOT REPLEVIABLE; BUT

(2) IS IN THE CUSTODY OF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY, SUBJECT ONLY
TO THE ORDERS, JUDGMENTS, AND DECREES OF THE COURT OR THE OFFICIAL
HAVING JURISDICTION OVER THE PROPERTY.

(B) A SEIZING AUTHORITY MAY PLACE SEIZED PROPERTY UNDER SEAL AND
REMOVE THE PROPERTY TO A PLACE DESIGNATED BY THE COURT.

~~13–607.~~

(A) A SEIZING AUTHORITY MAY SEIZE A MOTOR VEHICLE USED IN
VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE AND RECOMMEND
~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FORFEITING~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~IF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TOTAL~~ ~~CIRCUMSTANCES~~ ~~OF~~
THE CASE AS LISTED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION DICTATE THAT SEIZURE
AND FORFEITURE ARE JUSTIFIED.

(B) CIRCUMSTANCES TO BE CONSIDERED IN DECIDING WHETHER SEIZURE
AND FORFEITURE ARE JUSTIFIED INCLUDE:

(1) EVIDENCE THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS ACQUIRED BY USE OF
PROCEEDS FROM A TRANSACTION INVOLVING A VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THE
~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~ARTICLE;~~

(2) THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE ARREST; AND

(3) THE WAY IN WHICH THE MOTOR VEHICLE WAS USED.

~~13–608.~~

(A) THE CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY
THAT SEIZES A MOTOR VEHICLE USED IN VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL
LAW ARTICLE MAY RECOMMEND TO THE APPROPRIATE FORFEITING AUTHORITY IN
WRITING THAT THE MOTOR VEHICLE BE FORFEITED ONLY IF THE OFFICER:

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(1) DETERMINES FROM THE RECORDS OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION THE NAMES AND ADDRESSES OF ALL REGISTERED OWNERS AND
SECURED PARTIES AS DEFINED IN STATE LAW;

(2) PERSONALLY REVIEWS THE FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE
SEIZURE; AND

(3) PERSONALLY DETERMINES, ACCORDING TO THE STANDARDS
LISTED IN § 13–607 OF THIS SUBTITLE, AND REPRESENTS IN WRITING THAT
FORFEITURE IS WARRANTED.

(B) A SWORN AFFIDAVIT BY THE CHIEF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER THAT
THE OFFICER FOLLOWED THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
IS ADMISSIBLE IN EVIDENCE IN A PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

~~13–609.~~

(A) THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY SHALL SURRENDER THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ON REQUEST TO THE OWNER IF THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY DETERMINES,
INDEPENDENT OF THE DECISION OF THE SEIZING AUTHORITY, THAT THE TOTAL
CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE AS LISTED UNDER § 13–607(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE DO
NOT JUSTIFY FORFEITURE.

(B) IN A PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE COURT MAY DETERMINE,
BASED ON THE CIRCUMSTANCES LISTED IN § 13–607(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE,
~~WHETHER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SEIZING~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FORFEITING~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~ABUSED~~ ~~ITS~~
DISCRETION OR WAS CLEARLY ERRONEOUS:

(1) IN RECOMMENDING THE FORFEITURE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE; OR

(2) IN NOT SURRENDERING ON REQUEST A MOTOR VEHICLE TO AN
~~OWNER.~~

~~13–610.~~

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN §§ 13–612 AND 13–613 OF THIS
SUBTITLE, AN OWNER OF SEIZED PROPERTY WHO WISHES TO OBTAIN POSSESSION
OF THE PROPERTY, TO CONVEY AN INTEREST IN REAL PROPERTY, OR TO REMOVE A
~~BUILDING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~FIXTURE~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~NOTIFY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CLERK~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
PROPER COURT.

(2) IF FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEGUN, THE PROPER COURT
IS THE COURT WHERE THE PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEGUN.

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) IF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEGUN BUT FORFEITURE
PROCEEDINGS HAVE NOT BEGUN, THE PROPER COURT IS THE COURT WHERE THE
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS HAVE BEGUN.

(4) IF BOTH FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS AND CRIMINAL
PROCEEDINGS HAVE NOT BEGUN, THE PROPER COURT IS THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR
THE COUNTY WHERE THE PROPERTY WAS SEIZED.

(B) (1) UNLESS THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY AND THE OWNER AGREE TO
A BOND IN ANOTHER AMOUNT, IF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS NOT NEEDED FOR
EVIDENTIARY PURPOSES IN A JUDICIAL PROCEEDING:

(I) THE COURT SHALL APPRAISE THE VALUE OF THE MOTOR
~~VEHICLE~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BASIS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AVERAGE~~ ~~VALUE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MOTOR~~ ~~VEHICLE~~ ~~SET~~
FORTH IN THE NATIONAL AUTOMOBILE DEALERS ASSOCIATION OFFICIAL USED
CAR GUIDE; OR

(II) IF THE OWNER SHOWS THAT A LIEN IS ON THE MOTOR
~~VEHICLE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~AGREES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAKE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~PAYMENTS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~
LIENHOLDER, THE COURT SHALL REQUIRE A BOND IN AN AMOUNT OF THE AVERAGE
VALUE OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE SET FORTH IN THE NATIONAL AUTOMOBILE
DEALERS ASSOCIATION OFFICIAL USED CAR GUIDE, LESS THE AMOUNT OWED ON
THE LIEN.

(2) FOR A MOTOR VEHICLE, THE COURT SHALL APPRAISE THE VALUE
~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~MANNER~~ ~~PROVIDED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBSECTION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~PROVIDE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~APPRAISAL~~ ~~IN~~
WRITING TO THE CLERK OF THE COURT.

(C) (1) IF PROPERTY OTHER THAN A MOTOR VEHICLE IS NOT NEEDED
FOR EVIDENTIARY PURPOSES IN A JUDICIAL PROCEEDING, THE CLERK SHALL
OBTAIN AN INDEPENDENT APPRAISAL OF THE VALUE OF THE PROPERTY.

(2) THE SHERIFF OR OTHER PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR AN
APPRAISAL UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL PROMPTLY:

(I) INSPECT AND APPRAISE THE VALUE OF THE PROPERTY; AND

(II) RETURN THE APPRAISAL IN WRITING UNDER OATH TO THE
CLERK OF THE COURT.

(D) NOTICE OF THE APPRAISAL SHALL BE SENT TO ALL LIENHOLDERS
~~SHOWN~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RECORDS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~NOTICE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PERFECTION~~ ~~OF~~
THE LIEN.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(E) (1) ON THE FILING OF AN APPRAISAL, THE OWNER MAY GIVE BOND
PAYABLE TO THE CLERK OF THE COURT IN AN AMOUNT EQUAL TO THE GREATER OF:

(I) THE APPRAISED VALUE OF THE PROPERTY PLUS ANY
ACCRUED COSTS; OR

(II) THE AGGREGATE AMOUNT OF THE LIENS ON THE PROPERTY
~~THAT~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~SHOWN~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RECORDS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~NOTICE~~ ~~OR~~
PERFECTION OF LIENS.

(2) A PERSON MAY GIVE A BOND UNDER THIS SUBSECTION BY CASH,
THROUGH A SURETY, THROUGH A LIEN ON REAL PROPERTY, OR BY OTHER MEANS
THAT THE CLERK APPROVES.

(3) A BOND AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE:

(I) CONDITIONED FOR PERFORMANCE ON FINAL JUDGMENT BY
THE COURT;

(II) FILED IN THE DISTRICT COURT OR CIRCUIT COURT WHERE
THE CRIMINAL ACTION THAT GAVE RISE TO THE SEIZURE IS PENDING; AND

(III) UNLESS A COMPLAINT FOR FORFEITURE HAS BEEN FILED,
PART OF THE SAME CRIMINAL PROCEEDING.

(4) IF A CRIMINAL ACTION IS NOT PENDING OR A FORFEITURE
COMPLAINT HAS NOT BEEN FILED, THE BOND SHALL BE FILED IN THE CIRCUIT
COURT OR DISTRICT COURT WHERE THE PROPERTY WAS SEIZED.

(F) (1) IF THE COURT ORDERS THAT PROPERTY OR AN INTEREST OR
EQUITY IN THE PROPERTY OR PROCEEDS BE FORFEITED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE
~~COURT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~ENTER~~ ~~JUDGMENT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BOND~~ ~~AGAINST~~ ~~THE~~
OBLIGORS ON THE BOND WITHOUT FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

(2) PAYMENT OF THE AMOUNT OF THE BOND SHALL BE APPLIED AS
PROVIDED UNDER § 13–628(C)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~13–611.~~

SEIZURE OF REAL PROPERTY OCCURS ON THE EARLIER OF THE FILING OF:

(1) A COMPLAINT FOR FORFEITURE UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; OR

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) A NOTICE OF PENDING LITIGATION IN THE CIRCUIT COURT OF THE
COUNTY WHERE THE REAL PROPERTY IS LOCATED.

~~13–612.~~

(A) SUBJECT TO THE RIGHTS OF A LIENHOLDER TO SELL THE REAL
PROPERTY, AN OWNER OR AN OWNER’S TENANT MAY REMAIN IN POSSESSION OF
SEIZED REAL PROPERTY UNTIL FORFEITURE IS ORDERED.

(B) THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY MAY APPLY TO THE COURT FOR THE
APPOINTMENT OF A RECEIVER TO APPLY INCOME FROM INCOME–PRODUCING
~~PROPERTY.~~

(C) IF A PERSON WHO IS AN OWNER OR AN OWNER’S TENANT REMAINS IN
POSSESSION OF THE REAL PROPERTY AND THE PERSON’S INTEREST IN THE REAL
PROPERTY IS FORFEITED, THE PERSON IMMEDIATELY SHALL SURRENDER THE REAL
~~PROPERTY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SEIZING~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~IN~~ ~~SUBSTANTIALLY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SAME~~ ~~CONDITION~~
AS WHEN SEIZED.

~~13–613.~~

(A) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY IF:

(1) AN ACT IS AGREED TO BY A FORFEITING AUTHORITY OR IS
ORDERED BY THE COURT; OR

(2) AN OWNER POSTS A BOND UNDER § 13–610 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) UNTIL THE COURT ENTERS JUDGMENT IN FAVOR OF THE OWNER, AN
OWNER MAY NOT ATTEMPT TO:

(1) CONVEY OR ENCUMBER AN INTEREST IN SEIZED REAL PROPERTY;
~~OR~~

(2) REMOVE A BUILDING OR FIXTURE ON SEIZED REAL PROPERTY.

~~13–614.~~

EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 13–617(C) OF THIS SUBTITLE, IF PROPERTY IS
SEIZED UNDER § 13–604(2)(IV) OF THIS SUBTITLE BECAUSE THERE IS PROBABLE
~~CAUSE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BELIEVE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~IS~~ ~~DIRECTLY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~INDIRECTLY~~ ~~DANGEROUS~~
~~TO~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~OR~~ ~~SAFETY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~WILL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~USED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~VIOLATE~~

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

§ 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE, FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE SHALL BE FILED PROMPTLY.

~~13–615.~~

EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN § 13–616 OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE APPROPRIATE
~~FORFEITING~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~FILE~~ ~~PROCEEDINGS~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
CIRCUIT COURT.

~~13–616.~~

(A) TO APPLY FOR THE FORFEITURE OF MONEY, THE APPROPRIATE LOCAL
FINANCIAL AUTHORITY OR THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL FILE A COMPLAINT AND
AFFIDAVIT IN THE DISTRICT COURT OR THE CIRCUIT COURT FOR THE COUNTY IN
WHICH THE MONEY WAS SEIZED.

(B) THE COMPLAINT AND AFFIDAVIT SHALL BE SERVED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE MARYLAND RULES.

~~13–617.~~

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBSECTIONS (B) AND (C) OF THIS
SECTION, A COMPLAINT SEEKING FORFEITURE SHALL BE FILED WITHIN THE
EARLIER OF:

(1) 90 DAYS AFTER THE SEIZURE; OR

(2) 1 YEAR AFTER THE FINAL DISPOSITION OF THE CRIMINAL CHARGE
FOR THE VIOLATION GIVING RISE TO THE FORFEITURE.

(B) A COMPLAINT FOR THE FORFEITURE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE SHALL BE
FILED WITHIN 45 DAYS AFTER THE MOTOR VEHICLE IS SEIZED.

(C) (1) A PROCEEDING ABOUT MONEY SHALL BE FILED WITHIN 90 DAYS
~~AFTER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FINAL~~ ~~DISPOSITION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~CRIMINAL~~ ~~PROCEEDINGS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~ARISE~~ ~~OUT~~ ~~OF~~
THE CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS LAW.

(2) IF THE STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DOES NOT FILE
PROCEEDINGS ABOUT MONEY WITHIN THE 90–DAY PERIOD, THE MONEY SEIZED
~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~RETURNED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~ON~~ ~~REQUEST~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~
~~OWNER.~~

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) IF THE OWNER FAILS TO ASK FOR THE RETURN OF THE MONEY
WITHIN 1 YEAR AFTER THE FINAL DISPOSITION OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS, THE
MONEY SHALL REVERT TO:

(I) THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION IN WHICH THE MONEY WAS
SEIZED; OR

(II) THE STATE, IF THE MONEY WAS SEIZED BY STATE
~~AUTHORITIES.~~

~~13–618.~~

(A) A COMPLAINT SEEKING FORFEITURE SHALL CONTAIN:

(1) A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPERTY SEIZED;

(2) THE DATE AND PLACE OF THE SEIZURE;

(3) THE NAME OF THE OWNER, IF KNOWN;

(4) THE NAME OF THE PERSON IN POSSESSION, IF KNOWN;

(5) THE NAME OF EACH LIENHOLDER, IF KNOWN OR REASONABLY
SUBJECT TO DISCOVERY;

(6) AN ALLEGATION THAT THE PROPERTY IS SUBJECT TO
~~FORFEITURE;~~

(7) IF THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY SEEKS TO FORFEIT A
LIENHOLDER’S INTEREST IN PROPERTY, AN ALLEGATION THAT THE LIEN WAS
~~CREATED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~ACTUAL~~ ~~KNOWLEDGE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~BEING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~TO~~
BE USED IN VIOLATION OF § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

(8) A STATEMENT OF THE FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES
SURROUNDING THE SEIZURE;

(9) A STATEMENT SETTING FORTH THE SPECIFIC GROUNDS FOR
FORFEITURE; AND

(10) AN OATH OR AFFIRMATION BY THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY THAT
~~THE~~ ~~CONTENTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMPLAINT~~ ~~ARE~~ ~~TRUE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BEST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FORFEITING~~
AUTHORITY’S KNOWLEDGE, INFORMATION, AND BELIEF.

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(B) WITHIN 20 DAYS AFTER THE FILING OF THE COMPLAINT, COPIES OF THE
~~SUMMONS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~COMPLAINT~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~SENT~~ ~~BY~~ ~~CERTIFIED~~ ~~MAIL~~ ~~REQUESTING~~
“RESTRICTED DELIVERY – SHOW TO WHOM, DATE, ADDRESS OF DELIVERY” AND
FIRST–CLASS MAIL TO ALL KNOWN OWNERS AND LIENHOLDERS WHOSE IDENTITIES
ARE REASONABLY SUBJECT TO DISCOVERY, INCLUDING ALL REAL PROPERTY
~~OWNERS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LIENHOLDERS~~ ~~SHOWN~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RECORDS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~FOR~~
NOTICE OR PERFECTION OF THE LIEN.

~~13–619.~~

(A) A NOTICE SHALL BE SIGNED BY THE CLERK OF THE COURT AND SHALL:

(1) INCLUDE THE CAPTION OF THE CASE;

(2) DESCRIBE THE SUBSTANCE OF THE COMPLAINT AND THE RELIEF
~~SOUGHT;~~

(3) STATE THE LATEST DATE ON WHICH A RESPONSE MAY BE FILED;

(4) STATE THAT THE PROPERTY SHALL BE FORFEITED IF A RESPONSE
IS NOT FILED ON TIME;

(5) STATE THAT THE OWNER OF THE PROPERTY MAY HAVE
~~POSSESSION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~PENDING~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~BY~~ ~~POSTING~~ ~~A~~ ~~BOND~~ ~~AS~~
PROVIDED IN § 13–610 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(6) TELL WHERE TO FILE A RESPONSE AND WHOM TO CONTACT FOR
MORE INFORMATION CONCERNING THE FORFEITURE.

(B) WITHIN 20 DAYS AFTER THE FILING OF THE COMPLAINT, THE NOTICE
SHALL BE:

(1) POSTED BY THE SHERIFF ON THE DOOR OF THE COURTHOUSE
~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~IS~~ ~~PENDING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~ON~~ ~~A~~ ~~BULLETIN~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~WITHIN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMMEDIATE~~
VICINITY OF THE DOOR;

(2) POSTED BY THE SHERIFF IN A CONSPICUOUS PLACE ON THE LAND,
IF FORFEITURE OF REAL PROPERTY IS SOUGHT; AND

(3) PUBLISHED AT LEAST ONCE A WEEK IN EACH OF 3 SUCCESSIVE
~~WEEKS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~NEWSPAPER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~CIRCULATION~~ ~~PUBLISHED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COUNTY~~ ~~IN~~
WHICH THE ACTION IS PENDING, UNLESS THE PROPERTY IS A BOAT OR MOTOR
~~VEHICLE.~~

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~13–620.~~

THE ANSWER TO A COMPLAINT SHALL:

(1) COMPLY WITH THE MARYLAND RULES;

(2) STATE THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE PERSON’S RIGHT IN,
TITLE TO, OR INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY;

(3) STATE HOW AND WHEN THE PERSON ACQUIRED A RIGHT IN, TITLE
TO, OR INTEREST IN THE PROPERTY; AND

(4) CONTAIN A REQUEST FOR RELIEF AND A REQUEST FOR A PROMPT
~~HEARING.~~

~~13–621.~~

(A) IF AN ANSWER HAS BEEN FILED ON TIME, THE COURT SHALL SET A
HEARING ON THE FORFEITURE CLAIM WITHIN 60 DAYS AFTER THE LATER OF:

(1) POSTING OF NOTICE UNDER § 13–619(B)(1) OR (2) OF THIS
SUBTITLE; OR

(2) FINAL PUBLICATION OF NOTICE UNDER § 13–619(B)(3) OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

(B) WITHOUT A HEARING, THE COURT MAY ORDER FORFEITURE OF THE
PROPERTY INTEREST OF A PERSON WHO FAILS TO TIMELY FILE AN ANSWER.

~~13–622.~~

EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN §§ 13–603 AND 13–624 OF THIS SUBTITLE, AN
OWNER’S INTEREST IN REAL PROPERTY MAY BE FORFEITED IF THE OWNER OF THE
REAL PROPERTY IS CONVICTED OF VIOLATING § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
ARTICLE OR ATTEMPTING OR CONSPIRING TO VIOLATE § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL
~~LAW~~ ~~ARTICLE.~~

~~13–623.~~

(A) FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS FOR REAL PROPERTY MAY BE BROUGHT IN
THE JURISDICTION WHERE:

(1) THE CRIMINAL CHARGES ARE PENDING;

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(2) THE OWNER RESIDES; OR

(3) THE REAL PROPERTY IS LOCATED.

(B) (1) IF FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS FOR REAL PROPERTY ARE
~~BROUGHT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~A~~ ~~JURISDICTION~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~THAN~~ ~~WHERE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REAL~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~IS~~
LOCATED, A NOTICE OF PENDING LITIGATION SHALL BE FILED IN THE JURISDICTION
WHERE THE PROPERTY IS LOCATED.

(2) A NOTICE OF PENDING LITIGATION REQUIRED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE AT LEAST:

(I) THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE OWNER OF THE REAL
~~PROPERTY;~~

(II) A DESCRIPTION OF THE REAL PROPERTY; AND

(III) A DESCRIPTION OF THE REASONS FOR THE FILING OF THE
FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS AND NOTICE OF PENDING LITIGATION.

~~13–624.~~

IF AN OWNER OF REAL PROPERTY USED AS THE PRINCIPAL FAMILY
RESIDENCE IS CONVICTED UNDER § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR IS
CONVICTED OF AN ATTEMPT OR CONSPIRACY TO VIOLATE § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL
LAW ARTICLE AND THE OWNER FILES AN APPEAL OF THE CONVICTION, THE COURT
SHALL STAY FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS UNDER § 13–603 OF THIS SUBTITLE
AGAINST THE REAL PROPERTY DURING THE PENDENCY OF THE APPEAL.

~~13–625.~~

(A) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION,
~~THERE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~A~~ ~~REBUTTABLE~~ ~~PRESUMPTION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PART~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~PROPERTY~~
~~IN~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~A~~ ~~PERSON~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OWNERSHIP~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~IS~~ ~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~AS~~
PROCEEDS, IF THE STATE ESTABLISHES BY CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE
~~THAT:~~

(I) THE PERSON WAS CONVICTED OF VIOLATING § 9–804 OF
THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE OR ATTEMPTING OR CONSPIRING TO VIOLATE § 9–804
OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE;

(II) THE PROPERTY WAS ACQUIRED BY THE PERSON DURING
THE VIOLATION OR WITHIN A REASONABLE TIME AFTER THE VIOLATION; AND

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) THERE WAS NO OTHER LIKELY SOURCE FOR THE PROPERTY.

(2) A CLAIMANT OF THE PROPERTY HAS THE BURDEN OF PROOF TO
REBUT THE PRESUMPTION IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) REAL PROPERTY USED AS THE PRINCIPAL FAMILY RESIDENCE MAY NOT
BE FORFEITED UNDER THIS SECTION UNLESS:

(1) AN OWNER OF THE REAL PROPERTY WAS CONVICTED OF A CRIME
DESCRIBED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(1)(I) OF THIS SECTION; OR

(2) § 13–603(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE APPLIES.

~~13–626.~~

(A) THE COURT MAY ORDER THE FORFEITURE OF OTHER PROPERTY OF THE
OWNER UP TO THE VALUE OF ANY PROPERTY SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, WITH
THE EXCEPTION OF REAL PROPERTY, IF AS A RESULT OF AN ACT OR OMISSION OF
THE OWNER THE PROPERTY TO BE FORFEITED:

(1) CANNOT BE LOCATED AFTER THE EXERCISE OF DUE DILIGENCE;

(2) HAS BEEN TRANSFERRED TO, SOLD TO, OR DEPOSITED WITH A
THIRD PARTY;

(3) HAS BEEN PLACED BEYOND THE JURISDICTION OF THE COURT;

(4) HAS BEEN SUBSTANTIALLY DIMINISHED IN VALUE; OR

(5) HAS BEEN COMMINGLED WITH OTHER PROPERTY AND CANNOT BE
DIVIDED WITHOUT DIFFICULTY.

(B) THE COURT MAY ORDER THE OWNER TO RETURN PROPERTY TO THE
JURISDICTION OF THE COURT.

~~13–627.~~

IN A PROCEEDING UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, A COURT MAY:

(1) GRANT REQUESTS FOR MITIGATION OR REMISSION OF
~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TAKE~~ ~~OTHER~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~PROTECTS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RIGHTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~INNOCENT~~
PERSONS, IS CONSISTENT WITH THIS SUBTITLE, AND IS IN THE INTEREST OF
~~JUSTICE;~~

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(2) RESOLVE CLAIMS ARISING UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(3) TAKE APPROPRIATE MEASURES TO SAFEGUARD AND MAINTAIN
~~PROPERTY~~ ~~FORFEITED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~PENDING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DISPOSITION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~PROPERTY.~~

~~13–628.~~

(A) AFTER A FULL HEARING, IF THE COURT DETERMINES THAT THE
PROPERTY SHOULD NOT BE FORFEITED, THE COURT SHALL ORDER THAT THE
PROPERTY BE RELEASED.

(B) SUBJECT TO § 13–629 OF THIS SUBTITLE, IF THE COURT DETERMINES
THAT THE PROPERTY SHOULD BE FORFEITED, THE COURT SHALL ORDER THAT THE
PROPERTY BE FORFEITED TO THE APPROPRIATE GOVERNING BODY.

(C) (1) IF THE COURT DETERMINES THAT THE FORFEITED PROPERTY IS
~~SUBJECT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~VALID~~ ~~LIEN~~ ~~CREATED~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~ACTUAL~~ ~~KNOWLEDGE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~LIENHOLDER~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~BEING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~USED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~VIOLATION~~
OF § 9–804 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE, THE COURT SHALL ORDER THAT THE
PROPERTY BE RELEASED WITHIN 5 DAYS TO THE FIRST PRIORITY LIENHOLDER.

(2) THE LIENHOLDER SHALL SELL THE PROPERTY IN A
COMMERCIALLY REASONABLE MANNER.

(3) THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE SHALL BE APPLIED AS FOLLOWS:

(I) TO THE COURT COSTS OF THE FORFEITURE PROCEEDING;

(II) TO THE BALANCE DUE THE LIENHOLDER, INCLUDING ALL
REASONABLE COSTS INCIDENT TO THE SALE;

(III) TO PAYMENT OF ALL OTHER EXPENSES OF THE
PROCEEDINGS FOR FORFEITURE, INCLUDING EXPENSES OF SEIZURE OR
MAINTENANCE OF CUSTODY; AND

(IV) TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE OR OF THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT SEIZED THE PROPERTY.

~~13–629.~~

IF PROPERTY IS FORFEITED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE GOVERNING BODY
WHERE THE PROPERTY WAS SEIZED MAY:

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) KEEP THE PROPERTY FOR OFFICIAL USE;

(2) REQUIRE AN APPROPRIATE UNIT TO TAKE CUSTODY OF THE
PROPERTY AND DESTROY OR OTHERWISE DISPOSE OF IT; OR

(3) SELL THE PROPERTY IF:

(I) THE LAW DOES NOT REQUIRE THE PROPERTY TO BE
DESTROYED; AND

(II) THE PROPERTY IS NOT HARMFUL TO THE PUBLIC.

~~13–630.~~

(A) THE PROCEEDS FROM A SALE OR THE RETENTION OF PROPERTY
~~DECLARED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~FORFEITED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~INTEREST~~ ~~ACCRUED~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~BE~~ ~~APPLIED~~
~~FIRST~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPER~~ ~~EXPENSES~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROCEEDING~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~AND~~
RESULTING SALE, INCLUDING THE EXPENSE OF SEIZING AND MAINTAINING
CUSTODY OF THE PROPERTY AND ADVERTISING.

(B) ANY BALANCE REMAINING AFTER THE DISTRIBUTION REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO THE GENERAL FUND
OF THE STATE OR OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT SEIZED THE PROPERTY.

~~13–631.~~

A SALE OF PROPERTY ORDERED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE SHALL BE MADE FOR
CASH AND GIVES THE PURCHASER CLEAR AND ABSOLUTE TITLE.

~~13–632.~~

(A) BEFORE EXERCISING THE RIGHT TO SELL PROPERTY THAT HAS BEEN
SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, A LIENHOLDER SHALL GIVE TO THE FORFEITING
~~AUTHORITY:~~

(1) WRITTEN NOTICE OF THE INTENTION TO SELL;

(2) COPIES OF DOCUMENTS GIVING RISE TO THE LIEN; AND

(3) AN AFFIDAVIT UNDER OATH BY THE LIENHOLDER STATING:

(I) THAT THE UNDERLYING OBLIGATION IS IN DEFAULT; AND

(II) THE REASONS FOR THE DEFAULT.

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 934

(B) ON REQUEST OF THE LIENHOLDER, THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY SHALL
RELEASE THE PROPERTY TO THE LIENHOLDER.

~~13–633.~~

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE LAW
~~GOVERNING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SALE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~COLLATERAL~~ ~~SECURING~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OBLIGATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~DEFAULT~~
GOVERNS A LIENHOLDER’S REPOSSESSION AND SALE OF PROPERTY THAT HAS BEEN
SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) A LIENHOLDER MAY NOT BE REQUIRED TO TAKE POSSESSION OF THE
PROPERTY BEFORE THE SALE OF THE PROPERTY.

~~13–634.~~

(A) ANY PART OF THE PROCEEDS FROM A SALE OF PROPERTY THAT HAS
~~BEEN~~ ~~SEIZED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~WOULD~~ ~~BE~~ ~~PAID~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~PROPERTY~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~APPLICABLE~~ ~~LAW~~ ~~RELATING~~ ~~TO~~ ~~DISTRIBUTION~~ ~~OF~~
PROCEEDS SHALL BE:

(1) PAID TO THE SEIZING AUTHORITY; AND

(2) PROPERTY SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE.

(B) IF AN ORDER OF FORFEITURE IS NOT ENTERED, THE STATE SHALL
~~RETURN~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OWNER~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~PART~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROCEEDS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~COSTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS PAID FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE.

~~13–635.~~

(A) IF THE INTEREST OF THE OWNER IN PROPERTY THAT HAS BEEN SEIZED
UNDER THIS SUBTITLE IS REDEEMED, THE LIENHOLDER SHALL MAIL A NOTICE OF
THE REDEMPTION TO THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY WITHIN 10 DAYS AFTER THE
~~REDEMPTION.~~

(B) (1) IF PROPERTY THAT HAS BEEN SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE HAS
BEEN REPOSSESSED OR OTHERWISE LAWFULLY TAKEN BY THE LIENHOLDER, THE
~~LIENHOLDER~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~RETURN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SEIZING~~ ~~AUTHORITY~~ ~~WITHIN~~
21 DAYS AFTER THE REDEMPTION.

(2) THE SEIZING AUTHORITY AND THE FORFEITING AUTHORITY MAY
~~THEN~~ ~~PROCEED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROPERTY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROCEEDS~~ ~~FROM~~
THE SALE OF THE PROPERTY.
– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 934 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) TIME LIMITATIONS REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE FOR NOTICE AND
~~FILING~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMPLAINT~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~FORFEITURE~~ ~~RUN~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DATE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~REDEMPTION~~
OR PURCHASE OF THE PROPERTY THAT HAS BEEN SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

~~13–636.~~

THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT PROHIBIT A LIENHOLDER FROM EXERCISING
RIGHTS UNDER APPLICABLE LAW, INCLUDING THE RIGHT TO SELL PROPERTY THAT
HAS BEEN SEIZED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, IF A DEFAULT OCCURS IN THE
OBLIGATION GIVING RISE TO THE LIEN.

~~13–637.~~

(A) IN AN ACTION BROUGHT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE, THE STATE MAY FILE
~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CLERK~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COURT~~ ~~A~~ ~~CERTIFICATE~~ ~~STATING~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CASE~~ ~~IS~~ ~~OF~~
SPECIAL PUBLIC IMPORTANCE.

(B) THE CLERK OF THE COURT SHALL IMMEDIATELY FURNISH A COPY OF A
CERTIFICATE FILED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION TO THE CHIEF
JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF MARYLAND OR THE CHIEF JUSTICE’S
~~DESIGNEE.~~

(C) ON RECEIPT OF A CERTIFICATE FILED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE CHIEF JUSTICE OR THE CHIEF JUSTICE’S DESIGNEE SHALL
IMMEDIATELY DESIGNATE A JUDGE TO HEAR AND DETERMINE THE CASE.

(D) THE JUDGE DESIGNATED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL PROMPTLY ASSIGN THE CASE FOR HEARING, PARTICIPATE IN THE HEARINGS
AND DETERMINATION, AND CAUSE THE CASE TO BE EXPEDITED.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28