START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1012 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1012 
(The Speaker)(By Request - State Treasurer) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Officers and Employees – Required Surety Bonds – Insurance Policies 
Authorized 
 
 
This bill repeals provisions under the State Government Article pertaining to the Maryland 
State Employees Surety Bond Committee and transfers specified duties of the committee 
to the State Treasurer. The bill also authorizes specified officers and employees of the State 
who are required to be covered by surety bonds to alternatively be covered by insurance 
policies of the type and in the amount of coverage determined by the State Treasurer. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill likely results in operational efficiencies, and potentially cost savings, 
due to the consolidation and transfer of specified duties to the State Treasurer and 
authorization that specified officers and employees of the State be covered by insurance 
policies, which may be less expensive than surety bonds. The State Treasurer’s Office can 
handle the bill’s requirements with existing resources. State revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The State Treasurer must consider the duties and responsibilities of any 
State officer or employee when determining the type and amount of coverage of any bond 
or insurance policy required by State law. Any State officer or employee who is required 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1012/ Page 2 
to be bonded or insured, or in the opinion of the State Treasurer should be bonded or 
insured, must be covered by a surety bond or an insurance policy of the type, amount, and 
term determined by the State Treasurer, as specified.  
 
The State Treasurer must keep a record of each insurance policy. On the purchase of any 
bond required by State law, a copy of the bond must be sent to the Comptroller who must 
keep a record of (1) the name of the officer or employee for whom a bond is issued; (2) the 
name of the agency in which the officer or employee is employed; (3) the name of the 
company issuing the bond; and (4) the amount, date, and time of expiration of the bond 
and of any certificate renewing the bond. 
 
The bill requires the Governor, in consultation with the State Treasurer, to determine the 
type and amount of coverage provided by an insurance policy covering the State Treasurer 
while in office. The State Treasurer must keep a record of any insurance policy procured 
for this purpose. 
 
An insurance policy purchased for the State Treasurer as custodian of the Unemployment 
Insurance Fund must be of the type and in the amount determined by the State Treasurer 
in consultation with the Secretary of Labor. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland State Employees Surety Bond Committee 
 
Chapter 702 of 1967 created the Maryland State Employees Surety Bond Committee. 
Title 9, Subtitle 17 of the State Government Article outlines the powers and duties of the 
committee, which consists of the State Treasurer, State Comptroller, and Attorney General 
or their designated representatives. The committee may periodically set the type, amount, 
and term of the bonds of State officers and employees who are either required by State law 
to be bonded, or in the opinion of the committee should be bonded. The specified bonds 
must be purchased by the State Treasurer after approval by the Board of Public Works 
(BPW) from a company authorized to issue the bonds and do business in the State. The 
premium on all bonds purchased must be provided by the State budget. The State Treasurer 
is authorized, after approval of BPW, to cancel a bond and collect any rebate of the 
premium at any time any bond coverage is no longer required.         
 
Each bond must be approved by the Attorney General and filed with the Comptroller’s 
Office. The Comptroller’s Office must keep a record of (1) the name of the officer or 
employee for whom a bond is issued; (2) the name of the agency in which the officer or 
employee is employed; (3) the name of the company issuing the bond; and (4) the amount, 
date, and time of expiration of the bond and of any certificate renewing the bond. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1012/ Page 3 
Background:  As described by the National Association of Surety Bond Producers 
(NASBP), “[a] surety bond is a promise to be liable for the debt, default, or failure of 
another. It is a three-party contract by which one party (the surety) guarantees the 
performance or obligations of a second party (the principal) to a third party (the obligee).” 
 
NASBP indicates that there are two broad categories of surety bonds:  (1) contract surety 
bonds (written for construction projects); and (2) commercial surety bonds, which cover a 
broad range of surety bonds, including public official bonds, which are typically required 
by statute for certain holders of public office, to protect the public from malfeasance by an 
official or from an official’s failure to faithfully perform duties. 
 
The Treasurer’s Office notes the State Employees Surety Bond Committee has not met 
since 2005.        
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 775 (The President)(By Request - State Treasurer) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; National Association of 
Surety Bond Producers; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Trevor S. Owen 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3