START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1005 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1005 
(Delegate McCaskill) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Correctional Officers' Retirement System - Membership 
 
 
This bill makes specified employees of the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and 
the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) members of the 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS) as a condition of their employment. It 
also requires the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) to 
transfer service credit earned by affected employees in the Employees’ Retirement System 
(ERS) or Employees’ Pension System (EPS) to CORS, unless an affected employee opts 
not to have service credit transferred. However, members who transfer into CORS with no 
creditable service in EPS from before July 1, 2008, are not eligible to opt out of the transfer 
of service. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024; some provisions related to transfer of 
service credit terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State pension liabilities increase by approximately $13.7 million, and the 
normal cost increases by approximately $2.5 million. Amortizing the increase in liabilities 
over 10 years and adding the full normal cost results in State pension contributions 
increasing by approximately $4.87 million in FY 2027. Those costs increase annually 
thereafter according to actuarial assumptions and are assumed to be allocated 60% general 
funds, 20% special funds, and 20% federal and other funds. No effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
2,922,000 
2,988,000 
3,060,000 
SF Expenditure 
0 
0 
974,000 
996,000 
1,020,000 
FF Expenditure 
0 
0 
974,000 
996,000 
1,020,000 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
($4,870,000) 
($4,980,000) 
($5,100,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1005/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An individual who is employed in the job classifications listed below on 
or after July 1, 2024, is a member of CORS as a condition of employment. An individual 
who is employed in any of the listed positions on or before June 30, 2024, is eligible to 
retire from CORS if vested in CORS with a combined total of at least 20 years of eligibility 
credit in CORS and either EPS or ERS: 
 
 
a correctional maintenance regional manager in DPSCS; and 
 
an employee of Eastern Shore Hospital Center, Thomas B. Finan Center, Potomac 
Center/Secure Evaluation and Therapeutic Treatment Program, Spring Grove 
Hospital Center, Springfield Hospital Center, Regional Institute for Children and 
Adolescents-Baltimore, or John L. Gildner Regional Institute for Children and 
Adolescents in any of the following positions: 
 
a CAMH associate – CI 
 
a developmental disability associate – CI; 
 
a direct care assistant – CI; 
 
a licensed practical nurse – CI; 
 
a resident associate SETT – CI; 
 
a security attendant I, II, or III; 
 
a security attendant manager I or II; or 
 
a security attendant supervisor. 
 
Any individual who retires under this provision is entitled to a normal service retirement 
benefit based on creditable service in CORS. Affected members are exempt from a 
requirement in current law that they remain in CORS for at least five years before they are 
eligible for CORS benefits. 
 
If any of the affected employees is granted an ordinary disability benefit, the SRPS Board 
must calculate and pay the ordinary disability benefit that is greater under either CORS or 
EPS. 
 
Current Law:  Eligibility for CORS membership has been expanded in recent years from 
just correctional officers in the first six job classifications and security attendants at the 
Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center to now also include:   
 
 
correctional dietary, maintenance, and supply workers (Chapter 340 of 2006); 
 
correctional laundry workers and designated employees of Maryland Correctional 
Enterprises (Chapters 408 and 409 of 2008); 
 
correctional case management specialists, supervisors, and managers (Chapters 218 
and 219 of 2016); 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1005/ Page 3 
 
parole and probation agents, supervisors, and regional administrators (Chapters 688 
and 689 of 2017); 
 
specified counselors, social workers, psychologists, and recreation officers within 
DPSCS (Chapter 690 of 2017); 
 
specified detention center employees of the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) 
and specified supervisory positions within DPSCS (that had been inadvertently 
omitted from earlier legislation) (Chapter 579 of 2018); and 
 
specified case management workers and group life managers in DJS (Chapter 147 
of 2022). 
 
Exhibit 1 delineates key provisions for CORS and EPS. As the exhibit shows, 
Chapter 110 of 2006 phased in a higher EPS employee contribution rate, from 2.0% in 
fiscal 2006 to 5.0% in fiscal 2009. Chapter 397 of 2011 made additional changes, raising 
the member contribution rate to 7.0% and reducing the benefit multiplier to 1.5% for 
members hired after June 30, 2011. Prior to July 1, 1998, EPS was noncontributory for 
most members. 
 
“Eligibility service” means service credit that is recognized for determining eligibility for 
a retirement benefit. In general, a member of EPS receives one year of eligibility service 
credit for completing at least 500 hours of employment in a fiscal year. “Creditable service” 
is service credit that is recognized for computing a retirement benefit. In general, it equals 
eligibility service credit plus credit for unused sick leave. 
 
Title 37 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article governs transfers from EPS to another 
contributory pension system (like CORS). Under Title 37, a “new system” means the 
system into which the member is transferring service credit, and “previous system” means 
the system from which the individual is transferring. Members transferring creditable 
service from EPS to another contributory system must pay the member contribution rates 
in effect for the period of service covered by the transferred service credit, plus interest. 
They are also refunded any accumulated contributions in the previous system that are in 
excess of the member contributions required by the new system.  
 
Under the terms of Title 37, therefore, EPS members transferring creditable service to 
CORS have to pay the difference between the contribution rate paid to EPS, if any, and the 
5.0% CORS contribution rate, plus interest, for any service credit earned prior to 
fiscal 2009, when the EPS member contribution rate was less than the 5.0% CORS 
contribution. For service credit earned prior to 1998, they likely must pay the full CORS 
contribution of 5.0% (plus interest) since EPS was noncontributory for most members. 
However, they will also receive credit for the higher member contributions (7.0%) paid in EPS 
since June 30, 2011, because those contributions are also transferred to CORS and credited 
to their account. Any net deficiency in their member contributions results in an actuarial 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1005/ Page 4 
reduction to their benefit at the time of retirement. The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) notes that there is no actual transfer of assets between plans because CORS and 
EPS/ERS are considered a single plan for the purpose of valuing their assets and liabilities. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Pension Plan Provisions 
 
 
Employees’ Pension System 
 
 
Hired Before July 1, 2011 
Hired After June 30, 2011 
CORS 
Normal Retirement Age 
621 
652 
553 
 
 
 
 
Years of Service for 
 Normal Retirement 
30 
Age and service add to 90 
20 
 
 
 
 
Employee Contribution 
None prior to 1998 
2.0% (1998-2006) 
3.0% in 2007 
4.0% in 2008 
5.0% (2009-2011) 
7.0% after June 30, 2011 
7.0% 
5.0% 
 
 
 
 
Benefit Multiplier 
1.8% (after 1998) 
1.2% (before 1998) 
1.5% 
1.818% 
 
CORS:  Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
 
1 Retiree must have at least 5 years of service. 
2 Retiree must have at least 10 years of service. 
3 Retiree must have 5 years of service if hired before July 1, 2011; otherwise, retiree must have 10 years of 
service if hired on or after July 1, 2011. 
 
Source:  Maryland Annotated Code; State Personnel and Pensions Article 
 
 
Under the terms of Title 37, therefore, EPS members transferring creditable service to 
CORS have to pay the difference between the contribution rate paid to EPS, if any, and the 
5.0% CORS contribution rate, plus interest, for any service credit earned prior to 
fiscal 2009, when the EPS member contribution rate was less than the 5.0% CORS 
contribution. For service credit earned prior to 1998, they likely must pay the full CORS 
contribution of 5.0% (plus interest) since EPS was noncontributory for most members. 
However, they will also receive credit for the higher member contributions (7.0%) paid in EPS 
since June 30, 2011, because those contributions are also transferred to CORS and credited 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1005/ Page 5 
to their account. Any net deficiency in their member contributions results in an actuarial 
reduction to their benefit at the time of retirement. DLS notes that there is no actual transfer 
of assets between plans because CORS and EPS/ERS are considered a single plan for the 
purpose of valuing their assets and liabilities. 
 
In general, under Title 37, an individual who retires from a new system within five years 
of transferring to that system receives benefits for the transferred credit that would have 
been payable under the previous system. However, the bill exempts affected individuals 
from this provision of Title 37. 
 
Normal retirement age for most CORS members is age 55 if they have vested; they can 
also retire with 20 years of service regardless of age.  
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, EPS/ERS and CORS are considered a single plan 
for actuarial reasons, so the employer contribution rates for each plan are the same. Also, 
current EPS members transferring creditable service to CORS have to make up any 
difference in member contributions. Therefore, any difference in member contributions has 
no effect on plan assets. Moreover, even though the bill applies to members of both ERS 
and EPS, all affected members are assumed to participate only in EPS (ERS was closed to 
new members in 1980). Based on data provided by MDH and DPSCS, the bill affects 
805 individuals currently employed by MDH and 5 individuals employed by DPSCS. 
 
State pension liabilities increase because service credit in EPS accrues at a lower benefit 
level than CORS, whether at the 1.2% level, prior to 1998, or the 1.5% level, for those 
hired on or after July 1, 2011. For EPS service between July 1, 1998, and June 30, 2011, 
benefits accrued at 1.8% (and still accrue at that level for those hired before July 1, 2011), 
which is slightly below the 1.818% rate for CORS. Under the bill, all service credit must 
be paid at the 1.818% CORS level for individuals who transfer creditable service from EPS 
to CORS. This factor increases State pension liabilities because accrued credit is being paid 
at a higher level. 
 
The bill requires the SRPS Board to transfer the service credit on June 30, 2025; members 
have 11 months to opt out of the transfer – they must do so by June 1, 2025. However, this 
analysis assumes that all affected individuals for whom data is available transfer all prior 
creditable service to CORS and retire with a CORS benefit (i.e., they do not opt out of the 
transfer of credit). To the extent that some affected members do opt out, the fiscal effect 
may be less. Based on the date of transfer, this analysis assumes that transferred credit is 
first recognized in the June 30, 2025 valuation, which determines contribution rates for 
fiscal 2027. Therefore, the fiscal effect begins in fiscal 2027. 
 
The General Assembly’s actuary advises that, with these assumptions, State pension 
liabilities increase by $13.7 million, and the normal cost increases by $2.5 million. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1005/ Page 6 
Beginning July 1, 2024, new gains and losses each year are amortized over between  
10 and 15 years; for this analysis, the actuary advises that 10 years is appropriate because 
the average expected future service for affected members is 9 years. Therefore, adding the 
increased normal cost to the annual amortization payment results in a first-year cost of 
$4.87 million in fiscal 2027. Out-year pension costs increase according to actuarial 
assumptions. State pension costs in the combined employees’ system (which includes both 
CORS and EPS) are assumed to be split 60% general funds, 20% special funds, and 20% 
federal/other funds. 
 
This analysis does not include the effect of future individuals hired into the affected 
positions, including currently vacant positions. 
 
Despite the number of individuals affected by the bill, the State Retirement Agency can 
likely process credit transfers with existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  The actuarial analysis conducted for this bill was based on an 
earlier version that affected 806 MDH employees and no DPSCS employees. Amendments 
to the bill added a net total of 4 individuals (810 total). As the amendments did not 
materially change the number or demographics of affected members, the actuarial analysis 
was not redone for the current version of the bill.  
 
DLS notes that security attendants at the Clifton T. Perkins Hospital Center are already 
covered by CORS and, therefore, Clifton T. Perkins is not specified as one of the hospital 
centers covered by the bill. Most of the other position titles in the bill are not used at 
Perkins; however, MDH advises that one individual at Perkins, a resident associate 
supervisor SETT – CI, is excluded from the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 972 (Senator Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Health; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1005/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
rh/ljm    
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7