START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1064 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1064 
(Delegate Hartman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Income Tax Subtraction Modification – Death Benefits – Law Enforcement 
Officers and Fire Fighters 
 
 
This emergency bill allows a subtraction modification against the personal income tax for 
a payment of a death benefit (to the extent included in federal adjusted gross income) under 
a collective bargaining agreement from a county or municipality in the State to the 
surviving spouse or other beneficiary of a law enforcement officer or fire fighter whose 
death arises out of or in the course of employment as a law enforcement officer or fire 
fighter. The bill applies to tax year 2022 and beyond. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2024 to 
the extent subtraction modifications are claimed under the bill. The Comptroller’s Office 
can implement the bill’s changes with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease, likely minimally, beginning in FY 2024 to the 
extent subtraction modifications are claimed under the bill. Local expenditures are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual may claim a subtraction modification against the personal 
income tax for a payment from a pension system to the surviving spouse or other 
beneficiary of a law enforcement officer or fire fighter whose death arises out of or in the 
course of employment as a law enforcement officer or fire fighter. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1064/ Page 2 
State/Local Revenues:  State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
decrease beginning in fiscal 2024 to the extent subtraction modifications are claimed under 
the bill. It is unknown how many taxpayers will be eligible for and claim the subtraction 
modification and the amount of their excludable death benefit payments; thus, a reliable 
estimate of the bill’s impact on State general fund revenues and local income tax revenues 
is not feasible at this time. However, the Department of Legislative Services anticipates 
that any effect on State and local revenues is likely to be minimal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 897 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2