START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1026 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1026 
(Delegate Patterson, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Armed Forces - Support of Military Families and Addition of Space Force 
 
 
This bill adds members of the U.S. Space Force to several provisions of State law that refer 
to members of the U.S. Armed Forces. The bill also expands existing statutory provisions 
to authorize military spouses and residents of the State who are members of the 
National Guard of another state or a part of a reserve component of the U.S. Armed Forces 
to terminate or suspend certain consumer-related contracts when called into military 
service. Finally, the bill authorizes the Governor to award a Maryland Defense Force 
commission, appointment, or promotion posthumously. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Use of a Deceased Soldier’s Identity 
 
Current law generally prohibits a person from knowingly using the name or image of a 
soldier killed in the line of duty within the previous 50 years in advertising for the sale of 
products or services for the purpose of gaining a commercial advantage, without obtaining 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1026/ Page 2 
prior consent for the use from the soldier or the surviving spouse or other specified related 
individuals. 
 
Under current law, “soldier” means (1) an active duty member of the U.S. Armed Forces, 
including the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, National Guard, 
Reserve forces, and any other standard U.S. military agency. Under the bill, the definition 
of “soldier” is expanded to include members of the Space Force. 
 
Purple Star Schools Program 
 
Under current law, the Purple Star Schools Program, administered by the Maryland State 
Department of Education, recognizes public schools that provide strong services and 
support for “military-connected students” and their families when students transfer schools 
as a result of a parent or guardian’s military service. Under current law, 
“military-connected student” means a student who is a dependent of (1) a current member 
of the U.S. military serving in the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard 
on active duty; (2) the Maryland National Guard; or (3) a reserve force of the U.S. military. 
“Military-connected student” also means a student who is a dependent of a member of a 
military or reserve force listed above who was killed in the line of duty. Under the bill, 
“military-connected student” is expanded to include a current member of the Space Force 
or the National Guard of any other state. 
 
Custody or Visitation Order Based on Deployment of a Parent 
 
Under current law, any order or modification of an existing child custody or visitation order 
issued by a court during a term of a deployment of a parent must specifically reference the 
deployment of the parent. A parent who petitions the court for an order or modification of 
an existing child custody or visitation order after returning from a deployment must 
specifically reference the date of the end of the deployment in the petition. If the petition 
is filed within 30 days after the end of the deployment of the parent, the court must set a 
hearing on the petition on an expedited basis. On a finding that extenuating circumstances 
prohibited the filing of the petition within 30 days, the court may set a hearing on the 
petition on an expedited basis whenever the petition is filed. Any custody or visitation order 
issued based on the deployment of a parent must require that (1) the other parent reasonably 
accommodate the leave schedule of the parent who is subject to the deployment; (2) the 
other parent facilitate opportunities for telephone and electronic mail contact between the 
parent who is subject to the deployment and the child during the time of deployment; and 
(3) the parent who is subject to the deployment provide timely information regarding the 
parent’s leave schedule to the other parent. 
 
Under current law, “deployment” means compliance with military orders received by a 
member of the U.S. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, National Guard, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1026/ Page 3 
or any other reserve component to report for combat operations or other active service, as 
specified. Under the bill, “deployment” is expanded to include military orders received by 
a member of the Space Force. 
 
Maryland Defense Force – Appointments and Commissions 
 
Under current law, the Governor must appoint and commission each commissioned officer 
or appoint each warrant officer of the organized militia on recommendation of the 
Adjutant General. Commissioned or appointed officers and warrant officers must meet 
specified qualifications. The appointments do not require confirmation by the Senate of 
Maryland. The bill incorporates the Space Force into provisions concerning appointments 
and commissions that refer to other branches of the armed forces. The bill also authorizes 
the Governor to award a Maryland Defense Force commission, appointment, or promotion 
posthumously. 
 
Under current law, when initially appointed, a general officer or colonel of the organized 
militia must, among other things, have served in any component or auxiliary of the 
U.S. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, Coast Guard, or National Guard with the grade 
of O-4 or higher. When initially appointed, a lieutenant-colonel or major of the line must 
have had service as an officer for at least two years in any component or auxiliary of the 
U.S military, as specified. In addition, the Governor may grant a brevet commission to an 
officer of the organized militia of a grade equal to the highest grade in which the officer 
previously served in the organized militia or in the U.S. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, 
Air Force, or Coast Guard. Under the bill, service in the Space Force may also be 
considered for a commission or appointment within the organized militia, as specified. 
 
Civil Relief for Military Service Members 
 
In addition to the rights and protections regarding consumer transactions, contracts, and 
service providers included in specified provisions of the federal Service Members Civil 
Relief Act, current law generally authorizes a service member to terminate or suspend a 
contract for (1) telecommunication services; (2) Internet services; (3) television services; 
(4) athletic club or gym memberships; and (5) satellite radio services. This may be done at 
any time after the date the service member receives military orders to relocate for a period 
of “military service” of at least 90 days to a location where the service member would be 
unable to use the services under the contract. Specified procedures apply to this process. A 
service member who terminates, suspends, or reinstates a consumer contract for the 
services (1) may not be charged a penalty, fee, loss of deposit, or any other additional cost 
and (2) is not liable for payment for any services after the effective date of the termination 
or suspension, until the effective date of any reinstatement of services. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1026/ Page 4 
Under current law, only a service member may terminate, suspend, or reinstate a consumer 
contract, as specified. Under the bill, “military service” is expanded to include a member 
of the Space Force and a resident of the State who is a member or reserve member of the 
National Guard of another state or a reserve component of the U.S. Armed Forces. The bill 
also authorizes a military spouse to terminate, suspend, or reinstate a consumer contract, 
as specified. 
 
Unlawful Wearing of Uniform 
 
With specified exceptions, current law prohibits the unauthorized wearing of a uniform or 
distinctive part of a uniform or an item similar to a uniform or a distinctive part of a uniform 
of (1) the U.S. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, or Coast Guard; (2) the  
National Guard of this State, another state, or the United States; (3) the Maryland Defense 
Force; or (4) an auxiliary of any of those military units. Violations are subject to criminal 
penalties. The bill expands this prohibition to include uniforms of the Space Force. 
 
Improper Use of Military Property – Generally 
 
Under current law, a person may not (1) hide, sell, dispose of, offer for sale, purchase, 
retain after a demand by a commissioned officer of the organized militia, or pledge any 
arms, uniforms, equipment, or other military property issued under statute or (2) wear any 
specified articles or objects prescribed by law for the use of the organized militia. Under 
current law, this prohibition does not apply to a member of the U.S. Army, Navy, Air Force, 
Marines, or Coast Guard, the organized militia of this State or another state, an officer of 
the Maryland Defense Force, or a member of associations wholly composed of soldiers 
honorably discharged from the U.S. Armed Forces. Violations are subject to criminal 
penalties. Under the bill, this exception is expanded to include the Space Force. 
 
Exclusion from Places of Amusement or Recreation 
 
Under current law, a person who is the owner or who is an agent of the owner of a place of 
amusement or recreation open to the public may not refuse admission to an officer or 
enlisted individual of the U.S. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, or Air Force or 
the organized militia of this State or of another state because the officer or enlisted 
individual is in uniform. A person who violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor 
punishable by imprisonment for up to six months and/or a maximum fine of $500. The bill 
expands this prohibition to include the Space Force. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1026/ Page 5 
Maryland Code of Military Justice 
 
Generally, the Maryland Code of Military Justice applies to all members of the State 
military forces at all times and provides a comprehensive system of military justice in State 
statute. 
 
Under current law, “judge advocate” means, among other things, a commissioned officer 
of the organized State military forces who is a member in good standing of the bar of the 
highest court of a state certified or designated as a judge advocate in the 
Judge Advocate General’s Corps of the Army, Air Force, Navy, or the Marine Corps or 
designated as a law specialist as an officer of the Coast Guard, or a reserve component of 
one of these. Under the bill, “judge advocate” also includes being certified or designated 
as a judge advocate in the Judge Advocate General’s Corps of the Space Force. 
 
Under current law, in the instance when a defense counsel is not a member of the bar of 
the highest court of the state, the defense counsel must be deemed admitted pro hac vice, 
subject to filing a certificate with the military judge setting forth the qualifications that 
counsel is (1) a commissioned officer of the U.S. Armed Forces or a component thereof; 
(2) a member in good standing of the bar of the highest court of a state; and (3) certified as 
a judge advocate in the Judge Advocate General’s Corps of the Army, Air Force, Navy, or 
Marine Corps. The bill expands this provision to include a certified or designated 
judge advocate in the Judge Advocate General’s Corps of the Space Force. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 707 (Senator Jackson, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; 
Military Department; Public Service Commission; Air Force Times; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1026/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6