START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1056 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1056 
(Delegate Guzzone, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Pharmacy - Prohibition on Discrimination Against 340B Drug 
Distribution 
 
 
This bill prohibits a “340B manufacturer” from directly or indirectly denying, restricting, 
prohibiting, discriminating against, or limiting the acquisition or delivery of a “340B drug” 
to a pharmacy on behalf of a “covered entity,” with specified exceptions. A violation is an 
unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
(MCPA) and is subject to specified enforcement actions and penalties. An alleged violation 
must be investigated by the Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the 
Attorney General (OAG) or, as applicable, the State Board of Pharmacy (MBOP). The bill 
may not be construed to be (1) less restrictive than any federal law that is applicable to a 
person regulated under the bill or (2) in conflict with applicable federal and State laws and 
regulations. By July 1, 2026, the Prescription Drug Affordability Board (PDAB) must 
study the 340B Program, as specified, and report its findings and recommendations to 
specified committees of the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBOP special fund expenditures increase by $39,600 in FY 2025 for staff; 
future years reflect annualization and elimination of one-time costs. PDAB general fund 
expenditures increase by $7,500 in FY 2025 and 2026 only for contractual expenses. OAG 
can likely absorb any additional workload under the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
The imposition of penalty provisions does not materially impact State finances. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
7,500 
7,500 
0 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
39,600 
41,900 
43,700 
45,600 
47,600 
Net Effect 
($47,100) 
($49,400) 
($43,700) 
($45,600) 
($47,600)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1056/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
A “340B drug” means a drug that (1) is a covered outpatient drug under federal law; (2) has 
been subject to an offer for reduced prices by a 340B manufacturer; and (3) is purchased 
by a covered entity. A 340B drug includes a drug that would have been purchased but for 
the purchase being prohibited by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS).  
 
“340B manufacturer” means a manufacturer, as defined under federal law, of covered 
outpatient drugs that has a signed a pharmaceutical pricing agreement under federal law. 
 
“Covered entity” has the meaning stated in 42 U.S.C. § 256(B)(4). Generally, covered 
entities include federally qualified health centers, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program 
grantees, certain hospitals, and specialized clinics. 
 
“Package” means the smallest individual saleable unit of product for distribution by a 
manufacturer or repackager that is intended by the manufacturer for ultimate sale to the 
dispenser of such product. 
 
Exceptions to the Prohibition 
 
A 340B manufacturer may deny, restrict, prohibit, discriminate against, or limit the 
acquisition or delivery of a 340B drug to a pharmacy on behalf of a covered entity if the 
receipt of 340B drugs is prohibited by HHS. Additionally, a 340B manufacturer may limit 
the distribution of a 340B drug if the limitation is required under a federal risk evaluation 
and mitigation strategy, as specified under federal law. 
 
Violations – Investigations and Penalties 
 
A violation by a 340B manufacturer is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under 
MCPA. In general, an alleged violation must be investigated by OAG’s Consumer 
Protection Division; however, for an alleged violation committed by a person who is 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1056/ Page 3 
licensed or permitted by MBOP, the investigation may be conducted by MBOP. As part of 
an investigation, MBOP or the Consumer Protection Division may investigate an affiliate 
or a contractor of the 340B manufacturer, including a wholesaler or third-party logistics 
provider. 
 
A violator is subject to specified enforcement actions and penalties under MCPA. In 
addition to these penalties, a civil fine of up to $5,000 per violation may be assessed. Each 
package of 340B drugs subject to a violation constitutes a separate violation. If a violation 
is committed by a person licensed or permitted by MBOP, the board may impose discipline, 
suspension, or revocation of the person’s license or permit. A violation does not create a 
private right of action under MCPA. 
 
Study and Report on 340B Program 
 
Uncodified language requires PDAB, in consultation with the Maryland Department of 
Health (MDH), to conduct a study on (1) the current implementation and scope of the  
340B Program in the State; (2) the bill’s implementation and the impact of its 
implementation; and (3) the finances of the program in the State, including how covered 
entities reinvest savings realized from the program. PDAB is authorized to require covered 
entities and 340B manufacturers to provide information as necessary to complete the study.  
 
By July 1, 2026, PDAB must report its findings and recommendations from the study to 
the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations 
Committee. 
 
Current Law:  The federal 340B Drug Pricing Program was established to enable health 
care providers that serve low-income and uninsured patients to purchase drugs at lower 
costs. The program requires pharmaceutical manufacturers to sell outpatient drugs to 
covered entities at reduced prices in order to have their drugs covered under Medicaid.   
 
The 340B statute specifies that the Secretary of HHS must enter into purchase price 
agreements (PPAs) with pharmaceutical manufacturers that participate in Medicaid. Under 
a PPA, a manufacturer must sell certain covered outpatient drugs at a “ceiling price,” which 
is calculated based on a specified statutory formula. Manufacturers may not charge covered 
entities more than the ceiling price if they sell the drug to any other entity at any price. 
Providers may pass the drug discounts on to patients, but the statute does not require them 
to do so.  
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1056/ Page 4 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer.  
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
Maryland Board of Pharmacy 
 
MBOP regulates the practice of pharmacy by licensing pharmacists, registering pharmacy 
technicians, issuing permits to individuals to establish or operate pharmacies in the State, 
setting pharmacy practice standards, and developing and enforcing laws and regulations to 
protect the public. MBOP also regulates manufacturers and virtual manufacturers 
distributing their own prescription drugs or devices and wholesale distributors.  
 
State Expenditures: 
 
State Board of Pharmacy 
 
MBOP advises that the board does not currently investigate trade practices and, as such, 
needs to hire a part-time (50%) contractual investigator with an appropriate skill set to 
investigate violations by 340B manufacturers (including a wholesaler or third-party 
logistics provider). Accordingly, MBOP special fund expenditures increase by $39,561 in 
fiscal 2025, which assumes a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024, effective 
date. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$32,709 
Operating Expenses 
6,852 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$39,561 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1056/ Page 5 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Office of the Attorney General 
 
OAG advises that, as long as it receives fewer than 50 complaints annually as a result of 
the bill, the Consumer Protection Division can absorb the increased workload using 
existing budgeted resources. To the extent that a higher volume of complaints is received, 
OAG would likely need to hire an additional staff member to assist with reviewing and 
investigating complaints. OAG advises that the annual cost of hiring such an employee 
would be approximately $150,000.  
 
Prescription Drug Affordability Board 
 
According to PDAB, it does not have the internal staff capacity to comply with the bill’s 
study and reporting requirements without adversely impacting its other required work. 
Therefore, PDAB advises that it must hire contractual support, at a total cost of $15,000, 
to adequately study and report on the implementation and scope of the 340B Program in 
the State, as well as the bill’s implementation and its impact. Given that PDAB’s report to 
the General Assembly is due by July 1, 2026, this analysis assumes that the $15,000 in 
contractual expenses is incurred evenly between fiscal 2025 and 2026, at a cost of $7,500 
in each year. 
 
Maryland Department of Health 
 
MDH advises that it can assist PDAB with fulfilling the bill’s study and reporting 
requirements using existing budgeted resources.   
  
Additional Comments:  The Health Resources and Services Administration within HHS 
estimates that 340B sales constitute about 7.2% of the overall U.S. drug market. In 2021, 
total 340B sales reached approximately $44 billion.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 986 (Senator Lam) - Finance. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1056/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Congressional Research Service; Office of the Attorney General 
(Consumer Protection Division); Maryland Department of Health; Prescription Drug 
Affordability Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - April 6, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6