START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1009 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1009 
(Delegate Chang) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Public Health – Federally Qualified Health Centers Grant Program – Recovery 
of Funding 
 
   
This bill alters the number of years after completion of a project within which the State 
may recover an amount incurred for a project under the Federally Qualified Health Centers 
(FQHC) Grant Program if the property has been sold or transferred, as specified, or ceases 
to be an FQHC. The State may not recover an amount incurred for a project (1) if the 
property was leased by the FQHC, more than 15 years after completion of the project or 
(2) if the property was owned by the FQHC, more than 30 years after completion of the 
project.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any workload resulting from the bill can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. General fund revenues may increase by an indeterminate amount sooner than 
expected due to acceleration of the State’s right of recovery for certain properties.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 277 of 2005 established the FQHC Grant Program. Grants 
awarded under this capital program may be used for projects involving a facility designated 
as an FQHC under § 330 of the federal Public Health Service Act and wholly owned and 
operated by a county, municipal corporation, or nonprofit organization.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1009/ Page 2 
Any county, municipal corporation, or nonprofit organization that is sponsoring a project 
involving the construction, acquisition, renovation, or equipping of an FQHC may apply 
to the Maryland Department of Health for a State grant toward the cost of the project. A 
State grant must provide up to 75% of the eligible costs remaining after any federal grant 
is applied, or, if the project is designated as eligible for poverty area funding, up to 90% of 
the eligible costs remaining after any federal grant is applied. The county, municipal 
corporation, or nonprofit organization sponsoring the project is responsible for providing 
matching funds for the remaining cost.  
 
The State may recover funds provided for a project in an amount calculated as specified, 
together with all costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the State in the recovery 
proceedings, if, within 30 years after completion of a project, the property (1) is sold or 
transferred to any person, agency, or organization that would not qualify as an applicant 
under the program, or that is not approved as a transferee by the Board of Public Works or 
(2) ceases to be an FQHC. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Board of Public 
Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2