START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1023 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1023 
(Prince George's County Delegation and Montgomery 
County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Prince George's County and Montgomery County - The Washington Suburban 
Transit Commission Reform Act  
PG/MC 103-24 
 
   
This bill makes various changes related to the Washington Suburban Transit Commission 
(WSTC). Specifically, the bill (1) repeals the authority of the governing bodies of 
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties to review and approve the contracts and 
agreements entered into by WSTC; (2) authorizes the WSTC commissioner that serves on 
the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) Board of Directors to be 
reappointed to the board; and (3) authorizes the Secretary of Transportation’s designee to 
attend meetings of the WMATA Board of Directors on behalf of the Secretary when the 
Secretary is not available, instead of only if a scheduling conflict arises. When attending 
board meetings on behalf of the Secretary, the Secretary’s designee must have the same 
powers as the Secretary.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State government operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1023/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Washington Suburban Transit Commission  
 
WSTC is responsible for administering the Washington Suburban Transit District and is 
authorized to develop a transportation system, including mass transit facilities, for 
Montgomery and Prince George’s counties. It coordinates mass transit programs with the 
two county governments, WMATA, and the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT). MDOT provides annual operating grants to WSTC, which then provides funding 
to WMATA for the operation of the Metrorail, Metrobus, and MetroAccess systems.  
 
The commission consists of seven members:  two appointed by the County Executive of 
Montgomery County; two appointed by the County Executive of Prince George’s County; 
two appointed by the Governor; and one that is the Secretary of Transportation as an 
ex officio member.  
 
WTSC’s operations are governed by the public local laws of Montgomery and 
Prince George’s counties. Among other things, the laws grant WSTC the power to make 
and enter into all contracts or agreements as it determines are necessary or incidental to the 
performance of its duties and to the execution of its powers, subject to the review and 
approval in whole or in part by the respective governing bodies of the counties.  
 
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority   
 
WMATA was established in 1967 through an interstate compact among Maryland, 
Virginia, and the District of Columbia. The original purpose was construction and 
operation of a rapid rail transit system for the Washington metropolitan area. Maryland’s 
overall participation in the Washington metropolitan transit system consists of the 
provision of annual funding to WMATA for capital and operating costs of the Metrorail, 
Metrobus, and MetroAccess systems. WMATA’s operations are funded through operating 
revenues and subsidies provided by the compact signatories:  Maryland, Virginia, and the 
District of Columbia. General parameters on capital funding levels are typically established 
in a six-year Capital Funding Agreement developed through negotiations between 
WMATA and its local funding partners.  
 
WMATA’s Board of Directors is responsible for determining WMATA policy and 
providing oversight of the funding, operation, and expansion of WMATA transit facilities. 
The board is comprised of eight voting members and eight alternate members. Maryland, 
Virginia, the District of Columbia, and the federal government each appoint two voting 
and two alternate members. Chapters 353 and 354 of 2018 require one of the State’s voting 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1023/ Page 3 
members to be the Secretary of Transportation or the Secretary’s designee. The other 
voting member must be appointed by the Governor and meet other specified qualifications.  
 
One of the commissioners appointed by the Governor to WSTC must also serve on the 
WMATA Board of Directors; however, this appointee may not be succeeded in office by 
a commissioner who is a resident of the same county.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery and Prince George’s counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3