START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1065 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1065 
(Delegate Clippinger) 
Judiciary 
 
 
Public Safety - Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant Program 
 
 
This bill establishes (1) the Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant Program to 
assist community organizations, nonprofit entities, and local governments to fund security 
operations during times of high pedestrian traffic in entertainment districts from which a 
higher than average number of calls for police assistance in response to reported crime are 
placed and (2) the Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant Program Fund as a 
special fund administered by the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
(GOCPP) to provide funding for grants awarded under the program. Beginning in 
fiscal 2026, the Governor may annually appropriate up to $1.0 million to the fund. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The FY 2025 budget includes $250,000 in general funds to establish an 
entertainment district security grant; thus, general fund expenditures increase by $250,000 
in FY 2025. Although funding is discretionary in future years, general fund expenditures 
increase by an estimated $1.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026 to capitalize the fund; 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly each year, reflecting 
receipt of the capitalization funds and spending on grant awards. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
GF Expenditure 
$250,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
$1,000,000 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000) 
($1,000,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and corresponding expenditures may increase 
beginning in FY 2025 to the extent local jurisdictions are awarded grants under the bill.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1065/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Executive Director of GOCPP must establish:   
 
 
an application process for community organizations and nonprofit entities located 
in entertainment districts, and local governments with entertainment districts 
located within the jurisdiction, to apply for grant funding from the program; 
 
eligibility criteria for selecting grant recipients; and 
 
minimum criteria for an entertainment district for the purpose of determining 
eligibility for grant funding from the program, including (1) the density of 
establishments licensed to serve alcohol for on-site consumption, hookah bars, or 
establishments that regularly host live entertainment for their patrons or members 
of the public; (2) the amount of pedestrian traffic; and (3) the number of calls for 
police assistance in response to reported crimes. 
 
The Maryland Entertainment District Security Grant Program Fund consists of money 
appropriated in the State budget to the fund and any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. Any interest earnings of the fund must be credited to 
the general fund. 
 
The fund may be used only (1) to fund grants to community organizations, nonprofit 
entities, and local governments through the program and (2) for costs to administer the 
fund. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the State budget. 
Money expended from the fund for the program is supplemental to and is not intended to 
take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated for the program. 
 
“Community organization” means a neighborhood association recognized by the political 
subdivision in which it is located. 
 
“Entertainment district” means a one-half square mile area in the State in which one of the 
following is present:  (1) a high density of establishments licensed to serve alcoholic 
beverages for on-site consumption; (2) a high density of establishments that are hookah 
bars; or (3) a high density of establishments that regularly host live entertainment for their 
patrons or members of the public. 
 
Current Law:  The Community Health and Safety Works Program, which is administered 
by the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD), was created as part 
of Governor Lawrence J. Hogan Jr.’s Re-Fund the Police Initiative in fiscal 2022. The 
program provides grants for business districts or facility improvements to Main Street 
communities or other community development nonprofit organizations. Grants can be used 
for surveillance tools such as lighting and cameras; pedestrian and vehicle traffic 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1065/ Page 3 
management tools, such as landscaping, fencing, or expanding restaurant space to 
sidewalks and roadways; and other improvements that renovate and improve public spaces 
to remove signals of blight. In fiscal 2023, DHCD expanded the eligible uses of grants 
under the program to include crime and violence intervention and prevention, including 
social services and direct outreach. The program received $10.0 million in federal funds 
from the federal American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 in both fiscal 2022 and 2023 and 
$10.0 million in general funds in fiscal 2024. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly, however, does not include any funding for the program. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$250,000 in general funds for the purpose of establishing an entertainment district security 
grant for community organizations, nonprofit entities, and local governments to fund 
security operations during times of high pedestrian traffic in entertainment districts. 
Although the budgeted funds are not contingent on enactment of the bill, funds not 
expended for this added purpose may not be transferred to any other purpose and must 
revert to the general fund. Thus, it is assumed that general fund expenditures increase by 
$250,000 in fiscal 2025. 
 
The bill does not mandate funding for the new special fund but does specify that the 
Governor may appropriate up to $1.0 million each year to the fund beginning in fiscal 2026. 
Consistent with the bill’s intent, this analysis assumes that, beginning in fiscal 2026,  
$1.0 million in general funds is provided each year to capitalize the fund. Actual 
expenditures will vary with the amount of any discretionary funding included in the budget 
bill and ultimately passed by the General Assembly each year. 
 
Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly each 
year beginning in fiscal 2026, reflecting receipt of the capitalization funds and subsequent 
spending to provide grants.  
 
As noted above, the fiscal 2025 budget includes $250,000 for the purpose of establishing 
an entertainment district security grant. GOCPP advises that the office plans to use 10% 
($25,000) of the fiscal 2025 funding for administrative costs and the remainder to provide 
grants. GOCPP further advises that the administrative costs could include costs to cover 
some portion of a part-time contractual grants specialist, with ongoing costs, to develop 
and administer the grant program. However, the Department of Legislative Services 
advises that until the scope of the grant program is better known, GOCPP can administer 
the program with existing staff, as the office currently administers several grant programs 
that support local jurisdictions to advance and enhance public safety. To the extent that 
existing staff prove insufficient, GOCPP may request additional resources through the 
annual budget process. As the bill explicitly authorizes the fund to be used to cover 
GOCPP’s costs to administer the fund, any administrative costs incurred by GOCPP in the 
out-years would be covered by the special fund. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1065/ Page 4 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2025 
to the extent that local jurisdictions apply for and are awarded grants from the program. 
Assuming local governments are the primary grant recipients, based on the anticipated 
funding available for grant awards (as discussed above), as much as $250,000 in 
fiscal 2025 and $1.0 million annually thereafter – across all jurisdictions – is provided in 
grants each year. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses located within entertainment districts may 
benefit from an increase in business and/or a reduction in crime as a result of improved 
safety due to the additional funding provided under the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 774 (Senator Ferguson, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; 
City of Annapolis; Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy; Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - June 25, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4