START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1021 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1021 
(Washington County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Washington County - Public Facilities Bonds 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Washington County Commissioners to issue up to $50.0 million in 
general obligation bonds for the acquisition, construction, improvement, or renovation of 
public buildings, facilities, and public works projects. The date of maturity of the bonds 
cannot exceed 30 years. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Washington County receives up to $50.0 million in bond proceeds. County 
debt service expenditures increase by an estimated $3.4 million annually over a 
20-year period. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Commission counties do not have the legislative power to create debt; 
General Assembly authorization is required before any bonds can be sold. 
Washington County is one of six counties that still operates under the commission form of 
government. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Since 2007, Washington County has received authorization by the 
General Assembly to issue up to $210.0 million in general obligation bonds for public 
facilities, as shown in Exhibit 1.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1021/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Bond Authorizations for Washington County 
($ in Millions) 
 
Session 
Chapter  
Number 
Authorized  
Amount 
2007 
Ch. 392 
$80.0 
2013 
Ch. 60 
60.0 
2018 
Ch. 99 
70.0 
Total 
 
$210.0 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Washington County indicates that it still has approximately $29.3 million remaining from 
prior bond authorizations. The county’s capital program is approved on an annual basis 
and the county estimates it will spend approximately $21.6 million in capital improvement 
projects in fiscal 2025. Exhibit 2 shows the planned capital projects for the bond 
authorization under the bill. 
 
Washington County revenues increase by up to $50.0 million from bond proceeds. Annual 
debt service costs for the bonds total approximately $3.4 million. This estimate is based on 
a 3.37% interest rate and a 20-year term of maturity. To the extent that the bond issuance, 
interest rate, or term of maturity deviate from this assumption, debt service expenditures 
would adjust accordingly. 
 
At the end of fiscal 2022, Washington County had approximately $189.9 million in total 
outstanding debt, which represents approximately 1.3% of the county’s assessable base and 
$1,224 on a per capita basis. The county currently has an AA+ credit rating from  
Standard & Poor’s, an Aa1 credit rating from Moody’s Investors Service, and an 
AA+ credit rating from Fitch Ratings. 
 
Information on local debt measures for Maryland counties and Baltimore City can be found 
in the Local Government Overview report. A copy of the 2024 report can be found on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1021/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 2 
Washington County Bond Authorization Request 
 
Project Description 
Project Amount 
Public Schools 
Capital Maintenance  
$12,917,000 
Downsville Pike Elementary School 
1,480,000 
ATC Renovation 
2,700,000 
Total Public Schools 
$17,097,000 
Public Works 
Gardenhour Road Bridge  
$400,000 
Greenspring Furnace Road Culvert  
488,000 
Burnside Bridge Road Culvert  
461,000 
Harpers Ferry Road Culvert  
757,000 
Henline Road Culvert  
429,000 
Long Hollow Road Culvert  
416,000 
Remsburg Road Culvert 
268,000 
Rinehart Road Culvert 
465,000 
Broadfording Church Road Culvert 
231,000 
Harpers Ferry Road Drainage 
525,000 
Shank Road Drainage 
214,000 
University Road Culvert 
285,000 
Pavement Maintenance and Rehab. Program 
13,833,000 
Longmeadow Road 
1,260,000 
Eastern Boulevard Extended 
5,029,000 
Eastern Boulevard Widening Phase II 
2,422,000 
Wright Road 
500,000 
E. Oak Ridge Drive/South Pointe Signal 
350,000 
Robinwood Drive Sidewalk Extension 
500,000 
Total Public Works 
$28,833,000 
Public Safety 
Patrol Services Relocation Renovation 
$4,070,000 
Total Public Safety 
$4,070,000 
Grand Total 
$50,000,000 
 
Source:  Washington County Government 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1021/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Washington County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4