START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1074 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1074 
(Delegate Bagnall, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits - Sunset 
Repeal and Modification of Reporting Requirements 
 
   
This emergency bill alters and expands reporting requirements for carriers to demonstrate 
compliance with the federal Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act (Parity Act). 
A carrier must submit a biennial compliance report beginning July 1, 2024, that includes 
specified information, including information on select nonquantitative treatment 
limitations (NQTLs), and results from a comparative analysis conducted by the carrier. The 
bill also authorizes the Insurance Commissioner to take additional actions to enforce 
compliance with reporting requirements. The bill specifies that a carrier has the burden of 
persuasion in demonstrating compliance and that “Parity Act” includes any regulations to 
implement the Act. The bill also repeals the termination date of Chapters 211 and 212 of 
2020, the requirement that the Commissioner use a specified form for reporting, and the 
requirement that carriers submit a benefits report.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA) special fund revenues increase 
by an indeterminate amount in FY 2025 and every two years thereafter from any charges 
or penalties assessed on carriers, as discussed below. MIA special fund expenditures for 
contractual services for review of reports decrease by an indeterminate amount in FY 2024 
and 2025 but increase every two years thereafter, as discussed below. No effect on the State 
Employee and Retiree Health and Welfare Benefits Program.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1074/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 211 and 212 require carriers to submit  
two specified reports to the Commissioner, by March 1, 2022, and March 1, 2024, to 
demonstrate compliance with the Parity Act and conduct a specified comparative analysis. 
The Acts terminate September 30, 2026. 
 
Compliance Report 
 
Under current law, by March 1, 2022, and March 1, 2024, each carrier must identify the 
five health benefit plans with the highest enrollment for each product offered by the carrier 
in the individual, small, and large group markets and submit a report to the Commissioner 
to demonstrate the carrier’s compliance with the Parity Act. The reports must include the 
following information for the five health benefit plans identified: 
 
 
a description of the process used to develop or select the medical necessity criteria 
for mental health, substance use disorder (SUD), and medical and surgical benefits; 
 
for each Parity Act classification, identification of NQTLs that are applied to mental 
health, SUD, and medical and surgical benefits;  
 
identification of the description of NQTLs in the carrier’s plan documents and 
instruments under which the plan is established or operated; and 
 
the results of a specified comparative analysis. 
 
A carrier must conduct a comparative analysis for NQTLs identified in the compliance 
report as those limitations are written and in operation. The comparative analysis must 
demonstrate that the processes, strategies, evidentiary standards, or other factors used in 
applying the medical necessity criteria and each NQTL to mental health and SUD benefits 
in each Parity Act classification are comparable to, and are applied no more stringently 
than, those used for medical and surgical benefits. 
 
Under the bill, each carrier must (1) identify all NQTLs that are applied to mental health, 
SUD, and medical/surgical benefits for each Parity Act classification; (2) perform and 
document comparative analyses of the design and application of all NQTLs imposed on 
mental health and SUD benefits; (3) provide the comparative analysis for each NQTL 
requested by the Commissioner within specified time periods; and (4) submit compliance 
reports as required. 
 
Compliance reports must be submitted by July 1, 2024, and every two years thereafter. 
Each carrier must submit a report to the Commissioner on each product offered by the 
carrier in the individual, small, and large group markets.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1074/ Page 3 
A report must include (1) all NQTL information required under the Parity Act, the bill, and 
any State regulations for the products; (2) the results of a comparative analysis conducted 
by the carrier on at least five NQTLs selected by the Commissioner; and (3) attestation 
that, for each product, the selected NQTLs and the processes, strategies, evidentiary 
standards, or other factors used in designing and applying the selected NQTLs to mental 
health, SUD, and medical/surgical benefits are the same for all plans within the product, as 
written and in operation.  
 
For any plan within a product with any differences in the application of NQTLs, the 
attestation must note the exception and identify the plan; the carrier must also submit a 
separate comparative analysis for the selected NQTLs for the identified plan.  
 
In selecting the NQTLs required to be included for each reporting period, the 
Commissioner (1) must prioritize the NQTLs identified by the Commissioner as having 
the greatest impact on member access to care; (2) must review the same subset of NQTLs 
for each carrier report; and (3) may take into consideration other factors determined 
relevant by the Commissioner. Of the five selected NQTLs, no more than two may be for 
utilization review and at least one must be for network composition, including 
reimbursement rate setting.  
 
The compliance report must be submitted on a standard form that meets or exceeds any 
minimum requirements specified in federal regulations and subregulatory guidance on 
NQTL reporting. 
 
Comparative Analysis 
 
Under current law, in providing the comparative analysis, a carrier must (1) identify the 
factors used to determine that an NQTL will apply to a benefit; (2) identify and define the 
specific evidentiary standards used to define the factors and any other evidence relied on 
in designing each NQTL; (3) include the results of specified audits, reviews, and analyses 
performed on NQTLs; (4) identify the measures used to ensure comparable design and 
application of NQTLs; (5) disclose the specific findings and conclusions reached by the 
carrier that indicate that the health benefit plan is in compliance with the Parity Act; and  
(6) identify the process used to comply with the Parity Act disclosure requirements for 
mental health, SUD, and medical/surgical benefits. 
 
Under the bill, a carrier must conduct a comparative analysis for the five NQTLs selected. 
The comparative analysis must include all information required under the Parity Act and 
demonstrate that the processes, strategies, evidentiary standards, or other factors used in 
designing and applying each selected NQTL to mental health and SUD benefits are 
comparable to and applied no more stringently that those used in designing and applying 
each NQTL to medical/surgical benefits within the same Parity Act classification.  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1074/ Page 4 
As requested by the Commissioner, a carrier must perform and provide a comparative 
analysis for each process, strategy, evidentiary standard, or other factor used in designing 
and applying a selected NQTL used during a reporting period, regardless of whether it was 
used before the Parity Act was enacted. 
 
The Commissioner must (1) develop additional standardized data templates to evaluate the 
comparative analysis of NQTLs in operation and that meet or exceed any minimum 
requirements for data reporting specified in federal regulations; (2) require each carrier to 
submit the data templates for each product for the NQTLs selected for the reporting year 
(and a separate data template for any plans with exceptions or differences); and (3) post the 
data templates on the MIA website for a comment period of at least 30 days before 
adoption.  
 
Benefits Report 
 
Under current law, by March 1, 2022, and March 1, 2024, each carrier must submit a report 
to the Commissioner for the five health benefit plans identified in the compliance report on 
the following data for the immediately preceding calendar year for mental health, SUD, 
and medical/surgical benefits by Parity Act classification:  
 
 
the frequency, reported by number and rate, with which the health benefit plan 
received, approved, and denied prior authorization requests for mental health, SUD, 
and medical and surgical benefits in each Parity Act classification; and  
 
the number of claims submitted for mental health, SUD, and medical and surgical 
benefits in each Parity Act classification and the number, rates of, and reasons for 
denials of claims. 
 
The bill repeals this requirement.  
 
Insurance Commissioner Review of Reports 
 
Under current law, the Commissioner must (1) review each report to assess each carrier’s 
compliance with the Parity Act; (2) notify a carrier in writing of any noncompliance before 
issuing an administrative order; and (3) within 90 days after the notice of noncompliance 
is issued, allow the carrier to submit a compliance plan to MIA and reprocess any claims 
that were improperly denied because of the noncompliance. 
 
Under the bill, the Commissioner must review each report submitted to assess each 
carrier’s compliance with the Parity Act for each Parity Act classification. The 
Commissioner may require carriers to complete data templates for an NQTL more 
frequently than every two years. A finding of noncompliance for a product must apply to 
all plans within the product.  

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1074/ Page 5 
Penalties and Enforcement 
 
Under current law, if the Commissioner finds that a carrier failed to submit a complete 
compliance report, the Commissioner may impose any penalty or take any action as 
authorized under current law.  
 
Under the bill, the Commissioner is also authorized to (1) charge the carrier for any 
additional expenses incurred by the Commissioner to review additional reports or 
(2) impose a penalty for each day that the carrier fails to submit information required by 
the Commissioner to evaluate compliance.  
 
If the Commissioner cannot make a determination that a specific conduct or practice is 
compliant with the Parity Act because the carrier failed to provide a sufficient comparative 
analysis for an NQTL, the Commissioner may (1) issue an administrative order requiring 
the carrier (or a delegated entity) to take specified action until the Commissioner can 
determine compliance with the Parity Act or (2) require the carrier to perform a new 
comparative analysis, as specified.  
 
Burden of Persuasion 
 
The bill establishes that, in any review conducted by the Commissioner or in any complaint 
investigation or market conduct action undertaken by the Commissioner that involves the 
application of the Parity Act, a carrier has the burden of persuasion in demonstrating that 
its design and application of an NQTL complies with the Parity Act. Failure of a carrier to 
submit complete Parity Act compliance information constitutes noncompliance with the 
Parity Act. 
 
Standard Form 
 
Under current law, the standard form the Commissioner must use for submission of 
compliance reports must be the National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ Data 
Collection Tool for Mental Health Parity Analysis, Nonquantitative Treatment Limitations 
and any amendments by the Commissioner. 
 
The bill repeals this requirement. 
  
State Revenues:  Under the bill, if the Commissioner finds that a carrier failed to submit 
a complete compliance report, the Commissioner may charge the carrier for any additional 
expenses incurred to review additional reports or impose a penalty for each day that the 
carrier fails to submit information required by the Commissioner to evaluate compliance. 
Thus, MIA special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1074/ Page 6 
fiscal 2025 (and every two years thereafter) from any charges or penalties assessed on 
carriers.  
 
State Expenditures:  Under current law, each carrier must submit a compliance and 
benefit report for the top five plans for each product offered by the carrier in each of the 
individual, small group, and large group markets. In 2022, MIA received 213 separate 
reports from 17 different carriers, including approximately 2,982 NQTLs to be reviewed 
over a two-year period. 
 
Under the bill, MIA advises that it must select and review five NQTLs every other year for 
each report. MIA advises that review of a single NQTL typically takes 60 to 80 hours. 
Generally, the first report reviewed for each carrier takes 80 hours, while additional reports 
from the same carrier take less time to review. MIA estimates that, under the bill, it will 
receive 40 reports (rather than the 213 under current requirements) and review a total of 
200 NQTLs (rather than 2,982 under current requirements) in fiscal 2025. Thus, the bill 
significantly reduces the number of NQTLs that must be reviewed and, as a result, the 
amount of time required to review compliance reports compared with current practice.  
 
As MIA contracts with a contractor/vendor to review NQTLs at a fully loaded fixed hourly 
rate of $155, a reduction in the number of hours required to review NQTLs reduces MIA 
special fund expenditures by an indeterminate amount in fiscal 2024 and 2025 (consistent 
with the timing for the final report (March 1, 2024) under current law). However, as the 
bill establishes a permanent biennial reporting requirement concurrent with the start of the 
fiscal year, special fund expenditures increase every two years thereafter beginning in 
fiscal 2027. 
 
As noted above, the bill permits MIA to charge a carrier for any additional expenses 
incurred by the Commissioner to review additional reports if the initial submission is 
determined to be incomplete. Thus, the cost of any additional review is offset by an 
indeterminate amount of special fund revenues in fiscal 2025 and every other year 
thereafter. 
 
Additional Comments:  In December 2023, MIA submitted an interim report on NQTLs 
and data based on March 2022 report submissions. MIA determined that carrier reports 
were uniformly and significantly inadequate, impeding the ability to reach parity 
determinations. MIA offered several recommendations for options to streamline the 
reporting process to make the reviews more effective and efficient including granting MIA 
greater enforcement authority and discretion on the frequency and number of reports 
required to be filed, the specific NQTLs that should be subject to the reporting 
requirements, the structure and content of the standard reporting forms and data, and 
additional options for corrective actions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1074/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 684 (Senator Augustine) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7