START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1082 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1082 
(Delegates Smith and Toles) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Blueprint for Maryland's Future Implementation - Funding for Implementation 
Coordinators 
 
 
This bill requires each county board of education to provide $150,000 for the salary and 
benefits of the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint) implementation coordinator 
jointly appointed by the county government (including Baltimore City) and the local school 
system. The State and county governments must pay for coordinator salaries in the same 
proportion as the foundation program. The requirement to appoint an implementation 
coordinator for each county, which currently terminates after fiscal 2026, is extended 
indefinitely. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  State expenditures increase by $1.8 million annually, beginning with 
discretionary funding in FY 2025. However, the State budget provides $2.0 million in 
FY 2025 for implementation coordinators. The Accountability and Implementation Board 
(AIB) can administer the required salary grants with existing resources. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
1.82 
1.81 
SF Expenditure 
1.84 
1.82 
1.81 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($1.84) 
($1.82) 
($1.81) 
($1.82) 
($1.81)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems receive $1.8 million in additional State funding each 
year beginning in FY 2025, including FY 2025 funds provided in the State budget. Local 
school system expenditures increase by $3.6 million annually beginning in FY 2027. 
County government expenditures are not directly affected. This bill imposes a mandate 
on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1082/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future and Implementation Coordinators 
 
The Blueprint legislation, including Chapter 771 of 2019; Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021; and 
Chapter 33 of 2022 established new programs and updated education funding formulas, 
and among other provisions, includes mechanisms for holding units of State and local 
government accountable for implementing the Blueprint. Most State education aid 
formulas include wealth equalization across counties, compensating for differences in local 
wealth by providing less aid per pupil to the more wealthy counties and more aid per pupil 
to the less wealthy counties. Although on the whole most State aid formulas are designed 
to have the State pay roughly one-half of program costs, the State’s share for the less 
wealthy counties is higher than 50%, and the State’s share for more wealthy counties is 
lower than 50%. 
 
State and local government units responsible for implementing an element of the Blueprint 
must develop implementation plans consistent with a specified Comprehensive 
Implementation Plan that describe the goals, objectives, and strategies that will be used to 
improve student achievement and meet the Blueprint recommendations for each segment 
of the student population. For each of fiscal 2022 through 2026, each county government 
and the local school system must jointly appoint a single implementation coordinator 
responsible for the implementation of the Blueprint by all government units operating in 
the county. While Blueprint legislation provides substantial increases to public school 
funding in the State, State funding of the coordinator position is not mandated or specified. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share 
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of the maintenance of effort 
(MOE) requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The 
per-pupil MOE amount is based upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent 
(FTE) enrollment and (2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. The local 
share amount equals the local share of the foundation formula, compensatory education, 
English language learner, special education, comparable wage index (CWI), 
full-day prekindergarten, college and career ready, transitional supplemental instruction 
(through fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from 
the compensatory education State funding floor are required to fund the local share of the 
concentration of poverty grant programs. However, for some counties, the combined local 
share across these several programs is subject to adjustments described below. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1082/ Page 3 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several existing and new funding formula programs. The law also 
includes a mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund 
each year. This involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by 
dividing the county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An 
“education effort index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average 
education effort” is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for 
each county, which is the county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education 
effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid) is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or 
(3) at least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased 
up from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. 
State relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education 
effort adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per-pupil MOE is met 
each year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the Guaranteed Tax 
Base (GTB) program, the local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except 
that for Baltimore City only the amount above $10 million may be reduced from the local 
share; (2) if a county receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% 
for the foundation and 40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at 
least 0.13, the local share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, 
the local share may not be reduced below the required per-pupil MOE amount. 
 
State Expenditures:  State expenditures increase by $1.8 million annually beginning with 
discretionary funding in fiscal 2025. However, the fiscal 2025 State budget as passed 
includes $2.0 million in special funds from the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
(BMFF) for provisions of this bill. Exhibit 1 shows by county the expected State and local 
shares of the $150,000 for each local Blueprint coordinator, to be provided to each local 
board in fiscal 2025, based on the State and local share proportions under the foundation 
program. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1082/ Page 4 
BMFF special fund revenues are projected to be sufficient to cover mandated annual 
increases in expenditures for the Blueprint through fiscal 2027. However, current 
projections indicate that, under current law, revenues in BMFF, including prior-year fund 
balances, will be less than the current law required increases to annual expenditures under 
the Blueprint beginning in fiscal 2028. Thus, the expenditures shown in Exhibit 1 are 
covered by BMFF special funds through fiscal 2027 but are covered by general funds 
beginning in fiscal 2028. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
State and Local Share of Blueprint Coordinator Salaries 
Fiscal 2025 
 
County 
State 
Local 
Total 
Allegany  
$108,606 
$41,394 
$150,000 
Anne Arundel  
60,981 
89,019 
150,000 
Baltimore City 
100,941 
49,059 
150,000 
Baltimore  
78,244 
71,756 
150,000 
Calvert  
63,278 
86,722 
150,000 
Caroline  
109,539 
40,461 
150,000 
Carroll  
81,222 
68,778 
150,000 
Cecil 
88,749 
61,251 
150,000 
Charles 
92,597 
57,403 
150,000 
Dorchester  
97,787 
52,213 
150,000 
Frederick  
84,927 
65,073 
150,000 
Garrett 
53,865 
96,135 
150,000 
Harford  
83,016 
66,984 
150,000 
Howard  
66,853 
83,147 
150,000 
Kent  
27,750 
122,250 
150,000 
Montgomery  
46,990 
103,010 
150,000 
Prince George’s 
88,633 
61,367 
150,000 
Queen Anne’s 
55,717 
94,283 
150,000 
St. Mary’s 
86,921 
63,079 
150,000 
Somerset 
107,642 
42,358 
150,000 
Talbot 
22,500 
127,500 
150,000 
Washington 
98,880 
51,120 
150,000 
Wicomico 
109,195 
40,805 
150,000 
Worcester 
22,500 
127,500 
150,000 
Total 
$1,837,333 
$1,762,667 
$3,600,000 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1082/ Page 5 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local boards of education each receive additional annual State 
funding for local Blueprint coordinator salaries, amounting to $1.8 million statewide. Local 
Blueprint coordinators are assumed to be either local board employees or county 
government employees. It is assumed that each local board will expend approximately 
$150,000 for local Blueprint coordinator salaries and benefits, or to the extent that local 
Blueprint coordinators are county government employees, transfer the additional State 
funds to the county government to be expended for this purpose. Depending upon current 
arrangements between local boards and county governments, local boards and/or county 
governments are relieved of some portion of the salary costs, given the availability of State 
funding. Because under current law the local Blueprint coordinator position is not required 
after fiscal 2026, local board expenditures increase by $3.6 million annually, beginning in 
fiscal 2027. Exhibit 1 shows the local government share of these costs in fiscal 2025. The 
bill does not change the overall county local effort requirement. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1196 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Budget 
and Management; Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Accountability and Implementation Board; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 14, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5