START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 855

Chapter 855

(House Bill 1053)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Nursing – Executive Director Qualifications ~~–~~ ~~Study~~

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~to~~ ~~convene~~ ~~a~~ ~~stakeholder~~
~~workgroup~~ ~~to~~ ~~study~~ altering the qualifications for the executive director of the State
Board of Nursing; and generally relating to qualifications for the executive director
of the State Board of Nursing.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 8–204(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapters 222 and 223 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the ~~Maryland~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ ~~shall~~ Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~(1)~~ ~~convene~~ ~~a~~ ~~stakeholder~~ ~~workgroup~~ ~~to~~ ~~study~~ ~~the~~ ~~qualifications~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~executive~~ ~~director~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Nursing,~~ ~~including~~ ~~by:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~discussing~~ ~~the~~ ~~functionality~~ ~~and~~ ~~effectiveness~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~examining~~ ~~qualifications~~ ~~for~~ ~~executive~~ ~~directors~~ ~~of~~ ~~other~~ ~~State~~
~~health~~ ~~occupations~~ ~~boards;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~examining~~ ~~the~~ ~~qualifications~~ ~~for~~ ~~executive~~ ~~directors~~ ~~of~~ ~~other~~ ~~state~~
~~boards~~ ~~of~~ ~~nursing;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~December~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024,~~ ~~submit~~ ~~a~~ ~~report~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Senate~~ ~~Finance~~
~~Committee~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~House~~ ~~Health~~ ~~and~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Operations~~ ~~Committee,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~
~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~workgroup’s~~ ~~findings~~ ~~and~~
~~recommendations,~~ ~~if~~ ~~any,~~ ~~for~~ ~~statutory~~ ~~changes~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~qualifications~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~executive~~
~~director~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Nursing.~~

Article – Health Occupations

8–204.

(d) The Board may:

(1) Employ a staff in accordance with the State budget;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 855 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Define the duties of its staff; and

(3) Employ:

(i) An executive director [who shall be a registered nurse with a
minimum of a master’s degree in nursing or the equivalent, in the judgment of the Board,
in professional education and administrative experience]; and

(ii) A deputy director who shall assume the duties and authority of
the executive director in the absence of the executive director.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall take
effect July 1, ~~2024~~ 2025, the termination date of Section 2 of Chapter 222 and Section 2 of
Chapter 223 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023. If the termination date of Section
2 of Chapter 222 and Section 2 of Chapter 223 is amended, Section 1 of this Act shall take
effect on the termination of Section 2 of Chapter 222 and Section 2 of Chapter 223.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to the provisions of
Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall take effect October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2