START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1089 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1089 
(Delegate Clippinger)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor License – 
Downtown Management District 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue a 
Class B beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license for use by a restaurant in ward 4, 
precincts 1 and 2, as specified. The licensee may not sell alcoholic beverages for 
off-premises consumption, except under a refillable container permit for draft beer, as 
specified. The license may not be transferred from the location of its first issuance; and if 
the license is renewed, the bill specifies renewal application requirements. The board may 
not issue a new license under the bill’s provisions after June 30, 2028, but may continue to 
renew licenses issued by June 30, 2028. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues may increase minimally beginning in FY 2025 to 
the extent the board issues additional Class B BWL licenses under the bill, as discussed 
below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that the board may issue a Class B BWL license in 
ward 4, precincts 1 and 2 to a restaurant that has (1) average daily receipts from the sale of 
food that are at least 51% of the total daily receipts of the restaurant; (2) been classified by 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1089/ Page 2 
the Baltimore City Health Department as a high priority food service facility, or a moderate 
priority food service facility; and (3) executed a memorandum of understanding with the 
Downtown Partnership of Baltimore. 
 
If a license is renewed, the licensee must file with the board as part of its renewal 
application:  (1) a statement detailing the average daily receipts from the restaurant; (2) an 
affidavit from a certified public accountant verifying that the licensee meets the 
requirement of having average daily receipts from the sale of food that are at least 51% of 
total daily receipts of the restaurant; and (3) any other information that the board requires. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
A Class B BWL license authorizes the holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at a hotel or 
restaurant for on- or off-premises consumption. Annual license fees are $1,320 for a 
licensed premises with a seating capacity of up to 200 and $1,800 for a licensed premises 
with a seating capacity of more than 200. A license holder must annually pay an additional 
$500 fee to provide live entertainment and/or a $200 fee to provide outdoor table service. 
 
Refillable Container Permit for Draft Beer 
 
The board may issue a refillable container permit for draft beer to any class of license 
except a Class C license or a Class M-G license. The hours of sale for the permit begin at 
the same time as those for the underlying license, and end at midnight. Receipt collected 
under the permit are included in the calculation of average daily receipts, as specified. The 
annual permit fee is $50 for an applicant holding an underlying license with an off-sale 
privilege, or up to $500 for an applicant holding an underlying license without an off-sale 
privilege. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the board issues a Class B BWL license under the bill, 
revenues increase by $1,920 to $2,400 at the time of application in fiscal 2025, and 
$1,370 to $1,850 annually thereafter. The estimate reflects an initial $600 application fee, 
the annual license fee of $1,320 or $1,800, depending upon the seating capacity of the 
licensed premises, and a subsequent $50 renewal fee for each license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1089/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 904 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3