START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1051 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1051 
(Delegate White Holland, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maternal Health – Assessments, Referrals, and Reporting (Maryland Maternal 
Health Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill codifies the current requirement that a provider who receives reimbursement from 
Medicaid for obstetric services complete a “prenatal risk assessment form” for a patient 
and submit the form to the local health department (LHD). A “birthing facility” where an 
infant is born must complete a postpartum infant and maternal referral form; submit the 
form to the LHD; and provide the birthing parent with specified resources, information, 
and follow-up. Each birthing facility must also participate in the Severe Maternal 
Morbidity (SMM) Surveillance and Review Program. The Secretary of Health must 
develop a Maryland Report Card for Birthing Facility Maternity Care for each birthing 
facility in the State. The SMM Surveillance and Review Program must report specified 
findings and recommendations to the General Assembly by December 1, 2025. The bill 
generally takes effect July 1, 2025; provisions regarding participation in the SMM 
Surveillance and Review Program take effect October 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) can implement the bill’s 
requirements using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  LHDs can likely collect specified information from birthing facilities with 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1051/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Prenatal Risk Assessment 
 
“Prenatal risk assessment form” means a standardized form developed by MDH in 
accordance with Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services guidelines for use by a 
licensed health care provider to evaluate risk factors for the health of a pregnant patient. 
 
A provider who receives reimbursement from Medicaid for obstetric services must 
complete a prenatal risk assessment form for the patient during the initial visit of the 
patient’s pregnancy. After completing a prenatal risk assessment form, the provider must 
submit the form to the LHD for the county in which the patient resides. MDH must 
establish a process for a provider to submit a prenatal risk assessment form electronically. 
 
By October 1 each year, each LHD must submit a report to MDH that includes the number 
and type of referrals made to patients based on the information from the prenatal risk 
assessment form. 
 
High-risk Pregnancy Requirements at Delivery 
 
If a newborn is delivered in a hospital or a freestanding birthing center following a high-risk 
pregnancy, the hospital or freestanding birther center must (1) complete a postpartum infant 
and maternal referral form and submit the form to the LHD for the county in which the 
birthing parent resides; (2) provide birthing parent resources and information specific to 
their circumstances, including information regarding the risks, signs, preventative 
measures, and treatment needs for postpartum complications, including cardiovascular 
conditions, chronic disease, substance misuse, and mental health conditions; and (3) call 
the birthing parent at least 24 hours, but not longer than 48 hours, after discharging the 
parent to evaluate the parent’s status and, as necessary, provide information about 
postpartum complications. 
 
By October 1 each year, each LHD must submit to MDH a report that includes the number 
and type of referrals made based on the postpartum infant and maternal referral forms 
submitted to the LHD. 
 
Maryland Report Card for Birthing Facility Maternity Care 
 
“Birthing facility” means a freestanding birthing center or a hospital that provides obstetric 
care. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1051/ Page 3 
The Secretary of Health, in collaboration with the Maryland Health Care Commission, 
must develop a Maryland Report Card for Birthing Facility Maternity Care and collect the 
necessary information to complete an annual report card for each birthing facility in the 
State. The report card must include the following information for each birthing facility, 
disaggregated by race and age in accordance with best practices for data suppression:   
 
 
the number and rate of vaginal deliveries performed; 
 
the number and rate of cesarean deliveries performed; 
 
the age-adjusted rate of complications and the total number of complications 
experienced by a patient receiving obstetric care for (1) a vaginal delivery at the 
birthing facility, including maternal hemorrhage, laceration, infection, or any other 
complication as required by the Secretary or (2) a cesarean delivery at the birthing 
facility, including maternal hemorrhage, infection, operative complication, or any 
other complication as required by the Secretary; and 
 
qualitative measures based on patient input regarding the patient’s receipt of 
respectful obstetric care. 
 
The report card score must be balanced for the risks associated with the level of acuity care 
provided for obstetric patients served by the birthing facility. 
 
MDH must include the most recent report card for each birthing facility on the 
department’s website. At least once every three years, the Secretary must review the criteria 
evaluated in the report card and revise the complications or other factors to be included in 
the report card. The Secretary must consider expert guidance when reviewing the criteria 
evaluated in the report card. 
 
Required Report 
 
Uncodified language requires each birthing facility to participate in the SMM Surveillance 
and Review Program to (1) identify the contextual drivers, risk factors, and causes of 
SMM; (2) study quality improvement efforts of birthing facilities regarding SMM based 
on the reviews; and (3) make recommendations to reduce the prevalence of SMM in the 
State. By December 1, 2025, the SMM Surveillance and Review Program must report the 
findings and recommendations of the study to the General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Medicaid Coverage 
 
Maryland Medicaid covers pregnant women with incomes up to 138% of the 
federal poverty level (FPL). Pregnant women with incomes between 138% and 264% FPL 
may also qualify based on their pregnancy under the Sixth Omnibus Budget Reconciliation 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1051/ Page 4 
Act of 1986 category. Effective July 1, 2023, Medicaid provides coverage to noncitizen 
pregnant women who would be eligible for Medicaid but for their immigration status. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.67.04.08), a Medicaid managed care 
organization must ensure access to prenatal care for pregnant women and postpartum care 
for postpartum women by (1) scheduling an appointment for the first prenatal visit and 
seeing the woman within 10 days of request; (2) scheduling an appointment for a 
postpartum woman and seeing the woman within 10 days of request; (3) arranging for an 
adequate network of providers including obstetricians, gynecologists, perinatologists, 
neonatologists, anesthesiologists, and advanced practice nurses who are capable of 
addressing complex maternal and infant health issues; and (4) linking a pregnant woman 
with a pediatric provider before delivery. 
 
Prenatal providers must (1) complete a prenatal risk assessment at the first prenatal visit 
and (2) within 10 days of completing the prenatal risk assessment, forward this assessment 
to the LHD in the jurisdiction in which the pregnant enrollee lives. Medicaid currently 
reimburses providers for this assessment at a rate of $40. In calendar 2022, Medicaid 
provided reimbursement for 32,189 births. 
 
Maryland Maternal Mortality Review Program 
 
Chapter 74 of 2000 established Maryland’s Maternal Mortality Review Program to 
(1) identify maternal death cases; (2) review medical records and other relevant data; 
(3) determine preventability of death; (4) develop recommendations for the prevention of 
maternal deaths; and (5) disseminate findings and recommendations. Maternal mortality 
reviews are conducted by a committee of clinical experts, the Maternal Mortality Review 
Committee. The program must submit an annual report on findings, recommendations, and 
program actions to the Governor and the General Assembly. The most recent report was 
submitted in November 2021. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that there are currently no freestanding birthing 
centers in the State. 
 
The Maryland Maternal Health Innovation (MDMOM) Program is a collaboration between 
Johns Hopkins University, MDH, and the Maryland Patient Safety Center, aimed to 
improve maternal health across the State by coordinating innovation in the areas of 
maternal health data, hospital and home visiting, training, and resource availability. In 
July 2020, MDMOM launched a hospital-based pilot program in six birthing hospitals in 
the State to test processes for SMM surveillance and review in the State. According to 
MDMOM, 20 of the 32 birthing hospitals in Maryland voluntarily participate in SMM 
surveillance and review. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1051/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1059 (Senator Ellis) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5