START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1097 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1097 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners - Veterinary Technicians and 
Veterinary Assistants 
 
 
This bill authorizes (1) a “veterinary assistant” to perform specified duties under the “direct 
supervision” or “immediate supervision” of a veterinary practitioner or veterinary 
technician, as specified and (2) a “veterinary technician” to perform specified duties under 
the direct supervision or “indirect supervision” of a veterinary practitioner, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by an estimated $2,700 in FY 2025 through 
2027 and by an estimated $5,400 annually thereafter due to an anticipated increase in 
registered veterinary technicians. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$2,700 
$2,700 
$2,700 
$5,400 
$5,400 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$2,700 
$2,700 
$2,700 
$5,400 
$5,400  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1097/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Definitions 
 
The definition of “direct supervision” is altered to mean that the supervising veterinarian 
who is licensed and registered in the State (1) is on the premises of the animal treatment 
facility; (2) is available on an immediate basis; and (3) has given written or oral instructions 
for treatment of the animal patients involved. “Immediate supervision” means the 
supervising veterinarian who is licensed and registered in the State is in the immediate area 
and within audible and visual range of the animal patient and the person treating the patient. 
“Indirect supervision” means the supervising veterinarian who is licensed and registered in 
the State is not required to be in the same facility or in close proximity to the individual 
being supervised and (1) has given written or oral instructions for treatment of the animal 
patient involved; (2) is available to provide supervision by electronic or telephonic means; 
and (3) has arranged for telephonic consultation with a licensed veterinarian, if necessary.  
 
The definition of “veterinary technician” is altered to include a veterinary nurse. 
“Veterinary assistant” means a person who aids a veterinarian or veterinary technician in 
patient care and is not registered with the board as a veterinary technician.  
 
Veterinary Assistant and Veterinary Technician Duties 
 
The following tasks may be performed by (1) a veterinary technician under the indirect 
supervision of a veterinary practitioner, if the veterinary practitioner determines the 
veterinary technician is qualified to perform the procedure or (2) a veterinary assistant 
under the direct supervision of a veterinary practitioner or veterinary technician that is 
under the direct supervision of a veterinary practitioner:  
 
 
obtaining and monitoring vitals on a nonanesthetized patient; 
 
radiographs; 
 
dental prophylaxis; 
 
nail trims; 
 
educating on basic topics; 
 
administering medications; 
 
husbandry; 
 
collecting blood, urine, and fecal samples; 
 
aseptic techniques; 
 
setup for surgery and other procedures; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1097/ Page 3 
 
low-stress handling and restraint; 
 
microchip insertion; and 
 
any other skill that is noninvasive, as defined by the State Board of Medical 
Veterinary Examiners (SBMVE) and within the veterinary assistant’s skills as 
determined by the supervising veterinary practitioner. 
 
A veterinary assistant may perform the following tasks under the immediate supervision of 
a veterinary practitioner or veterinary technician:  (1) set-up of anesthesia; and 
(2) anesthesia monitoring. 
 
A veterinary technician may also perform the following procedures under the direct 
supervision of a veterinary practitioner: 
 
 
inducing anesthesia by intramuscular injection, inhalation, or intravenous injection; 
 
simple dental extractions of loose teeth that do not involve flaps or tooth sectioning;  
 
basic suturing skills, as specified; 
 
accessing a small working stock of Schedule II Drugs under separate lock and filling 
prescriptions; 
 
cytology;  
 
administering vaccines, excluding rabies vaccines unless otherwise authorized by 
law; 
 
phlebotomy, blood typing, and monitoring blood product transfusion;  
 
urinary and intravenous catheter care; 
 
cystocentesis; 
 
gastric and tracheal intubation; 
 
medication and fluid therapy calculations; 
 
basic life support in cardiopulmonary resuscitation; 
 
ophthalmological testing;  
 
fine needle aspirates; and  
 
any other procedure authorized by regulations adopted by SBVME.  
 
A veterinary technician may not (1) make any diagnosis or prognosis; (2) prescribe any 
treatments, drugs, medications, or appliances; or (3) perform surgery. Under emergency 
conditions only, a veterinary technician may perform the following procedures before a 
veterinary practitioner’s initial examination of an animal:  (1) life support care, including 
basic and advanced cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and (2) any other procedure authorized 
by regulations adopted by SBVME. 
 
At the discretion of the veterinary practitioner, a veterinary technician employed at an 
animal emergency hospital, as defined in regulations adopted by SBVME, may perform 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1097/ Page 4 
euthanasia on an animal if the animal is unable to be saved by supportive care, first aid, or 
life support measures. A veterinary technician who works in or for an animal shelter may 
perform euthanasia on an animal at the animal shelter. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Regulation of the Practice of Veterinary Medicine 
 
State law prohibits a person from practicing veterinary medicine unless the person is 
licensed, registered, and authorized to engage in the practice under provisions of State law 
that regulate the practice of veterinary medicine. “Veterinary practitioner” means a 
licensed and registered veterinarian engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine.  
 
The “practice of veterinary medicine” is defined in detail in State law, and there are certain 
circumstances that are excluded from the definition of “practice of veterinary medicine,” 
in which a person is not required to be licensed and registered to practice veterinary 
medicine in the State in order to perform certain functions, including (1) any nurse, 
attendant, technician, intern, or other employee of a licensed and registered veterinarian 
when administering medication or rendering auxiliary or supporting assistance under the 
responsible direct supervision of a licensed and registered veterinarian; (2) a registered 
veterinary technician when performing a procedure under the responsible direct 
supervision of a veterinary practitioner as provided by regulations adopted by the board; 
and (3) a student of veterinary medicine practicing veterinary medicine who has 
successfully completed three years of veterinary education at an institution approved by 
SBVME and who works under the responsible direct supervision of a veterinary 
practitioner.  
 
“Direct supervision” means that a veterinarian licensed and registered in the State is in the 
immediate vicinity where veterinary medicine is being performed and is actively engaged 
in the supervision of the practice of veterinary medicine.  
 
Registration of Veterinary Technicians  
 
“Veterinary technician” means a person who is registered with SBVME as a veterinary 
technician. A veterinary technician may, but is not required to, register with SBMVE. To 
apply for registration, an applicant must submit an application and pay an application fee. 
SBMVE must register any applicant who (1) meets the board’s educational requirements; 
(2) passes a board-approved examination; (3) is of good moral character; (4) is at least 
age 18; and (5) otherwise meets the statutory requirements related to registered veterinary 
technicians. A registration is valid for three years, after which SBMVE may renew the 
registration for an additional three-year term if the applicant (1) submits a renewal 
application; (2) pays a renewal fee; (3) complies with the board’s continuing education 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1097/ Page 5 
requirements; and (4) is otherwise entitled to be registered. SBMVE may refuse to register 
an applicant, suspend or revoke the registration, or reprimand and censure, or place on 
probation any veterinary technician for specified reasons and in accordance with specified 
hearing provisions.   
 
Registered Veterinary Technician Duties 
 
Under current regulations, a registered veterinary technician may perform the following 
procedures under the responsible direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian: 
 
 
inducing anesthesia by intramuscular injection; 
 
applying casts and splints 
 
simple dental extractions of loose teeth that do not involved flaps or tooth 
sectioning; 
 
suturing of existing surgical skin or gingival incisions; and 
 
accessing a small working stock of Schedule II drugs under separate lock. 
 
A registered veterinary technician may also perform anesthetic induction by inhalation or 
intravenous injection if the veterinarian is able to maintain direct visual supervision of the 
technician’s performance. In addition, a registered veterinary technician may administer 
medication and render other auxiliary or supporting assistance not otherwise specified 
under the responsible direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian.   
 
Under emergency conditions only, and before a veterinarian’s initial examination of an 
animal, a registered veterinary technician may provide supportive care and first aid and 
follow written protocols for specific conditions, as established by the veterinarian. If a 
veterinarian is unavailable to perform an initial examination of an animal that is presented 
as an emergency, a registered veterinary technician must notify the animal’s owner of the 
veterinarian’s unavailability, the veterinarian’s estimated time of arrival, and the estimated 
distance to another veterinary hospital.  
 
A registered veterinary technician may not (1) diagnose; (2) offer prognosis; (3) prescribe 
drugs, medication, or appliances; (4) perform surgery; or (5) initiate treatment without prior 
instruction by a veterinarian.   
 
State Revenues:  As of March 2024, there are 807 veterinary technicians registered in the 
State. SBVME advises that additional veterinary technicians are likely to register with the 
board under the bill as a result of the clarification and expansion of duties that a registered 
veterinary technician may perform under specified circumstances. Specifically, SBVME 
anticipates that approximately 27 additional veterinary technicians will register with the 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1097/ Page 6 
board each year due to the bill’s changes. Pursuant to current regulations, the application 
fee for a veterinary technician is $100, and the triennial registration fee is $100. 
 
Accordingly, special fund revenues to the State Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners 
Fund increase by an estimated $2,700 annually in fiscal 2025 through 2027 and by an 
estimated $5,400 annually thereafter, reflecting additional application and triennial 
registration fees. To the extent the actual number of additional veterinary technicians that 
register with the board (and renew their registration every three years) varies from the 
above estimate, the increase in special fund revenues varies accordingly. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, and Garrett counties; cities of 
Greenbelt, Hagerstown, and Laurel; Town of La Plata; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 1, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6