START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 443

Chapter 443

(House Bill 1069)

AN ACT concerning

~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~–~~ ~~Commission~~ Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard
of Hearing – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the ~~Commission~~ Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and
Hard of Hearing ~~as~~ ~~an~~ ~~independent~~ ~~unit~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~government~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~and~~ ~~advocate~~
~~for~~ ~~accessible~~ ~~and~~ ~~comprehensive~~ ~~services,~~ ~~and~~ ~~foster~~ ~~inclusivity,~~ ~~equal~~
~~opportunities,~~ ~~and~~ ~~improved~~ ~~quality~~ ~~of~~ ~~life,~~ ~~for~~ to study and make recommendations
regarding certain services, programs, advocacy, outreach efforts, and other items to
improve the quality of life of individuals who are deaf, deafblind, or hard of hearing;
and generally relating to the ~~Commission~~ Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and
Hard of Hearing.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~
~~Section~~ ~~9–3801~~ ~~through~~ ~~9–3806~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~new~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~“Subtitle~~ ~~38.~~
~~Commission~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Deaf,~~ ~~Deafblind,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Hard~~ ~~of~~ ~~Hearing”~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That ~~the~~ ~~Laws~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~read~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Government~~

SUBTITLE 38. COMMISSION FOR THE DEAF, DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING.

~~9–3801.~~

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(B) “COMMISSION” MEANS THE COMMISSION FOR THE DEAF, DEAFBLIND,
AND HARD OF HEARING.

(C) (1) “DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS” MEANS
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE RESIDENTS OF THE STATE WHO HAVE PARTIAL OR
COMPLETE LOSS OF HEARING.

(2) “DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS” INCLUDES
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 443 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(I)~~ ~~DEAF;~~

~~(II)~~ ~~DEAFBLIND;~~

(III) HARD OF HEARING; AND

~~(IV)~~ ~~LATE–DEAFENED.~~

(D) “DEAF COMMUNITY” MEANS A CULTURAL MINORITY WITH DISTINCT
MODES OF VISUAL OR TACTILE COMMUNICATION, LANGUAGES, OR SOCIAL MORES.

(E) “DEAF INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WITH SEVERE, PROFOUND,
OR COMPLETE ABSENCE OF LEVELS OF RESIDUAL HEARING, WHERE THE PRIMARY
EFFECTIVE RECEPTIVE COMMUNICATION OR LANGUAGE MODE IS VISUAL, TACTILE,
OR BOTH.

(F) “DEAFBLIND INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO HAS A
CONCOMITANT ABSENCE OF OR LIMITED LEVEL OF VISION AND HEARING.

(G) “HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WITH A
~~LIMITED~~ ~~RESIDUAL~~ ~~HEARING~~ ~~LEVEL~~ ~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~HEARING~~ ~~LOSS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~AN~~ ~~INDIVIDUAL~~ ~~THAT~~
RESULTS IN A FUNCTIONAL HEARING LOSS, BUT NOT TO THE EXTENT THAT THE
INDIVIDUAL MUST DEPEND PRIMARILY ON VISUAL COMMUNICATION.

(H) “LATE–DEAFENED INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHOSE ONSET
~~OF~~ ~~HEARING~~ ~~LOSS~~ ~~OCCURS~~ ~~AFTER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~SPEECH~~ ~~AND~~ ~~LANGUAGE~~
~~AND~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~DEPENDENT~~ ~~ON~~ ~~VISUAL~~ ~~OR~~ ~~AUDITORY~~ ~~ENHANCEMENT~~ ~~MODES~~ ~~FOR~~
~~COMMUNICATION.~~

~~9–3802.~~

(A) THERE IS A COMMISSION FOR THE DEAF, DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF
~~HEARING.~~

(B) THE COMMISSION IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO PROVIDE AND ADVOCATE FOR
ACCESSIBLE AND COMPREHENSIVE SERVICES, AND TO FOSTER INCLUSIVITY, EQUAL
OPPORTUNITIES, AND IMPROVED QUALITY OF LIFE, FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE
DEAF, DEAFBLIND, OR HARD OF HEARING.

~~9–3803.~~

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 443

(A) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF:

(1) 1 MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) 1 MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE; AND

(3) 10 COMMUNITY REPRESENTATIVES OF STATE OR LOCAL
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS FOR DEAF INDIVIDUALS IN THE STATE OR THE
WASHINGTON, D.C. METROPOLITAN AREA, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR.

(B) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, WHEN APPOINTING MEMBERS TO THE
COMMISSION, THE GOVERNOR SHALL ENSURE GEOGRAPHIC BALANCE AND
PROMOTE RACIAL AND GENDER DIVERSITY IN THE COMMISSION’S MEMBERSHIP.

(C) EACH MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE A RESIDENT OF THE
~~STATE.~~

(D) BEFORE SERVING ON THE COMMISSION, EACH MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION SHALL TAKE THE OATH REQUIRED BY ARTICLE I, § 9 OF THE
~~MARYLAND~~ ~~CONSTITUTION.~~

(E) (1) THE TERM OF A MEMBER IS 2 YEARS.

(2) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(3) A MEMBER MAY NOT SERVE FOR MORE THAN THREE
CONSECUTIVE FULL TERMS.

(F) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(G) THE COMMISSION SHALL MEET AT LEAST SIX TIMES A YEAR, AT THE
TIMES AND PLACES THAT IT DETERMINES.

~~9–3804.~~

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 443 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THE HEAD OF THE COMMISSION IS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL BE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR
WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL BE:

(1) A DEAF OR HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUAL; AND

(2) KNOWLEDGEABLE AND EXPERIENCED WITH ISSUES AFFECTING
DEAF, DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS.

~~(D)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXECUTIVE~~ ~~DIRECTOR~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) MANAGE THE OPERATION OF THE COMMISSION; AND

(2) ESTABLISH GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES TO PROMOTE THE
ORDERLY AND EFFICIENT OPERATION OF THE COMMISSION.

(E) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR IS ENTITLED TO:

(1) COMPENSATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET; AND

(2) REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE STANDARD STATE
TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(F) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY HIRE ANY STAFF NECESSARY TO
CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~9–3805.~~

~~(A)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMMISSION~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) PROVIDE DIRECT AND SPECIALIZED CASE MANAGEMENT
SERVICES FOR DEAF, DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS;

(2) DEVELOP AND ADMINISTER PROGRAMS THAT SUPPORT
EDUCATIONAL, EMPLOYMENT, HEALTH, AND SOCIAL OPPORTUNITIES FOR DEAF,
DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS;

(3) ADVOCATE FOR POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND LEGISLATIVE
INITIATIVES THAT ADDRESS THE NEEDS OF, AND ISSUES AFFECTING, DEAF,
DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 443

(4) RAISE PUBLIC AWARENESS AND FOSTER UNDERSTANDING OF THE
CHALLENGES ENCOUNTERED BY THE DEAF COMMUNITY;

(5) COORDINATE WITH OTHER STATE AGENCIES AND OTHERWISE USE
THE RESOURCES OF THE STATE TO PROVIDE SPECIALIZED CASE MANAGEMENT
SERVICES TO MEET THE NEEDS OF DEAF, DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING
~~INDIVIDUALS;~~

(6) IDENTIFY BARRIERS AND GAPS IN COMMUNICATION ACCESS AND
~~DEVELOP~~ ~~SOLUTIONS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~IMPROVE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~QUALITY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~LIFE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEAF~~
~~COMMUNITY;~~

(7) ENCOURAGE THE DEVELOPMENT OF ACTIVITIES TO ENHANCE
CIVIC ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN DEAF, DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING
INDIVIDUALS AND THE COMMUNITY; AND

(8) ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

(B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, AND EACH JULY 1 THEREAFTER, THE
COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, A REPORT ON THE
COMMISSION THAT INCLUDES:

(1) DATA RELATED TO THE SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE
COMMISSION; AND

(2) ANY OTHER POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS THAT THE COMMISSION
CONSIDERS NECESSARY TO ADDRESS ACCESSIBILITY OF SERVICES FOR DEAF,
DEAFBLIND, AND HARD OF HEARING INDIVIDUALS.

~~9–3806.~~

(A) (1) THE COMMISSION MAY SEEK MONEY FROM THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT, FOUNDATIONS, AND PRIVATE SOURCES, IN ADDITION TO STATE
~~FINANCING.~~

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY ACCEPT GIFTS, GRANTS, DONATIONS,
BEQUESTS, OR ENDOWMENTS FOR ANY OF ITS PURPOSES.

(B) MONEY RECEIVED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AND
INCOME AND FEES DERIVED FROM ACTIVITIES OF THE COMMISSION ARE NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 443 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) MONEY MAINTAINED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER THIS SECTION IS
SUBJECT TO AUDIT BY THE STATE, INCLUDING THE LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR.

(a) There is a Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing.

(b) (1) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(i) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the
President of the Senate;

(ii) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker
of the House;

(iii) the Director of the Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing, or the
Director’s designee; and

(iv) 10 community representatives of State or local nonprofit
organizations for deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals in the State or the
Washington, D.C. metropolitan area, appointed by the Governor.

(2) To the extent practicable, when appointing members to the Workgroup,
the Governor shall ensure geographic balance and promote racial and gender diversity in
the Workgroup’s membership.

(c) The members of the Workgroup shall elect a chair from among the members
of the Workgroup.

(d) The Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing shall provide staff for the
Workgroup.

(e) The Workgroup shall:

(1) establish subcommittees as necessary to fulfill its duties; and

(2) assign members as necessary to assist in the research and preparation
of the report submitted under subsection (h) of this section.

(f) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(g) The Workgroup shall study, assess, and make recommendations regarding:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 443

(1) providing direct and specialized case management services for deaf,
deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals;

(2) the development and administration of programs that support
educational, employment, health, and social opportunities for deaf, deafblind, and hard of
hearing individuals;

(3) advocacy for policies, programs, and legislative initiatives that address
the needs of and issues affecting deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals;

(4) outreach efforts to raise public awareness and foster understanding of
the challenges encountered by deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals;

(5) coordination with State agencies and utilization of State resources to
provide specialized case management services to meet the needs of deaf, deafblind, and
hard of hearing individuals;

(6) identification of barriers and gaps in communication access and
development of solutions to improve the quality of life of deaf, deafblind, and hard of
hearing individuals; and

(7) development of activities to enhance civic engagement between deaf,
deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals and the community.

(h) On or before June 1, 2025, the Workgroup shall submit a report of its findings
and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of June
30, 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7