START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1028 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1028 
(Delegate Allen) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Workgroup 
 
 
This bill establishes the Electric Vehicle (EV) Supply Equipment Workgroup to 
(1) develop a framework for reliability and reporting standards for EV charging stations; 
(2) study and make recommendations regarding which government entities have 
responsibility for ensuring accountability regarding EV charging stations; and (3) make 
recommendations regarding adopting and implementing regulations, as specified. The 
Public Service Commission (PSC) must provide staff for the workgroup. By 
November 1, 2024, the workgroup must report its framework and recommendations to the 
Senate Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee and the House Economic 
Matters Committee. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can staff the workgroup with existing budgeted resources. Expense 
reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within 
existing budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “EV supply equipment” means a unit that controls the power supply to 
one or more electric vehicles at an EV charging station. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1028/ Page 2 
Regulations recommended by the workgroup may: 
 
 
establish different payment options for the retail use of EV supply equipment and 
options for customers with disabilities and non-English speaking customers; 
 
prohibit an EV service provider from requiring a subscription or membership to 
initiate a charging session, but authorize an EV service provider to offer services on 
a subscription or membership basis; 
 
establish requirements for transparent information regarding EV charging stations, 
including charging rates, location, accessibility, and real-time availability; 
 
establish employee training or certification requirements for individuals who install 
or perform maintenance on EV supply equipment; 
 
establish minimum power output limits for EV supply equipment and EV charging 
stations; 
 
establish registration and certification requirements; 
 
require the submission of reports on EV supply equipment, as specified; 
 
require an uptime of 97%, specify how uptime will be measured and, if determined 
appropriate, establish exemptions; 
 
establish customer support requirements, as specified; 
 
establish minimum hours of operation for EV charging stations; 
 
require proactive monitoring of EV supply equipment and EV charging stations; 
 
establish specified standards for joint-use EV charging stations; and 
 
establish civil penalties for noncompliance with the regulations. 
 
The recommendations must (1) give deference to the Federal Highway Administration’s 
National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Formula Program; (2) provide a delayed 
applicability date for EV supply equipment installed before the date the regulations are 
initially adopted; and (3) exclude regulations that apply to EV supply equipment that is 
used for noncommercial purposes and EV supply equipment that supplies wholesale 
electricity. 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Zero Emission Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Council 
(ZEEVIC) is charged with formulating an action plan to successfully integrate EVs into 
the State’s transportation network, among other duties. The ZEEVIC 2023 Annual Report 
is available here. 
 
Chapter 569 of 2023 requires an electric company (utility) that installs or maintains 
EV charging stations for public use or that participates in the EV Pilot Program (established 
by PSC in 2019) to maintain uptime standards for each EV charging station in accordance 
with specified federal or State standards and requirements. The federal regulations require 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1028/ Page 3 
an average annual uptime for certain publicly accessible federally funded EV chargers of 
more than 97%. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 951 (Senator Hettleman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Public Service Commission; Maryland 
Department of Transportation; Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland Department of 
Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3