START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1078 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1078 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Remote Ultrasound Procedures and 
Remote Fetal Nonstress Tests 
 
 
This bill requires Medicaid to provide remote ultrasound procedures and remote fetal 
nonstress tests using current procedural terminology (CPT) codes if (1) the patient is in a 
residence or a location other than the office of the patient’s provider and (2) the provider 
follows the same standard of care that the provider would follow when providing services 
on site. Medicaid must provide reimbursement for a remote fetal nonstress test in the same 
manner as an on-site fetal nonstress test. A remote fetal nonstress test must require the use 
of remote monitoring solutions that are cleared by the federal Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for on-label use for monitoring fetal heart rate, maternal heart rate, 
and uterine activity. Medicaid must issue guidance for providers to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) assumes that the target 
population for remote ultrasound procedures and fetal nonstress tests is accessing care as 
needed under current law, as discussed below. To the extent that a remote option decreases 
missed appointments and increases utilization of services, Medicaid expenditures (59.2% 
federal funds, 40.8% general funds) increase by a minimal amount beginning in FY 2025. 
Federal fund revenues increase accordingly. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1078/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Medicaid must require that a provider offering a remote ultrasound 
procedure or remote fetal nonstress test use digital technology:  
 
 
to collect any health data from the patient and electronically transmit the 
information in a secure manner to a health care provider in a different location for 
interpretation and recommendations;  
 
that is compliant with the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act; and  
 
that is FDA approved. 
 
Current Law:  Medicaid currently covers synchronous telehealth services. Per 
Chapter 382 of 2023, telehealth flexibilities will continue through at least June 30, 2025. 
Medicaid provides coverage for health care services delivered through telehealth regardless 
of the participant’s location at the time services are rendered and allows a distant-site 
provider to provide services to a participant from any location at which the services may 
be delivered through telehealth. Reimbursement for a telehealth service must be made on 
the same basis and at the same rate as if the service were delivered in person. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MDH advises that these services are currently covered under 
Medicaid’s existing synchronous telehealth policy. 
 
Under the bill, as the provider must follow the same standard of care that the provider 
would follow when providing the services on site, any remote ultrasound procedure and 
remote fetal nonstress test would be conducted by a trained health care provider and not 
directly by the patient. Thus, these services would not be considered a remote patient 
monitoring service. Based on the clinical nature of these services, these procedures would 
also not be completed asynchronously or used as a part of “Store and Forward” telehealth 
services. While not specified under the bill, MDH assumes that any remote ultrasounds 
under the bill are pregnancy-related ultrasounds of the uterus. 
 
MDH assumes that the results of any testing will be interpreted by the health care 
professional receiving the results at the time of the test to ensure that, if medically 
necessary, urgent follow-up care can be received promptly. To bill for these services, 
providers will use the same CPT codes for in-person services but include coding modifiers, 
in addition to the standard radiology codes. The provider who performs the procedure will 
bill for the technical component, and the provider who interprets the results of the 
procedure will bill for the professional component. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1078/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3