START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1069 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1069 
(Delegate Kaufman, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Workgroup for the Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing to study 
and make recommendations regarding services, programs, advocacy, outreach, and other 
efforts to improve the quality of life of individuals who are deaf, deafblind, or hard of 
hearing. The Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing (ODHH) must staff the workgroup. 
Workgroup members may not receive compensation but are eligible for reimbursement 
under standard State travel regulations. By June 1, 2025, the workgroup must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  ODHH general fund expenditures increase by $67,100 in FY 2025 only to 
support the workgroup, as discussed below. The FY 2025 budget includes $10,000 in 
general funds for interpretation services to support the workgroup, contingent on enactment 
of House Bill 1069 or Senate Bill 1084 of 2024. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
67,100 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($67,100) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1069/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must study, assess, and make recommendations regarding:   
 
 
providing direct and specialized case management services for deaf, deafblind, and 
hard of hearing individuals; 
 
the development and administration of programs that support educational, 
employment, health, and social opportunities for deaf, deafblind, and hard of 
hearing individuals; 
 
advocacy for policies, programs, and legislative initiatives that address the needs of 
and issues affecting deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals; 
 
outreach efforts to raise public awareness and foster understanding of the challenges 
encountered by deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing individuals; 
 
coordination with State agencies and utilization of State resources to provide 
specialized case management services to meet the needs of deaf, deafblind, and hard 
of hearing individuals; 
 
identification of barriers and gaps in communication access and development of 
solutions to improve the quality of life of deaf, deafblind, and hard of hearing 
individuals; and 
 
development of activities to enhance civic engagement between deaf, deafblind, and 
hard of hearing individuals and the community. 
 
As necessary, the workgroup must establish subcommittees and assign members to assist 
in the research and preparation of the workgroup’s report. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Office of the Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
 
ODHH was established in 2001 to promote the general welfare of deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals in the State. ODHH must fulfill the following duties and responsibilities:   
 
 
provide, advocate, and coordinate the adoption of public policies, regulations, and 
programs that will benefit deaf and hard of hearing individuals; 
 
improve access to communication and to existing services and programs for deaf 
and hard of hearing individuals; 
 
provide direct services to deaf and hard of hearing individuals, as appropriate; 
 
increase public awareness of the needs and issues affecting deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals; 
 
work with State and local agencies to ensure access for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals to safety and emergency services; 
 
develop a referral service for deaf and hard of hearing individuals; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1069/ Page 3 
 
serve as an information clearinghouse on the needs and issues affecting deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals; 
 
increase access for deaf and hard of hearing individuals to educational, health, and 
social opportunities; 
 
work with private organizations, the federal government, and other units of State 
government to promote economic development for deaf and hard of hearing 
individuals; 
 
work to eliminate the underemployment and unemployment of deaf and hard of 
hearing individuals; 
 
provide a network through which services provided by State and federal programs 
serving deaf and hard of hearing individuals can be channeled; and 
 
promote compliance with State, local, and federal laws and policies protecting and 
serving deaf and hard of hearing individuals. 
 
Each year, the Director of ODHH must submit a report to the Governor and the 
General Assembly on (1) the activities of the office; (2) the status of programs and services 
facilitated by the office; (3) the activities of the State Board of Sign Language Interpreters, 
as specified; (4) statistics on compliance with State and federal laws related to deaf and 
hard of hearing individuals; and (5) recommendations for improved delivery of services 
for deaf and hard of hearing individuals. 
 
Maryland Advisory Council for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing 
 
Within ODHH, there is the Maryland Advisory Council for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing. 
The council, which meets at least quarterly, advises ODHH on carrying out its duties and 
reviews statewide activities that involve deaf and hard of hearing individuals. The council 
also fosters coordination and support of programs for deaf and hard of hearing individuals 
and studies ways to ensure that services and facilities are available to deaf and hard of 
hearing State residents. 
 
State Expenditures:  ODHH advises that additional resources are required to support the 
workgroup, including a part-time graduate assistant (at 10 hours per week) to staff the 
workgroup, consultant services (for outreach, program development, data gathering and 
visualization, research, and development of recommendations), and interpreter services for 
meetings. Thus, ODHH general fund expenditures increase by an estimated $67,123 in 
fiscal 2025. 
 
Graduate Assistant 
$7,123 
Consultant Services 
50,000 
Interpreter Services 
  10,000 
Total ODHH FY 2025 Expenditures 
$67,123 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1069/ Page 4 
This estimate reflects a 30-day start up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date and 
assumes that costs for the graduate assistant end May 31, 2025, as the workgroup’s report 
is due by June 1, 2025. The estimate does not reflect any expense reimbursements for the 
workgroup’s 13 members. Should submission of the report be delayed, general fund 
expenditures increase. The workgroup terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget includes a general fund appropriation of approximately 
$1.05 million for ODHH. Contingent on enactment of House Bill 1069 or Senate Bill 1084 
of 2024, the fiscal 2025 budget adds $10,000 to the ODHH appropriation for interpretation 
services necessary to support the workgroup. Funds not expended for this added purpose 
may not be transferred by budget amendment or otherwise to any other purpose and must 
revert to the general fund. This estimate reflects the full $10,000 in general funds for 
interpretation services provided in the fiscal 2025 budget as the bill satisfies the 
contingency. However, this actual cost for these services depends on the number of 
workgroup meetings held. As noted above, any unspent funds from this contingent 
appropriation revert to the general fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1084 (Senator M. Washington) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Office of the Deaf and 
Hard of Hearing; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4