START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 657

Chapter 657

(House Bill 1013)

AN ACT concerning

State Employees – Paid Sick Leave – Certificate of Illness or Disability Signed
by a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor

FOR the purpose of authorizing a licensed clinical professional counselor to sign a certain
certificate when a State employee uses certain sick leave beyond a certain number
of workdays; and generally relating to paid sick leave for State employees.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 9–501(a) and 9–504(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 9–504(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

9–501.

(a) Each employee in the State Personnel Management System, except a
temporary employee, is entitled to sick leave with pay as provided in this subtitle.

9–504.

(a) An employee who uses sick leave for 5 or more consecutive workdays for
personal illness or disability or the illness or disability of a member of the employee’s
immediate family may not receive payment under this subtitle unless the employee gives
the employee’s immediate supervisor an original certificate of illness or disability.

(b) The certificate required under subsection (a) of this section shall be signed by
one of the following:

(1) a medical doctor who is authorized to practice medicine or surgery by
the state in which the doctor practices;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 657 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) if authorized to practice in a state and performing within the scope of
that authority:

(i) a chiropractor;

(ii) a clinical psychologist;

(iii) a dentist;

(iv) a licensed certified social worker – clinical;

(v) a nurse midwife;

(vi) a nurse practitioner;

(vii) an oral surgeon;

(viii) an optometrist;

(ix) a physical therapist; [or]

(x) a podiatrist; OR

(XI) A LICENSED PROFESSIONAL COUNSELOR – CLINICAL;

(3) an accredited Christian Science practitioner; or

(4) a health care provider as defined by the federal Family Medical Leave
Act.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2