START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1016 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1016 
(Frederick County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Frederick County - School Construction Master Plan Workgroup 
 
 
This bill establishes the Frederick County School Construction Master Plan Workgroup to 
make recommendations regarding the county’s educational facilities master plan. The 
Frederick County Board of Education must provide staff to the workgroup. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) can likely 
respond to requests from the workgroup as needed with existing resources. Revenues are 
not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County Public Schools can staff the workgroup with existing 
resources. Local revenues are not affected.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Based on its review of the county’s 2023 update to the Educational 
Facilities Master Plan, the workgroup must: 
 
 
comprehensively evaluate all school facility needs; 
 
explore and evaluate solutions to balance the fiscal demands of the educational 
needs of Frederck County school construction priorities; and  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1016/ Page 2 
 
consider cost saving or cost sharing opportunities for Fredrick County to fund and 
afford new school projects, maintenance for existing buildings, or renovations to 
aging schools to better meet educational needs. 
 
By December 31, 2024, the workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to: 
 
 
the Frederick County Executive; 
 
the Frederick County Council; 
 
the Frederick County Board of Education; 
 
the IAC; and 
 
the Frederick County House and Senate delegations. 
 
Current Law:  By July 1 of every year, each local school system must develop and submit 
to IAC an educational facilities master plan, which is a written plan that is approved by the 
local school board and that includes: 
 
 
educational goals, standards, and guidelines; 
 
community analysis so that the plan conforms to county and municipal 
comprehensive plans and growth management strategies; 
 
an inventory and evaluation of existing school buildings; 
 
current and projected enrollment data; 
 
analysis of future school facility needs; 
 
policies for co-location, shared use, and shared cost of existing and planned school 
facilities; 
 
policies to address school capacity needs in planned growth areas or to address 
adequate public facilities ordinance requirements; and 
 
policies addressing current and planned transportation for students, administrators, 
and teachers per school. 
 
In submitting requests for planning and funding approval to IAC, a local school board must 
demonstrate that the requests are consistent with the most recent educational facilities 
master plan.  
 
Chapter 416 of 2018 established a similar workgroup for Prince George’s County Public 
Schools. Its final report can be read here. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1016/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1152 (Frederick County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Interagency Commission on School 
Construction; Frederick County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3