START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1013 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1013 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
State Employees - Paid Sick Leave - Certificate of Illness or Disability Signed by 
a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor 
 
   
This bill authorizes a licensed clinical professional counselor (LCPC) to sign a certificate 
of illness or disability that is required under current law for an employee in the State 
Personnel Management System (SPMS) to be paid when the employee uses five or more 
consecutive workdays of sick leave for a personal illness or disability or the illness or 
disability of the employee’s immediate family. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill generally codifies existing practice. Additionally, the bill is 
procedural in nature and does not directly affect governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State employees in SPMS, except temporary employees, currently accrue 
paid sick leave at the rate of 1.5 hours for every 26 hours worked in no overtime status. 
Employees earn a maximum of 15 days, or 120 hours, of sick leave each year.        
 
SPMS employees who use sick leave for at least five consecutive workdays for personal 
illness or disability or that of an immediate family member may not receive payment unless 
the employee gives his or her immediate supervisor an original certificate of illness or 
disability. This certificate must be signed by either a medical doctor authorized to practice 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1013/ Page 2 
medicine or surgery, an accredited Christian Science practitioner, a health care provider as 
provided by the federal Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA), or one of the following if 
authorized to practice and performing within the scope of that authority:  
 
 
a chiropractor;  
 
a clinical psychologist;  
 
a dentist;  
 
a licensed certified social worker – clinical;  
 
a nurse midwife;  
 
a nurse practitioner;  
 
an oral surgeon;  
 
an optometrist;  
 
a physical therapist; or  
 
a podiatrist.  
 
The certificate of illness or disability must include a prognosis about the employee’s ability 
to return to work. 
 
Federal Family and Medical Leave Act 
 
FMLA defines a health care provider as a Doctor of Medicine or osteopathy who is 
authorized to practice medicine or surgery by the state in which the doctor practices or any 
other person determined by the Secretary of Labor to be capable of providing health care 
services. Others capable of providing health care services only include specified providers, 
which include, among others, clinical psychologists, clinical social workers, and any health 
care provider from whom an employer or employer’s group health plan’s benefits manager 
will accept certification of the existence of a serious health condition to substantiate a 
benefits claim. 
 
The Department of Budget and Management advises that the State’s health plan accepts 
certification from LCPCs if they are operating within their scope of practice for FMLA 
purposes. Thus, LCPCs meet the definition of a health care provider under FMLA and are 
eligible to certify illnesses or disabilities under SPMS’s sick leave policy. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not directly affect State employees in agencies with 
independent personnel systems, including the Maryland Department of Transportation, the 
Judiciary, and public four-year institutions of higher education. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1013/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); University 
System of Maryland; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3