START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1081 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1081 
(Delegate Phillips, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Public Safety - Automatic License Plate Readers - Captured Plate Data Storage 
and Upload 
 
   
This bill establishes that automatic license plate reader (LPR) historical data captured in 
accordance with the bill and existing law (1) is the property of the law enforcement agency; 
(2) may not be sold for any purpose by a law enforcement agency or vendor contracted by 
a law enforcement agency, as specified; (3) may not be accessed by a vendor contracted by 
a law enforcement agency unless access is expressly requested and authorized by the law 
enforcement agency; (4) may not be uploaded for any reason by the law enforcement 
agency or a vendor contracted by the law enforcement agency that stores the data to any 
other law enforcement agency or entity, regardless of whether the agency or entity is 
located inside or outside the State; and (5) may be uploaded to a database owned or 
operated by the Maryland Coordination and Analysis Center (MCAC). In addition, the bill 
(1) applies the existing criminal prohibition and penalty against misuse of captured LPR 
data, in violation of the bill and existing law, to vendors contracted by law enforcement 
agencies and (2) expands the procedures that must be adopted by the Department of State 
Police (DSP) and law enforcement agencies relating to the operation and use of LPR 
systems. The bill also alters the definition of “historical data” as it applies to captured LPR 
data provisions. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances.    
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1081/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The procedures required to be adopted by DSP and law enforcement 
agencies relating to the operation and use of LPR systems must include procedures to  
(1) protect personally identifiable information and “criminal justice information” collected 
and stored in an LPR database and (2) certify whether an LPR system experienced a data 
breach and a requirement for any vendor operating a database for a law enforcement agency 
to report any breaches of the database, the number of employees who have access to the 
database, and any unauthorized releases of information. An existing requirement that the 
procedures include an audit process to ensure that information obtained through the use of 
an LPR system is used only for legitimate law enforcement purposes, including audits of 
requests made by individual law enforcement agencies or an individual law enforcement 
officer, is expanded to include audits of requests made by a vendor contracted by a law 
enforcement agency. 
 
The definition of “historical data,” as it applies to the use of captured LPR data provisions, 
is modified to include LPR data stored through cloud computing. In addition, “criminal 
justice information” is defined to mean information relating to criminal justice collected, 
processed, or preserved by a law enforcement agency.  
 
Current Law:  A law enforcement agency may not use captured plate data unless the 
agency has a “legitimate law enforcement purpose.” An employee of a law enforcement 
agency who violates this prohibition is subject to a maximum penalty of imprisonment for 
one year and/or a fine of $10,000. 
 
DSP and any law enforcement agency using an automatic LPR system must adopt 
procedures relating to the operation and use of the system. The procedures must include 
(1) an identification of MCAC or law enforcement agency personnel who are authorized 
to query captured plate data gathered by an LPR system; (2) an audit process to ensure that 
information obtained through the use of an LPR system is used only for legitimate law 
enforcement purposes, including audits of requests made by individual law enforcement 
agencies or an individual law enforcement officer; and (3) procedures and safeguards to 
ensure that MCAC staff with access to the LPR database are adequately screened and 
trained.  
 
Information gathered by an automatic LPR system is not subject to disclosure under the 
Maryland Public Information Act.  
 
By March 1 each year, DSP, in conjunction with MCAC and law enforcement agencies 
that maintain an LPR database, are required to report to the Senate Judicial Proceedings 
Committee, the House Judiciary Committee, and the Legislative Policy Committee on the 
following information based on data from the previous calendar year:  (1) the total number 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1081/ Page 3 
of LPR units being operated in the State by law enforcement agencies and the number of 
LPR units submitting data to MCAC; (2) the number of LPR readings made by a law 
enforcement agency that maintains an LPR database and the number of readings submitted 
to MCAC; (3) the number of readings being retained on the database; (4) the number of 
requests made to MCAC and each law enforcement agency for LPR data, including 
specified information; (5) any data breaches or unauthorized uses of the database; and (6) a 
list of audits that were completed by MCAC or a law enforcement agency.  
 
A custodian of records of captured plate data collected by an LPR system must deny 
inspection of the data. A custodian may only use or share such data in the course of the 
custodian’s duties for authorized purposes as specified above. This prohibition does not 
apply to an electronic toll collection system or associated transaction system operated by 
or in conjunction with the Maryland Transportation Authority.  
 
An “automatic license plate reader system” means a system of one or more mobile or fixed 
high-speed cameras used in combination with computer algorithms to convert images of 
license plates into computer-readable data.  
 
“Captured plate data” means the global positioning system coordinates, dates and times, 
photographs, license plate numbers, and any other data collected by or derived from an 
LPR system, including active and historical data. 
 
“Historical data” means any data collected by an LPR system and stored in an LPR 
database operated by MCAC or by a law enforcement agency.  
 
“Legitimate law enforcement purpose” means the investigation, detection, or analysis of a 
crime or a violation of Maryland’s vehicle laws or the operation of terrorist or missing or 
endangered person searches or alerts. 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 840 (Senator Sydnor) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Charles, Garrett, and Howard counties; City of Laurel; 
Town of La Plata; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1081/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4