START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1047 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1047 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings and Finance 
 
Consumer Protection – Self–Administered Sexual Assault Evidence Collection 
Kits 
 
 
This emergency bill generally (1) prohibits the sale or distribution of a self-administered 
sexual assault evidence collection kit, with a violation deemed as an unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA) and subject 
to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions; (2) specifies that information indicating 
the physical evidence of “sexually assaultive behavior” was obtained using the specified 
prohibited materials is not admissible in a criminal or civil proceeding involving the 
allegation of sexually assaultive behavior; (3) prohibits the limitation or waiver of rights, 
remedies, and warranties regarding sexual assault evidence collection; and (4) establishes 
the Forensic Nurse Examiner Training Grant Program and associated special fund 
administered by the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material effect anticipated in FY 2024. General fund expenditures 
increase by at least $50,000 annually beginning in FY 2025 to establish the grant program; 
special fund revenues and expenditures are assumed to increase correspondingly. To the 
extent that institutions of higher education receive grants from the program, revenues and 
expenditures increase minimally for these institutions (not reflected below). General fund 
interest revenues increase minimally. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
SF Revenue 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
GF Expenditure 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
SF Expenditure 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
$50,000 
Net Effect 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000) 
($50,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1047/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in local community college grant revenues and 
expenditures. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially impact local government 
operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Self-administered Sexual Assault Evidence Collection Kits 
 
Except for a self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kit that is issued by the 
Maryland Department of Health, a person is prohibited from selling, offering for sale, or 
distributing a self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kit. A violation of this 
prohibition is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice and subject to enforcement by 
the Attorney General under MCPA. In addition to existing civil and criminal penalties 
pursuant to MCPA, a violator is subject to a maximum civil penalty of $1,000 for each 
violation. 
 
Any fines, penalties, or damages collected for a violation of this prohibition must be 
credited to the Forensic Nurse Examiner Training Grant Program Fund established by the 
bill. 
 
Forensic Nurse Examiner Training Grant Program and Special Fund 
 
The Forensic Nurse Examiner Training Grant Program is established to assist nonprofit 
entities that provide resources for victims of sexual assault in the State to fund training for 
nurses in the State to develop the skills necessary to conduct forensic examinations of 
sexual assault victims. The associated fund is a special, nonlapsing fund consisting of 
revenues from civil penalties (and fines/damages) imposed from violations of the bill and 
any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may 
only be used for grants to nonprofit entities through the program. The interest earnings of 
the fund must be credited to the State’s general fund. 
 
GOCPP must administer the program and the fund, as specified, including by establishing 
an application process for nonprofit entities and higher education institutions and colleges 
in the State to apply for grant funding from the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1047/ Page 3 
Admissibility in Civil and Criminal Proceedings 
 
The bill prohibits admissibility, in a criminal or civil proceeding involving an allegation of 
sexually assaultive behavior, of information that the physical evidence of sexually 
assaultive behavior was obtained using a self-administered sexual assault evidence 
collection kit sold in violation of the bill’s prohibition. However, the bill does not require 
a court to admit the specified physical evidence. 
 
Limitation and Waiver of Rights 
 
Under the bill, the following are deemed null and void as against the public policy of the 
State:  (1) any agreement, condition of access or use, or policy that limits or waives any 
substantive or procedural right or remedy to a claim against any person who provides a 
victim or other person with any service, product, information, or other means to collect 
evidence of a sexual assault; and (2) any disclaimer of any warranties, express or implied, 
of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or noninfringement regarding any 
service, product, information, or other means to collect evidence of a sexual assault. The 
Attorney General must adopt regulations for uniform statewide implementation. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind, which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division within the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) is 
responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating the complaints of aggrieved consumers. 
The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, issue a cease and desist order, or file a 
civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 
for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition of the same violation. In addition 
to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person who violates MCPA is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment 
for up to one year. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1047/ Page 4 
Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee 
 
Chapter 659 of 2017 established the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and 
Funding Committee to, among other things, develop and disseminate best practices 
information and recommendations regarding the testing and retention of sexual assault 
evidence collection kits. In January 2024, the committee released its annual report. 
 
Chapters 702 and 703 of 2023, among other things, required the committee to issue a report 
by December 1, 2023, to the Governor and the General Assembly making 
recommendations for (1) guidelines for the transfer of sexual assault evidence collection 
kits collected before January 1, 2000, to be transferred to law enforcement agencies for 
testing; (2) guidance on the use of self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kits; 
and (3) in consultation with the Consumer Protection Division of OAG, educating 
consumers about use of self-administered sexual assault evidence collection kits, including 
information regarding the kits’ admissibility in a criminal prosecution and identifying other 
resources for victims of sexual assault. In its report, the committee recommended, among 
other things, (1) condemning any unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices from 
marketers of commercial, self-administered sexual assault kits and (2) supporting funding 
mechanisms to improve access to medical forensic care including the hiring and retention 
of forensic nursing staff. 
 
Rules of Evidence 
 
The Maryland Rules of Evidence generally follow the Federal Rules of Evidence. Except 
as otherwise specified, all relevant evidence is admissible. Relevant evidence is evidence 
having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to the 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the 
evidence. Although relevant, evidence may be excluded under Maryland Rule 5-403 if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, confusion of 
the issues, or misleading the jury, or by considerations of undue delay, waste of time, or 
needless presentation of cumulative evidence.  
 
“Sexually assaultive behavior” means an act that would constitute (1) a sexual crime under 
Title 3, Subtitle 3 of the Criminal Law Article; (2) sexual abuse of a minor under § 3-602 of 
the Criminal Law Article; (3) sexual abuse of a vulnerable adult under § 3-604 of the 
Criminal Law Article; (4) a violation of specified federal law; or (5) a violation of a law of 
another state, the United States, or a foreign country that is equivalent to a specified 
offense. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1047/ Page 5 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Forensic Nurse Examiner Training Special Fund and Grant Program 
 
The special fund established by the bill to be used to support the grant program includes 
revenues from any civil penalties (and fines/damages) collected for violations of the bill’s 
prohibition and any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Assuming that the 
bill’s prohibition applies in a small number of cases, special fund revenues from the 
resulting penalties are assumed to be negligible and insufficient to cover the cost of a viable 
grant program. As there is no other revenue source identified, this analysis assumes general 
funds are necessary to capitalize the fund. 
 
Thus, general fund expenditures increase by at least $50,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025 in order to provide funding to establish and support a modest grant program. 
Special fund revenues and expenditures are assumed to increase correspondingly, 
reflecting receipt of the capitalization funding and the awarding of grants. Any interest 
earnings of the fund, credited to the general fund under the bill, are likely to be minimal. 
To the extent that any other revenue source is identified, special fund revenues and 
expenditures may increase further or the impact on the general fund may be mitigated. 
 
To the extent that institutions of higher education apply for and receive grants under the 
bill, associated revenues and expenditures increase. 
 
Despite the bill’s designation as emergency legislation, this analysis assumes grant funding 
is not provided until fiscal 2025. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy 
 
GOCPP advises that in order to administer the grant program and special fund established 
under the bill, it requires additional resources (specifically, one part-time agency grant 
specialist and one part-time fiscal services officer to assist in, among other tasks, reviewing 
grant applications, proposals, and reports for accuracy, producing notices on funding 
availability, and monitoring/approving grant expenditures), with estimated expenditures of 
approximately $67,000 on an annual basis. 
 
However, given that the grant program is limited to nonprofits, institutions of 
higher education, and colleges, the number of resulting grant applications is not anticipated 
to be significant. Thus, GOCPP can likely administer the fund and the grant program using 
existing budgeted resources, particularly if the program receives only the minimal funding 
assumed in this analysis. To the extent, however, that more significant funding is made 
available for grant awards, GOCPP may require dedicated staff for the program and can 
request additional positions through the annual budget process. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1047/ Page 6 
Other Impacts 
 
OAG advises that it can handle enforcement with existing budgeted resources. This 
analysis also assumes that OAG can adopt necessary regulations using existing budgeted 
resources. The bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on the finances or operations 
of the Judiciary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 949 (Senator Hettleman) - Judicial Proceedings and Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - April 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6