START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1143 
(Delegate Bhandari, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Emergency Medical Services - Maryland Emergency Department Wait Time 
Reduction Commission - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Emergency Department Wait Time Reduction 
Commission to address factors throughout the health care system that contribute to 
increased emergency department (ED) wait times. The Health Services Cost Review 
Commission (HSCRC) must provide staff for the commission. A member of the 
commission may not receive compensation, but it is entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. By November 1, 2025, and November 1, 2026, the commission must report to 
the Governor and the General Assembly on its activities, findings, and recommendations, 
including an update on the development, implementation, and impact of the recommended 
policies and programs developed by the commission to improve ED wait times. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in FY 2025 through 
FY 2027 only for contractual services to staff the commission and complete the required 
reports. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
100,000 
100,000 
100,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1143/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Emergency Department Wait Time Reduction Commission 
 
The commission must develop strategies and initiatives to recommend to State and local 
agencies, hospitals, and health care providers to reduce ED wait times, including:   
 
 
initiatives that ensure that patients are seen in the most appropriate setting to reduce 
unnecessary use of EDs; 
 
initiatives that improve hospital efficiency, including by increasing ED and inpatient 
throughput; 
 
initiatives that improve post discharge resources to facilitate timely ED and inpatient 
discharges; 
 
by identifying and recommending improvements for the collection and submission 
of data necessary to monitor and reduce ED wait times; 
 
by making recommendations to State and local agencies, hospitals, and health care 
providers; and 
 
by facilitating the sharing of best practices for reducing ED wait times. 
 
The commission may:   
 
 
recommend that State and local agencies, hospitals, and health care providers 
implement developed strategies and initiatives; 
 
request interviews with State and local officials; 
 
request data from the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), the Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS), HSCRC, the 
Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC), the State-designated health 
information exchange, hospitals, other providers of health care services, and payors 
for health care services; and 
 
create advisory workgroups that do not include members of the commission. 
 
The commission comprises the following members (or their designees):  (1) the Secretary 
of Health; (2) the Executive Director of MIEMSS; (3) the Executive Director of HSCRC; 
(4) the Executive Director of MHCC, as well as nine specified members appointed by the 
Secretary of Health. The Secretary of Health and the Executive Director of HSCRC must 
cochair the commission.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1143/ Page 3 
Data Sharing Requirements 
 
An entity that receives a request for data from the commission must (1) for data that does 
not contain personally identifiable information, promptly transmit the data to the 
commission and (2) for data that contains personally identifiable information, promptly 
enter into an appropriate data sharing and use agreement with HSCRC and, on approval of 
an appropriate agreement by the parties, promptly transmit the data through a secure and 
encrypted manner to the commission. 
 
If an entity that receives a data request is prohibited from sharing the data under federal 
law, the commission may not require the submission of the data. The commission may use 
personally identifiable information only for the purpose of meeting the requirements of the 
bill and completing the required reports. Personally identifiable information may not be 
shared with a member of the commission who is not an employee of HSCRC or any other 
person that is not a party to the data sharing and use agreement for the information. 
  
Commission staff must analyze personally identifiable information shared with the 
commission staff and share the findings of the analysis with the members of the 
commission in a manner that does not reveal personally identifiable information. 
 
Current Law:  HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH charged with 
constraining hospital growth and establishing hospital rates to promote cost containment, 
access to care, equity, financial stability, and hospital accountability. HSCRC oversees 
acute and chronic care hospitals. 
 
In July 2023, HSCRC initiated the Emergency Department Dramatic Improvement Effort 
(EDDIE) to encourage and support advancements in ED throughput through rapid cycle 
improvement and public transparency. EDDIE includes monthly public reporting of 
three hospital ED wait time measures and hospital rapid-cycle quality improvement 
initiatives. 
 
HSCRC has completed recent studies regarding EDs, including the January 2022 report on 
Behavioral Health Emergency Department Wait Times and Service Improvements in 
Maryland and the November 2019 Emergency Department Overcrowding Update. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires HSCRC to staff the Maryland Emergency 
Department Wait Time Reduction Commission and report on its activities, findings, and 
recommendations by November 1, 2025, and November 1, 2026. 
 
HSCRC advises that staffing the commission and completing the required reports cannot 
be absorbed within existing resources and that contractual services are required. HSCRC 
estimates that the total cost for these contractual services is approximately $300,000. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1143/ Page 4 
Therefore, HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by $100,000 annually between 
fiscal 2025 and fiscal 2027 only. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Legislation with related provisions has been introduced 
within the last three years. See SB 387 and HB 274 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4