START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1110 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1110 
(Delegates Kerr and Simpson) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Intrastate Emergency Management Assistance Compact - City of 
Frederick 
 
   
This bill includes the City of Frederick as a participating jurisdiction in the Maryland 
Intrastate Emergency Management Assistance Compact (MIEMAC).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Although the City of Frederick and other MIEMAC jurisdictions may 
benefit from the inclusion of an additional MIEMAC member, the bill is not anticipated to 
significantly affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MIEMAC is a statewide program that provides for mutual aid among 
jurisdictions for emergency assistance. MIEMAC provides for the procedures to request 
assistance and to resolve financial and liability issues for assistance given. All 23 counties 
within the State, Baltimore City, the cities of Annapolis, Bowie, and Laurel, and 
Ocean City belong to the compact. 
 
MIEMAC also provides for mutual cooperation in emergency management-related 
exercises, testing, or other training activities. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1110/ Page 2 
Frequent consultations between the Maryland Department of Emergency Management and 
appropriate representatives of the party jurisdictions are required with the unhindered 
exchange of information and plans generally relating to emergency management. 
 
Requests for Assistance:  The senior elected official of each jurisdiction must designate 
authorized representatives who may request assistance of another party jurisdiction by 
contacting authorized representatives of that jurisdiction. The compact’s provisions apply 
only to requests for assistance made by and to authorized representatives. Requests may be 
verbal or in writing; however, each verbal request must be confirmed in writing within 
10 calendar days after the verbal request by a senior elected official or an authorized 
representative. Each written request must provide: 
 
 
the functional areas for which assistance is needed, including fire services, 
law enforcement, emergency medical services, transportation, communications, 
public works and engineering, building inspection, planning and information 
assistance, mass care, resource support, health and medical services, and search and 
rescue; 
 
the mission, capability, size, and amount of the requested aid; and 
 
the logistics, location, and time for staging the aid from a responding party 
jurisdiction. 
 
Limitations:  Each jurisdiction that is a party to MIEMAC and receives a request for 
assistance must take the actions necessary to provide the requested resources. Any party 
jurisdiction can withhold resources to the extent necessary to provide reasonable protection 
to its own jurisdiction. Emergency responders have the same powers, duties, rights, and 
privileges as personnel of the requesting jurisdiction in a position performing the same 
function. 
 
MIEMAC provisions only take effect when resources loaned under the terms of the 
compact by the responding party jurisdiction arrive in the requesting party jurisdiction. In 
addition, the provisions continue in effect as long as the resources loaned under the 
compact by the responding party jurisdiction remain in the requesting party jurisdiction. 
 
Liability:  Officers or emergency responders of a party jurisdiction rendering aid in another 
jurisdiction are considered agents of the requesting party jurisdiction for tort liability and 
immunity purposes. A party jurisdiction and its officers and emergency responders 
rendering assistance in another party jurisdiction may not be held liable for an act or 
omission done in good faith while engaged in rendering assistance or on account of the 
maintenance or use of equipment or supplies in connection with rendering assistance under 
MIEMAC. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1110/ Page 3 
Reimbursement:  A party jurisdiction must provide for the payment of workers’ 
compensation and death benefits to injured members of the emergency responders of its 
own jurisdiction. The requesting party jurisdiction must reimburse the responding party 
jurisdiction for all reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the responding party 
jurisdiction provided that any responding jurisdiction can (1) assume in whole or in part 
such loss, damage, expense, or other cost; (2) loan equipment or donate services to the 
requesting party jurisdiction without charge or cost; and (3) agree to any allocation of 
expenses between the responding and requesting party jurisdiction. 
 
Supplemental Agreements:  MIEMAC does not prevent a jurisdiction from entering into 
supplementary agreements with another jurisdiction or affect any other agreements 
between jurisdictions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:   Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; City of 
Frederick; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3