START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 853

Chapter 853

(House Bill 1134)

AN ACT concerning

Hospitals and Related Institutions – Residential Treatment Centers –
Accreditation

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “accredited residential treatment center” for
certain provisions of law governing hospitals and related institutions to include
residential treatment centers accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of
Rehabilitation Facilities or the Council on Accreditation; and generally relating to
residential treatment centers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–301(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–301(c) and (j) and 19–360(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Accredited hospital” means a hospital accredited by the Joint Commission on
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.

(c) “Accredited residential treatment center” means a residential treatment
center that is accredited by [the]:

(1) THE Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations;

(2) THE COMMISSION ON ACCREDITATION OF REHABILITATION
FACILITIES; OR

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 853 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE COUNCIL ON ACCREDITATION.

(j) “Nonaccredited residential treatment center” means a residential treatment
center that is not accredited by [the]:

(1) THE Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations;

(2) THE COMMISSION ON ACCREDITATION OF REHABILITATION
FACILITIES; OR

(3) THE COUNCIL ON ACCREDITATION.

19–360.

(a) This section applies to:

(1) Nonaccredited hospitals found in violation of the standards adopted
under this subtitle;

(2) Accredited hospitals:

(i) Found deficient as a result of the complaint review process; or

(ii) Subject to inspection by the Department under § 19–2302(e) of
this title as a result of a serious or life–threatening patient care deficiency identified by the
Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, or the Department;

(3) Accredited residential treatment centers subject to inspection by the
Department under § 19–2302(e) of this title as a result of a serious or life–threatening
patient care deficiency identified by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations, THE COMMISSION ON ACCREDITATION OF REHABILITATION
FACILITIES, THE COUNCIL ON ACCREDITATION, the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, or the Department; and

(4) Health care facilities that fail to achieve substantial compliance with
the standards of an approved accreditation organization under § 19–2302(c)(2) of this title.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2