START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 911

Chapter 911

(House Bill 1162)

AN ACT concerning

9–1–1 Specialist Recruitment and Retention Workgroup

FOR the purpose of establishing the 9–1–1 Specialist Recruitment and Retention
Workgroup; and generally relating to the 9–1–1 Specialist Recruitment and
Retention Workgroup.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a 9–1–1 Specialist Recruitment and Retention Workgroup.

(b) The Workgroup consists of:

(1) two members of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President of
the Senate;

(2) two members of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of
the House;

(3) the Secretary of State Police, or the Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Secretary of Emergency Management, or the Secretary’s designee;

(5) the Executive Director of the Maryland Institute for Emergency
Medical Services Systems, or the Executive Director’s designee;

(6) one representative of an urban county, designated by the Maryland
Association of Counties;

(7) one representative of a rural county, designated by the Maryland
Association of Counties; and

(8) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

(i) two individuals who are employed as 9–1–1 specialists in the
State;

(ii) two individuals who are employed as Public Safety Answering
Point Directors in the State;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 911 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iii) a member of the Maryland chapter of the National Emergency
Number Association;

(iv) an expert on Maryland Next Generation 9–1–1 education and
training;

(v) a member of the Maryland 9–1–1 Board;

(vi) a representative of the Maryland Association of Counties; and

(vii) a representative of the Maryland Municipal League.

(c) The members of the Workgroup shall elect a chair from among the
Workgroup’s members.

(d) The Department of Legislative Services and the Maryland Department of
Emergency Management shall provide staff for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall:

(1) review the reports submitted by the Commission to Advance Next
Generation 9–1–1 Across Maryland, established by Chapters 301 and 302 of the Acts of the
General Assembly of 2018, as amended by Chapter 506 of the Acts of the General Assembly
of 2020;

~~(1)~~ (2) identify and examine recruitment and retention challenges that affect
9–1–1 specialists in the State, including:

(i) the number of 9–1–1 specialists who retire annually;

(ii) the number of 9–1–1 specialists who are hired annually;

(iii) current salary ranges for 9–1–1 specialists;

(iv) current offerings of retirement benefits, health benefits, pension
programs, WORKERS’ COMPENSATION, and other benefits available to 9–1–1 specialists;

(v) training hour requirements for 9–1–1 specialists;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 911

(vi) recruitment techniques;

(vii) requirements for promotion and advancement within the
emergency response field;

(viii) the impact of current State and local laws on 9–1–1 specialists;
and

(ix) to the extent that information is available:

1. the migration of 9–1–1 specialists between departments;

2. the attrition rates of newly recruited 9–1–1 specialists;

3. the average length of active service for 9–1–1 specialists;

4. the amount and types of workers’ compensation claims
made by 9–1–1 specialists; and

5. perceptions of the occupation among potential 9–1–1
specialist recruits; and

~~(2)~~ (3) make recommendations regarding:

(i) the effectiveness and viability of uniform incentives, offerings, or
practices employed in other states to attract, support, and retain individuals in 9–1–1
specialist roles;

(ii) the feasibility of, and any barriers to, incorporating 9–1–1
specialists into the Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System; and

(iii) any other issues the Workgroup considers relevant to enhancing
and supporting career 9–1–1 specialists in the State.

(g) (1) On or before December 1, 2024, the Workgroup shall submit an interim
report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

(2) On or before December 1, 2025, the Workgroup shall submit a final
report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 7 months and, at the end of
December 31, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall
be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 911 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4