START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 228

Chapter 228

(House Bill 1157)

AN ACT concerning

Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program to provide
grants to certain local school systems for certain employees who pledge to fulfill a
certain service obligation as a full–time teacher in the State; requiring the State
Department of Education to administer the Program and to take certain actions to
develop and implement the Program; establishing the eligibility for certain teacher
candidates in the Program and requiring teacher candidates to be paid a certain rate
and offered certain benefits under the Program; requiring collaboratives to take
certain actions under the Program; ~~requiring~~ authorizing the Governor to include ~~a~~
~~certain~~ an appropriation in the annual budget bill for the Program; requiring the
Department to collect and publish on its website certain data on the Program each
year; and generally relating to the Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 18–27A–01 through 18–27A–06 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 27A.
Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

SUBTITLE 27A. GROW YOUR OWN EDUCATORS GRANT PROGRAM.

18–27A–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COLLABORATIVE” MEANS AN AGREEMENT OUTLINING COMMITMENTS
OF A PARTNERSHIP AMONG:

(1) AT LEAST ONE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 228 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) AT LEAST ONE UNION EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION REPRESENTING
EMPLOYEES OF A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 6, SUBTITLE
4 OR SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(3) AT LEAST ONE INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION WITH A
TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) “ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUAL” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) IS EMPLOYED AS A NONCERTIFIED EDUCATION SUPPORT
PROFESSIONAL BY A PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM; AND

(2) MEETS THE EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS DETERMINED BY A
~~COLLABORATIVE.~~

(D) (C) “NONCERTIFIED EDUCATION SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL” MEANS A
NONCERTIFIED PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEE DESIGNATED AS PART OF A BARGAINING
UNIT UNDER TITLE 6, SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(E) (D) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE GROW YOUR OWN EDUCATORS GRANT
PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(E) “PROVISIONAL TEACHER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYED BY A
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM THROUGH A PROVISIONAL CONTRACT AS A CONDITIONAL
TEACHER.

18–27A–02.

(A) THERE IS A GROW YOUR OWN EDUCATORS GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) (1) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO
ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS WHO:

(I) ARE INTERESTED IN PURSUING A CAREER IN THE TEACHING
PROFESSION; AND

(II) ULTIMATELY PLEDGE TO FULFILL A SERVICE OBLIGATION
AS A TEACHER EMPLOYED FULL–TIME IN A HIGH–NEEDS SCHOOL, GRADE LEVEL, OR
CONTENT AREA IN THE STATE IN WHICH THERE IS A SHORTAGE OF TEACHERS, AS
IDENTIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 228

(C) (1) TO SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, TO BE
ELIGIBLE FOR THE PROGRAM, A TEACHER CANDIDATE APPLICANT SHALL:

(1) (I) BE EMPLOYED AS A NONCERTIFIED EDUCATION SUPPORT
PROFESSIONAL OR PROVISIONAL TEACHER BY A PARTICIPATING LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM ON THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) (II) MEET THE EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS DETERMINED BY
A COLLABORATIVE.

(2) NOT MORE THAN ONE QUARTER OF THE FUNDS USED TO SUPPORT
TEACHING CANDIDATE APPLICANTS MAY BE USED TO SUPPORT TEACHING
CANDIDATE APPLICANTS WHO ARE PROVISIONAL TEACHERS.

18–27A–03.

(A) A COLLABORATIVE SHALL NEGOTIATE AN AGREEMENT THAT MEETS
THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(B) A COLLABORATIVE SHALL DEVELOP AND SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT:

(1) A PLAN TO:

(I) SELECT AT LEAST ONE CONTENT AREA IN THE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM IN WHICH THERE IS A SHORTAGE OF TEACHERS, AS IDENTIFIED BY
THE DEPARTMENT;

(II) SELECT AT LEAST ONE TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
AT AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION THAT SATISFIES THE TRAINING
REQUIREMENTS FOR TEACHER CANDIDATES; AND

(III) DESIGNATE AN INDIVIDUAL FROM A COLLABORATIVE TO
ASSIST TEACHER CANDIDATES AND PROVIDE PROGRAM GUIDANCE;

(2) AN ESTIMATE OF THE NUMBERS OF:

(I) TEACHER APPLICANTS LIKELY TO COMPLETE THE
PROGRAM WHO ARE NONCERTIFICATED EDUCATION SUPPORT PROFESSIONALS;
~~AND~~

(II) TEACHER APPLICANTS LIKELY TO COMPLETE THE
PROGRAM WHO ARE PROVISIONAL TEACHERS; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 228 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) MENTOR TEACHERS NECESSARY TO SUPPORT TEACHER
CANDIDATES IN THE PROGRAM; AND

(3) EVIDENCE OF A WRITTEN BILLING AGREEMENT WITH AN
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION THAT INCLUDES:

(I) THE TOTAL COST TO THE COLLABORATIVE FOR THE
COHORT OF TEACHER CANDIDATES;

(II) PRORATED TUITION COST THE COLLABORATIVE SHALL PAY
THE INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IF A CANDIDATE DOES NOT COMPLETE
THE PROGRAM; AND

(III) A PROVISION THAT NO TEACHER CANDIDATE SHALL BE
REQUIRED TO PAY TUITION, BOOKS, OR FEES AS PART OF THE TEACHER
CANDIDATE’S COURSE OF STUDY.

(C) A COLLABORATIVE SHALL DEVELOP AND SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT:

(1) AN OUTREACH PLAN TO RECRUIT TEACHER CANDIDATES AND
MENTOR TEACHERS THAT:

(I) PRIORITIZES RACIAL AND LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY OF THE
~~NONCERTIFIED~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~PROFESSIONAL~~ ~~WORKFORCE~~ CANDIDATES
AND MENTOR TEACHERS WITH LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY AND FROM RACIAL AND
ETHNIC GROUPS HISTORICALLY UNDERREPRESENTED IN THE TEACHING
PROFESSION;

(II) ESTIMATES PROGRAM EXPENSES BY CATEGORY, KEEPING
PROGRAM EXPENSES RELATED TO PROVISIONAL TEACHERS AT OR BELOW ONE
QUARTER OF TOTAL EXPENSES; AND

(III) IDENTIFIES AT LEAST ONE SOURCE OF LONG–TERM
FUNDING FOR THE PROGRAM, INCLUDING THE PROCESS AND TIMELINE FOR
OBTAINING LONG–TERM FUNDING; AND

(2) ANY OTHER MATERIALS REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

18–27A–04.

(A) (1) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL AWARD A GRANT TO A LOCAL SCHOOL
SYSTEM THAT IS PART OF A COLLABORATIVE FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM TO COMPLETE A TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM AT AN

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 228

INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION UNDER THE AGREEMENT DESCRIBED IN §
18–27A–03 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL AWARD A GRANT FOR:

(I) TUITION, BOOKS, AND FEES FOR TEACHER CANDIDATES;

(II) STIPENDS FOR MENTOR TEACHERS; AND

(III) COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE
PROGRAM.

(3) IN AWARDING A GRANT, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL TAKE
NECESSARY STEPS TO ENSURE THAT NOT MORE THAN ONE QUARTER OF EXPENSES
AWARDED IN THE GRANT GO TO SUPPORTING PROVISIONAL TEACHER
PARTICIPANTS IN THE PROGRAM.

(4) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COLLABORATION WITH THE MARYLAND
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR, SHALL, ON REQUEST, PROVIDE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE
TO A COLLABORATIVE IN OBTAINING STATE, FEDERAL, OR OTHER FUNDING FOR
THE OPERATION OF THE PROGRAM.

(B) A TEACHER CANDIDATE SHALL BE PAID A RATE OF PAY AND OFFERED
BENEFITS THAT ARE AT LEAST EQUAL TO THE RATE OF PAY RECEIVED BY AND
BENEFITS OFFERED TO A NONCERTIFIED EDUCATION SUPPORT PROFESSIONAL OR
PROVISIONAL TEACHER OF THE EQUIVALENT CLASSIFICATION AND TENURE IN THE
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM PROVIDED IN THE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT.

(C) (1) A COLLABORATIVE SHALL PROVIDE EACH TEACHER CANDIDATE A
MENTOR TEACHER FOR THE ENTIRETY OF THE PROGRAM.

(2) A TEACHER CANDIDATE MAY NOT SERVE AS A TEACHER OF
RECORD OR A SUBSTITUTE TEACHER FOR ANY TEACHER OTHER THAN THE MENTOR
TEACHER ASSIGNED TO THE TEACHER CANDIDATE.

(D) A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM AND A UNION AN EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION
THAT REPRESENTS THE TEACHER CANDIDATES SHALL NEGOTIATE A GRADUAL
RELEASE MODEL THAT ALLOWS TEACHER CANDIDATES TO FOCUS PRIMARILY ON
INTERNSHIP AND PRACTICUM REQUIREMENTS.

(E) (1) A TEACHER CANDIDATE SHALL PERFORM A SERVICE OBLIGATION
TO TEACH FULL–TIME IN THE STATE IN A PUBLIC SCHOOL OR A PUBLIC
PREKINDERGARTEN PROGRAM IN A HIGH–NEEDS SCHOOL, AS IDENTIFIED BY THE
DEPARTMENT, OR IN A GRADE LEVEL OR CONTENT AREA IN WHICH THERE IS A
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 228 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SHORTAGE OF QUALIFIED EDUCATORS, AS IDENTIFIED BY THE DEPARTMENT FOR A
MINIMUM OF 2 YEARS.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL DETERMINE THE LENGTH OF THE
SERVICE OBLIGATION.

18–27A–05.

BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $5,000,000 THE GOVERNOR MAY
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE PROGRAM.

18–27A–06.

(A) EACH YEAR, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COLLECT AND PUBLISH ON ITS
WEBSITE:

(1) DATA ON TEACHER CANDIDATE RACE, GENDER, AND LINGUISTIC
STATUS;

(2) DATA ON TEACHER CANDIDATE STATUS AND RETENTION;

(3) SPENDING BY CATEGORY;

(4) A SUMMARY OF TEACHER CANDIDATE RECRUITMENT METHODS;
AND

(5) IF APPLICABLE, THE HIRING STATUS AND RETENTION DATA OF
PROGRAM GRADUATES.

(B) IN REPORTING THE DATA UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION,
THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAKE REASONABLE EFFORTS TO ANONYMIZE THE DATA
TO PROTECT THE PRIVACY OF TEACHER CANDIDATES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6