START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1128 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1128 
(Chair, Economic Matters Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Labor) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Labor and Employment – Workforce Development – Talent Innovation Program 
and Fund 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes the Talent Innovation Program (TIP) within the 
Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), jointly administered by the Division of Workplace 
Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) and the Governor’s Workforce Development 
Board (GWDB). The bill also creates the Talent Innovation Fund (TIP Fund) in MDL. The 
purpose of TIP is to increase access to high-quality job training by using innovative and 
sustainable talent financing mechanisms to help meet skill needs in the State’s prominent 
and emerging industry sectors, including cybersecurity, health care, biotechnology, 
manufacturing, and artificial intelligence. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $2.0 million annually for the program 
beginning in FY 2025; the FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$2.0 million for TIP, which is not contingent on enactment of this bill. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. State revenues (and expenditures) 
may increase further to the extent that MDL receives grants and donations for the fund 
and/or State agencies receive (matching) funds under TIP. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
GF Expenditure 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
SF Expenditure 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
Net Effect 
($2.0) 
($2.0) 
($2.0) 
($2.0) 
($2.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1128/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues may increase to the extent that local governments receive 
TIP funds, and local expenditures may increase to the extent that they receive matching 
funds beginning in FY 2025. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to 
the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The program may conduct pilots, convene key stakeholders, and conduct 
research to develop and support new talent financing approaches. The program must 
establish an initial pilot program that focuses on the cybersecurity sector by supporting job 
training through the expansion of regional cyber ranges. 
 
The TIP Fund may only be used to support the purposes of the program, and any investment 
earnings of the fund must be paid into the fund. The fund consists of money from multiple 
sources, including grants and donations, and money expended from the fund for TIP is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for workforce development programs. MDL may use the TIP Fund to: 
 
 
provide grants to entities as specified for costs including support services, 
subsidized wages, grantees’ administrative costs, and training, 
 
provide matching funds to secure donations or grants; 
 
provide funding for the program and other talent finance mechanisms approved by 
DWDAL and GWDB; and 
 
pay expenses for the program’s administrative, actuarial, legal, and technical 
services. 
 
MDL may adopt regulations to carry out the program, and by January 1, 2025, and annually 
thereafter, MDL must report to the Governor and the General Assembly as specified on 
program activities and use of the fund. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Division of Workforce Development and Adult Learning 
 
DWDAL has as its mission ensuring businesses have the skilled workforce they need to be 
competitive in today’s environment, as well as helping people get jobs. Specifically, 
DWDAL serves the unemployed, jobless veterans, newly dislocated workers, 
trade-impacted workers, New Americans, ex-offenders, low-wage workers, and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1128/ Page 3 
individuals with barriers to employment. As the State’s main workforce development 
entity, DWDAL oversees operation of Maryland’s 30 American Job Centers, with at least 
1 such center located in each county of the State. DWDAL also oversees the 
Maryland Workforce Exchange, which is Maryland’s job bank. Additionally, DWDAL 
oversees workforce programs for New Americans and veterans and the processing of a 
number of federal and State tax credits. 
 
DWDAL oversees the Maryland Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) program. 
The EARN program was established in 2013 to create industry-led partnerships to advance 
the skills of the State’s workforce, grow the State’s economy, and increase sustainable 
employment for working families. Specifically, the program provides general fund grants 
on a competitive basis for industry partnerships, workforce training programs, and 
job-readiness and skills training. 
 
A strategic industry partnership (SIP) is a collaboration that brings together a regional 
group of businesses, educational institutions, and government agencies to (1) identify 
common workforce needs for high-demand occupations within a target industry and 
(2) develop and implement industry strategies to meet the common workforce needs and 
shortages based on regional needs. SIPs may include employers, nonprofits, institutions of 
higher education, community colleges, local workforce development boards, local 
governments, or other relevant partners. 
 
DWDAL also is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. For 
more information regarding apprenticeships in the State, see the Appendix – 
Apprenticeship. 
 
Governor’s Workforce Development Board 
 
GWDB is the Governor’s chief policymaking body for workforce development. The board 
is responsible for developing policies and strategies to form a coordinated workforce 
system from a variety of education, employment, and training programs. It brings together 
and focuses various workforce development partners and stakeholders on two key 
outcomes:  properly preparing the workforce to meet the current and future demands of 
Maryland employers; and providing opportunities for all Marylanders to succeed in the 
twenty-first century workforce. 
 
Background:  MDL advises that TIP differs from the EARN in a few critical ways:  (1) the 
TIP Fund is structured to receive and leverage outside support, such as philanthropic 
resources; (2) TIP focuses on innovative funding and program delivery models, thus 
providing a higher level of flexibility than the EARN program; and (3) it includes 
flexibility to invest in emerging and growth industries. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1128/ Page 4 
State Fiscal Effect:  TIP must establish an initial pilot program that focuses on the 
cybersecurity sector by supporting job training through the expansion of regional cyber 
ranges. MDL intends to release a competitive grant solicitation to support these cyber needs 
and anticipates funding to support training expenses for at least 100 individuals, along with 
supporting capital costs and operational expenses. 
 
MDL reports existing staff can implement the bill. Any operational expenses for GWDB 
staff can be absorbed within existing budgeted resources. However, DWDAL is staffed 
largely with federally funded personnel who cannot work on State-funded programs 
without the program reimbursing the federal government for their time. MDL estimates a 
special grants program manager will spend 30% of their time implementing the program. 
As the TIP Fund can be used for program administration, this analysis assumes that 
TIP special funds are used to reimburse the federal government for the portion of the 
employee’s time spent fulfilling the bill’s requirements. 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $2.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to 
capitalize the new fund. Special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly, 
assuming all funds are expended each year. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $2.0 million in general funds for TIP, which is not contingent 
on enactment of this bill. This estimate assumes the fiscal 2025 level of funding is sufficient 
for the program and is provided annually thereafter. Thus, operational expenses for 
DWDAL are $31,967 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for a 90-day implementation delay 
from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date, and approximately $1.97 million is available for 
the initial cybersecurity pilot program. Operational expenses for DWDAL increase in 
future years to reflect annualization with annual salary increases and employee turnover, 
which means slightly less funding for grants and other finance mechanisms under TIP in 
future years. 
 
To the extent that the TIP Fund is funded through grants and donations in future years, the 
increase in general fund expenditures may be less than $2.0 million, and special fund 
revenues and expenditures for the TIP Fund may exceed $2.0 million. 
 
To the extent that State agencies or higher education institutions receive grants or matching 
funds under TIP, revenues and expenditures may increase further beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues may increase to the extent that local governments 
receive TIP funds, and local expenditures may increase to the extent that they receive 
matching funds beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are in the cybersecurity sector may benefit 
from the initial pilot program that supports job training through the expansion of regional 
cyber ranges. In future years, small businesses in prominent and emerging industry sectors, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1128/ Page 5 
including cybersecurity, health care, biotechnology, manufacturing, and artificial 
intelligence may benefit from TIP funding. MDL expects the program to aid in the training 
and recruitment of talent, thereby helping with recruitment and training costs for small 
businesses, as well as on costs associated with poor employee retention and employee 
turnover. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 19, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1128/ Page 6 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a 
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. More 
specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as changes to current 
programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. The approval 
process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program in a proposed 
industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current staffing level of 
the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate supervision can be 
provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations of the entity. The 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory role for legislation 
and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1128/ Page 7 
As of November 28, 2023, there were 11,530 apprentices registered in 125 different 
occupations, with more than 400 approved registered apprenticeship programs and more 
than 3,800 employers. There were 1,825 Certificates of Completion for apprentices 
processed between January 1, 2023, and November 28, 2023. The State added 38 new 
apprenticeship programs in 2023. The diversity of Maryland’s apprenticeship system has 
also increased since the transfer of the program to DWDAL in 2016. The percentage of 
minority apprentices increased from 36% in November 2016 to 44% in November 2023. 
Likewise, the percentage of female apprentices increased from 3.7% in November 2016 to 
7.7% in November 2023. 
 
Chapter 168 (Senate Bill 104) of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
The purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages;  
 growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and  
 reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023 and published the Interim 
Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1128/ Page 8 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Labor and Employment – Workforce Development – Talent Innovation 
Program and Fund 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB1128 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Rachael Stephens Parker, Executive Director, Governor’s Workforce 
Development Board  
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
    X    WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 

END OF PAGE 8