START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1165 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1165 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Watershed, Stream, and Floodplain Restoration - Chesapeake and Atlantic 
Coastal Bays Restoration and Stream and Floodplain Restoration Funding 
(Whole Watershed Act) 
 
   
This bill establishes the Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership to accelerate restoration 
of the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays and their watersheds. The partnership 
provides grants and technical assistance to eligible projects over a period of five years. The 
Whole Watershed Fund (WWF) is established in the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR) to provide funding for approved projects and is generally authorized to receive 
funding from specified State agricultural and environmental special funds. The bill also 
establishes new application and evaluation criteria for stream restoration projects. The bill 
generally takes effect July 1, 2024. Provisions related to stream restoration project 
requirements take effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The effect on overall State finances in any particular fiscal year due to 
authorized and required funding for WWF is unknown but largely dependent on the extent 
to which funds transferred to WWF are a reallocation of existing spending or are provided 
from fund balance, as discussed below. Transferred funds could easily exceed $5.0 million 
annually. General fund expenditures for DNR increase by at least $200,000 in FY 2025 
and by at least similar amounts annually thereafter. The FY 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $200,000 in general funds and two positions for DNR, 
contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file. General/special fund expenditures 
for MDE increase beginning in FY 2026 for administrative expenses, including new 
permanent staff, as discussed below. State expenditures (all funds) increase, potentially 
significantly, for State agencies that undertake stream restoration projects beginning in 
FY 2026. Other potential effects are discussed below. This bill establishes a mandated 
distribution from FY 2026 through 2030. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1165/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments are affected by any reallocation of funding that occurs 
due to the bill and additional costs and/or operational delays for stream restoration projects. 
This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership 
 
The Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership is established to accelerate restoration of 
the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays and their watersheds by equitably focusing 
assistance on actions and areas that are cost-effective, likely to demonstrate a rapid 
systemic response to restoration activity, and supported by the local government. 
 
 
State Management Team to Administer Partnership  
 
The Secretary of Natural Resources must establish a State Management Team to administer 
the partnership. The State Management Team must include: 
 
 
one representative each from DNR, MDE, the Maryland Department of Agriculture 
(MDA), and the Maryland Department of Planning, designated by the relevant 
department secretary; 
 
one representative of the Critical Area Commission for the Chesapeake and Atlantic 
Coastal Bays, designated by the chair of the commission; and 
 
the Chief Resilience Officer, or the Chief Resilience Officer’s designee. 
 
The DNR representative must chair the State Management Team. The State Management 
Team must coordinate with other entities as necessary to carry out its functions and duties. 
The partnership must employ staff in accordance with the State budget. State agencies may 
provide staff or other assistance to the partnership. 
 
 
Project Grants 
 
By October 1, 2024, and every five years thereafter, the State Management Team must 
issue a request for proposals for projects that meet specified criteria for location, benefits, 
and local government support. By March 1, 2025, and every five years thereafter, the State 
Management Team may approve up to five projects to receive assistance. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1165/ Page 3 
The State Management Team must evaluate a proposed project based on whether the 
proposed project meets a variety of specified criteria, such as whether the project: 
 
 
is located in a watershed in which habitat restoration and pollution reduction will 
(1) result in the greatest improvements to shallow water habitat and living resources; 
(2) achieve rapid de-listing of impaired streams identified under specified federal 
law; or (3) generate rapidly improving conditions in the local ecosystem; 
 
emphasizes actions that are expected to provide the greatest, most cost-effective, 
and measurable amount of pollution reduction; and 
 
supports land use policies, conservation programs, and restoration protocols at the 
local level that will sustain project actions and outcomes. 
 
The State Management Team must work to ensure that the projects approved meet certain 
location requirements. The State Management Team may require siting, design, 
construction, maintenance, and operation principles and standards for a project that are in 
addition to those required by law or regulation if the team determines that those principles 
and standards are necessary to preserve the benefits of the project.  
 
For a period of five years after approving a project, the State Management Team must: 
 
 
assist the project sponsor in developing an implementation and financing plan, 
including measurable outcomes, for the duration of the project; 
 
award implementation grants from WWF and other appropriate State funds and 
accounts for up to 50% of project costs, in accordance with the implementation and 
financing plan, and with consideration given to the progress of the project; 
 
award operations grants of $20,000 to the project sponsor for project administration 
costs in accordance with the mandated distribution established by the bill under the 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund (2010 Trust Fund); 
 
provide for coordinated and transparent State permitting to the extent allowed by 
State and federal law, including the use of the permit tracking dashboard established 
by the Secretary of Natural Resources under the bill; 
 
provide funding to the project sponsor to support water quality monitoring at the 
project site; and 
 
meet with the project sponsor and participating local governments at least six times 
each calendar year to review and facilitate progress on the project. 
 
The bill establishes additional requirements for project sponsors related to water quality 
monitoring, community engagement, performance measurement, and progress reporting. 
By November 1, 2025, and each November 1 thereafter, the State Management Team must 
report to the General Assembly on the status of each approved project. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1165/ Page 4 
 
Permit Tracking Dashboard 
 
The Secretary of Natural Resources must establish a permit tracking dashboard that 
provides publicly available information on the permit schedules and requirements for 
actions that require a State permit. The permit tracking dashboard must be made available 
to the public on DNR’s website. 
 
 
Whole Watershed Fund 
 
WWF is established as a special, nonlapsing fund in DNR to fund the projects approved 
by the State Management Team under the bill and may only be used to support actions 
associated with an approved project, including (1) to satisfy match requirements of any 
federal source or (2) matching with county, municipal, or private funds or in-kind support 
for a project. Expenditures from WWF may be made only in accordance with the State 
budget. Any remaining funds must be available for use in subsequent fiscal years. The bill 
specifies requirements for related contracts and the treatment of funds when projects are 
partially financed with other State funds.  
 
In addition to money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, and 
any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund, WWF consists 
of revenue distributed to the fund from:   
 
 
2010 Trust Fund established under § 8-2A-02 of the Natural Resources Article;  
 
the Bay Restoration Fund (BRF) established under § 9-1605.2 of the Environment 
Article (specifically, the Wastewater Account, after funding eligible costs for 
wastewater treatment plants under the account each year); 
 
the Clean Water Commerce Account (CWCA) established under § 9-1605.4 of the 
Environment Article;   
 
the Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund established under § 2-505 of the 
Agriculture Article;  
 
the Maryland Agricultural Water Quality Cost-Share (MACS) Program established 
under § 8-702 of the Agriculture Article; and 
 
the Waterway Improvement Fund (WIF) established under § 8-707 of the Natural 
Resources Article.   
 
Related and conforming changes are made to the provisions establishing each of the 
funding sources listed above. Generally, the provisions incorporate a related purpose and 
authorize funding to be provided to WWF; however, the bill establishes one mandated 
distribution from 2010 Trust Fund. In each fiscal year from 2026 through 2030, inclusive, 
up to $100,000 from the fund must be used to fund the operations grants for approved 
projects under the bill, at a rate of $20,000 per project sponsor each fiscal year.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1165/ Page 5 
Generally, money transferred to WWF from one of the sources listed above must be subject 
to the conditions specified in the originating fund or account.  
 
Stream Restoration Projects 
 
Generally, an applicant seeking an authorization for a stream and floodplain restoration 
project in the State is subject to additional requirements related to public notice and 
application review by MDE. MDE must evaluate each application for specified criteria and 
provide for five years of monitoring after project completion. 
 
Stream restoration project provisions take effect July 1, 2025. 
 
 
Public Notice 
 
When the project design is 30% complete, a project applicant must (1) mail written notice 
to any residence or business within a radius of 200 feet of the proposed project area’s 
boundary and (2) post notice as points of public access to the project, as specified.  
 
Generally, when the project design is 60% complete, a project applicant must (1) hold an 
in-person public meeting that includes an option for virtual attendance; (2) take meeting 
minutes and record the meeting; (3) present the project design report and plans, along with 
other related information and documents; and (4) post the documents and meeting minutes 
on the project applicant’s website. However, the in-person meeting requirement does not 
apply if (1) the project applicant is an individual; (2) the proposed project is sited on the 
individual’s property; and (3) no residence, other than the individual’s residence, or 
business is located within a radius of 200 feet from the project boundary. 
 
 
Application and Review by the Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
A project applicant must submit to MDE all relevant documents as part of the application 
and review process, including (1) the project design report and drawings, as specified; 
(2) the forest stand delineation; (3) responses to MDE’s Stream Restoration Authorization 
Checklist; (4) the meeting minutes, and if feasible, the recording from the required public 
meeting; and (5) any other documents or information requested by MDE. Generally, the 
applicant must post notice of the application, its date of submission, and a copy of the 
application on its website within 24 hours after submitting the application; however, the 
requirement does not apply if the same criteria for a public notice exemption, described 
above, are met. 
 
MDE may authorize a stream and floodplain restoration project in accordance with the 
following requirements. Prior to the authorization of any stream and floodplain restoration 
project in the State, MDE must:   
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1165/ Page 6 
 
assess documentation submitted by the project applicant for degradation criteria 
related to (1) an existing biological function-based parameter and (2) a physical 
parameter, including an existing geomorphologic or hydraulic function-based 
parameter; 
 
assess whether the project applicant incorporated the following co-benefits, as 
appropriate, into the application:  (1) the creation or restoration of wildlife habitat, 
riparian buffers, and wetland restoration; (2) the restoration of aquatic resources, 
such as freshwater mussels, fish passage, or oyster reefs; (3) carbon sequestration; 
(4) climate change mitigation, adaptation, or resilience; (5) improving and 
protecting public health; and (6) recreational opportunities and public access to 
waterways and natural habitats; 
 
assess documentation of community notifications conducted by the project 
applicant prior to the submission of the application, as specified, including 
(1) whether the project applicant considered the project’s compatibility with local 
land use and (2) whether and how the project applicant considered and responded 
to relevant public input, including any resulting project modifications;  
 
assess whether the applicant incorporated, to the extent practicable, recognized best 
management practices to (1) maximize ecological uplift; (2) minimize impacts to 
wildlife habitats, tree loss and removal, earth disturbance, and disturbance to native 
vegetation; (3) avoid impacts to large noninvasive native plant communities and 
specimen trees; (4) use existing areas suitable for material staging areas to avoid 
forest removal; (5) limit construction access road widths; (6) limit the impacts of 
ingress and egress points to minimize forest impacts; and (7) where appropriate, 
prioritize the removal of nonnative and invasive trees and vegetation; and 
 
establish a plan to provide for at least five years of monitoring, as described below. 
 
On completion of a stream and floodplain restoration project, MDE must provide for at 
least five years of monitoring per the design and permit associated with the design for each 
authorized project. The monitoring must include an assessment of stream stability, stream 
and floodplain function, and vegetation viability within the affected project area. 
 
 
Annual Reporting 
 
By December 1, 2024, and each December 1 thereafter, MDE must report to the Senate 
Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and the House Environment and 
Transportation Committee on any changes made to the Stream Restoration Authorization 
Checklist since December 1, 2023. (This requirement is assumed to apply beginning  
December 1, 2025, given the provision’s effective date.) 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1165/ Page 7 
Current Law:  
 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund 
 
The 2010 Trust Fund was established in 2008 and is funded with a portion of revenues 
from the motor fuel tax and the sales and use tax on short-term vehicle rentals. The trust 
fund is used primarily for nonpoint source pollution control projects to help meet 
Chesapeake Bay restoration goals and to improve the health of the Atlantic Coastal Bays 
and their tributaries. 
 
Bay Restoration Fund 
 
Chapter 428 of 2004 established BRF. The primary purpose of the fund is to support 
upgrades to Maryland’s 67 major publicly owned wastewater treatment plants with 
enhanced nutrient removal technology; funds are also used for septic system upgrade 
grants, among other things, and the Cover Crop Program within MDA. As a revenue source 
for the fund, Chapter 428 established a bay restoration fee on users of wastewater facilities, 
septic systems, and sewage holding tanks. Chapter 150 of 2012 doubled the fee for most 
users (until July 1, 2030). Fee revenue generated from users of wastewater facilities is 
deposited into MDE’s Wastewater Account, to be used for eligible uses, subject to 
specified funding priorities.  
 
Clean Water Commerce Account 
 
Chapters 694 and 695 of 2021 created CWCA. MDE is required to transfer $20.0 million 
each fiscal year from BRF into the account to be used to purchase environmental outcomes 
to help the State achieve water quality goals. Specified percentages of the funding must be 
used to procure environmental outcomes from specified types of practices or projects, and 
any unencumbered funds not used to purchase environmental outcomes according to the 
percentages are no longer subject to the percentage requirements and available for use 
consistent with the CWCA statute in subsequent fiscal years. 
 
Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Fund  
 
The Maryland Agricultural Land Preservation Foundation was established by the 
General Assembly to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland, limit the extent 
of urban development, and protect agricultural land and woodland as open space. The 
foundation, with the assistance and cooperation of landowners and local governments, 
purchases development rights easements as a means of protecting agricultural land and 
woodland production activities. In addition to funding from the State transfer tax, which 
has traditionally been allocated toward the capital costs of purchasing easements, the 
foundation receives funding from the agricultural land transfer tax and surcharge, which is 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1165/ Page 8 
primarily used for the foundation’s operating expenses. Funds accrue to a related special 
fund.  
 
Maryland Agricultural Water Quality Cost-Share Program 
 
The MACS Program was established in 1982 to provide financial assistance to farmers for 
the installation of best management practices that control and reduce pollution caused by 
agricultural activities. Under this voluntary program, the State provides grants to farmers 
to cover up to 100% of the cost of installing best management practices on their farms to 
prevent soil erosion, manage nutrients, and safeguard water quality in streams, rivers, and 
the Chesapeake Bay.   
 
Waterway Improvement Fund 
 
WIF finances projects and activities that promote, develop, and maintain Maryland’s 
waterways for the benefit of the boating public. With certain exceptions, a local 
government and WIF must jointly finance projects to construct marine facilities beneficial 
to the boating public. The contribution of WIF must be limited to no more than 50% of the 
cost of each project. WIF may, however, finance completely any construction project 
beneficial to the boating public, which costs $250,000 or less, regardless of its location.  
  
Other types of projects that may be financed solely by WIF include projects for dredging 
and marking channels and harbors, construction of jetties and breakwaters, and clearing 
debris, aquatic vegetation, and obstructions in navigable waters, as well as construction of 
marine facilities located within lands owned by DNR and construction of pump-out stations 
for use by the general boating public at public and private marinas. 
 
Wetlands and Waterways Program 
 
Wetlands in the State are protected, and the Wetlands and Waterways Program within 
MDE administers a statewide program for the management, conservation, and protection 
of Maryland’s tidal wetlands and nontidal wetlands and waterways. Generally, a person 
must obtain a permit or license before working in wetlands in the State. Regulations define 
the criteria for evaluating tidal wetlands licenses and permits, as well as the property 
information that permit and license applicants must provide as part of the application 
process. The Board of Public Works (BPW) has the authority to determine whether to issue 
a license to dredge, fill, or alter State wetlands; MDE must assist BPW in making such a 
determination and, in some cases, BPW delegates the authority to issue such a license to 
MDE. Authorizations granted to work in privately owned wetlands are issued by MDE. 
Application fees for wetlands and waterways authorizations are paid into the Wetlands and  
Waterways Program Fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1165/ Page 9 
Total Maximum Daily Load and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System Permit 
 
Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) are a requirement under the federal Clean Water 
Act (CWA). A TMDL (1) establishes the maximum amount of an impairing substance or 
stressor that a water body can assimilate and still meet water quality standards and 
(2) allocates that load among pollution contributors. Surface water discharges in the State 
are regulated through combined State and federal permits under National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), which is a component of CWA. Among other 
things, NPDES regulates stormwater discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer 
System (MS4) permits. There are 10 jurisdictions in Maryland that hold NPDES Phase I 
MS4 permits (Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Charles, Frederick, Harford, Howard, 
Montgomery, and Prince George’s counties and Baltimore City). Additionally, the State 
Highway Administration holds a Phase I MS4 permit. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Fiscal effects for establishing the Whole Watershed Restoration 
Partnership and requirements for stream and floodplain restoration projects are described 
separately below. 
 
Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership 
 
Provisions establishing and funding the Whole Watershed Restoration Partnership have an 
unknown effect on overall State finances in any particular fiscal year, largely dependent on 
the extent to which funds transferred to WWF from MDA, MDE, and DNR are a 
reallocation of existing spending or are provided from fund balance. Reallocated funding 
generally does not affect overall State expenditures in a particular year, it just alters the 
uses and recipients. Funding provided from accrued fund balance increases overall State 
expenditures in a particular year but eventually leads to reduced spending in future years 
under the original programs.   
 
The decision to use fund balance or to reallocate existing spending is also dependent upon 
the amount of required funding for projects under the partnership, which is also at this point 
unknown. At a minimum, the bill requires $100,000 annually to be distributed from the 
2010 Trust Fund from fiscal 2026 through 2030. Depending on the size of the projects, 
transferred funds could easily exceed $5.0 million annually.   
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) cannot advise on the extent to which the 
affected special funds have, or will have in the future, sufficient fund balance to fund any 
transfers, but notes that many of the affected special funds are linked through various 
ongoing transfers or provide funding for purposes similar to those of the partnership. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1165/ Page 10 
In either case, special fund revenues and expenditures for WWF increase correspondingly 
as transferred funds are received and used for authorized purposes, which does not appear 
to include DNR administrative expenses, as discussed below. 
  
 
Administrative Expenses 
 
WWF does not appear to allow payment of the partnership’s administrative expenses, such 
as those of the State Management Team, partnership staff, and costs to develop a permit 
tracking dashboard. The bill does not identify another funding source for such costs but 
does allow State agencies to provide staff or other assistance to the partnership. 
Accordingly, this estimate assumes general fund expenditures increase to the extent that 
assistance provided by other State agencies is insufficient. Based on information provided 
by DNR, administrative costs for the partnership are approximately $200,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025, independent of the bill’s requirement to establish a permit 
tracking dashboard. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$200,000 and two positions for DNR, contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for DNR increase by at least $200,000 in 
fiscal 2025 and by at least $178,000 annually thereafter for ongoing costs associated with 
the contingent positions. Nevertheless, total administrative costs for DNR cannot be 
determined at this time. 
 
Other agencies on the partnership may also have additional expenditures and/or operational 
effects associated with their responsibilities, but the amount and extent is unknown at this 
time. 
 
New Requirements for Stream Restoration Projects  
 
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
MDE advises that it requires additional staff to review additional stream restoration project 
documentation and post-project monitoring, both of which are more extensive under the 
bill. Based on information provided by MDE, the department’s administrative costs total 
approximately $285,000 to $325,000 annually for three additional staff. DLS concurs that 
the bill establishes substantial new responsibilities for MDE related to stream restoration 
project approval, evaluation, and monitoring; however, without actual experience under 
the bill, total administrative costs for MDE cannot be determined at this time. Still, 
general/special fund expenditures for MDE are assumed to increase beginning in 
fiscal 2026, concurrent with the effective date of the stream restoration project provisions. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1165/ Page 11 
 
Stream Restoration Project Costs 
 
Costs related to stream restoration projects undertaken by affected State agencies increase, 
potentially significantly, beginning in fiscal 2026 due to (1) a likely increase in wetlands 
and waterways project application review times for MDE; (2) the likely need to conduct 
additional public notice, planning, and analysis for project applications; (3) potential 
additional requirements for projects, such as incorporating co-benefits and best 
management practices specified in the bill; and (4) ongoing monitoring for at least 
five years after project completion. 
 
Certain entities that are permitted by MDE utilize stream restoration projects to meet permit 
requirements (including for MS4 permits) and to meet other environmental and restoration 
goals (including TMDL goals). Thus, increased stream restoration project costs result in 
increased compliance costs for affected permit holders and entities working to achieve 
various environmental goals. Affected agencies likely include the Maryland Department 
of Transportation and the Maryland Transportation Authority. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local governments are affected by any reallocation of funding that 
occurs due to the bill (which may alter local expenditures for matching funds); the funding 
sources for WWF are used to fund a variety of programs and projects that directly or 
indirectly benefit local governments. Local governments also experience potentially 
significant cost increases and/or operational delays for stream restoration projects as 
described above for State agencies. The effect on any particular local government is 
unknown but could be significant. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses experience cost increases and/or operational 
delays associated with the bill’s public notice, project evaluation, and approval 
requirements related to stream restoration projects, similar to State and local governments. 
Small businesses may also be affected by the funding of WWF, since many of the potential 
funding sources benefit small businesses. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 969 (Senator Elfreth, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Labor; 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1165/ Page 12 
Maryland Department of Planning; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Governor’s Office; Office 
of Administrative Hearings; Carroll, Harford, and Queen Anne’s counties; towns of 
Bel Air and Leonardtown; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal 
League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 12