START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 844

Chapter 844

(House Bill 1143)

AN ACT concerning

Emergency Medical Services – Maryland Emergency Department Wait Time
Reduction Commission ~~and~~ ~~Standardized~~ ~~Protocols~~ – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Emergency Department Wait Time
Reduction Commission ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Institute~~ ~~for~~ ~~Emergency~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Services~~
~~Systems~~ ~~to~~ ~~enhance~~ ~~the~~ ~~overall~~ ~~effectiveness~~ ~~and~~ ~~responsiveness~~ ~~of~~ ~~emergency~~
~~medical~~ ~~services~~ to address factors throughout the health care system that
contribute to increased emergency department wait times; ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~Institute~~ ~~for~~ ~~Emergency~~ ~~Medical~~ ~~Services~~ ~~Systems,~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~advice~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Commission,~~ ~~and~~ ~~in~~ ~~consultation~~ ~~with~~ ~~certain~~ ~~entities,~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~ ~~certain~~
~~standardized~~ ~~operational~~ ~~protocols,~~ ~~advanced~~ ~~technology~~ ~~solutions,~~ ~~and~~ ~~certain~~
~~training~~ ~~programs,~~ ~~and~~ ~~to~~ ~~establish~~ ~~a~~ ~~system~~ ~~for~~ ~~monitoring~~ ~~certain~~ ~~emergency~~
~~department~~ ~~performance;~~ authorizing the Commission to request data from certain
entities; requiring certain entities to enter into a data sharing and use agreement
for the sharing of personally identifiable information; and generally relating to
emergency medical services.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Education~~
~~Section~~ ~~13–509.1~~ ~~and~~ ~~13–509.2~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 20–2401 through 20–2406 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 24.
Maryland Emergency Department Wait Time Reduction Commission”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – ~~Education~~ Health – General

SUBTITLE 24. MARYLAND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIME REDUCTION
COMMISSION.

20–2401.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 844 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “COMMISSION” MEANS THE MARYLAND EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT WAIT TIME REDUCTION COMMISSION.

~~13–509.1.~~ 20–2402.

(A) (1) THERE IS A MARYLAND EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIME
REDUCTION COMMISSION IN THE INSTITUTE TO ENHANCE THE OVERALL
~~EFFECTIVENESS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~RESPONSIVENESS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~
~~STATE.~~

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO ADDRESS FACTORS
THROUGHOUT THE HEALTH CARE SYSTEM THAT CONTRIBUTE TO INCREASED
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIMES.

(B) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEMS, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S
DESIGNEE;

(3) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE HEALTH SERVICES COST
REVIEW COMMISSION, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE
COMMISSION, OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE; AND

(5) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR
SECRETARY:

(I) TWO REPRESENTATIVES WHO ARE EXPERTS IN HEALTH
~~CARE;~~

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WHO IS EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
~~STAFF;~~

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE WHO IS AN EMERGENCY MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL; AND

(I) TWO INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE OPERATIONS LEADERSHIP
RESPONSIBILITIES OVER A HOSPITAL EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT IN THE STATE,
INCLUDING ONE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT PHYSICIAN;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 844

(II) ONE INDIVIDUAL WITH PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE IN AN
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WHO IS NOT A PHYSICIAN OR AN ADVANCED PRACTICE
PROVIDER, SUCH AS A NURSE OR CARE MANAGER;

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A LOCAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICE;

(IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A MANAGED CARE PLAN WITH
EXPERIENCE IN CARE MANAGEMENT OR CARE COORDINATION;

(V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ADVANCED PRIMARY CARE
PRACTICE;

(VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL
ASSOCIATION;

(IV) (VII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A PATIENT ADVOCACY
ORGANIZATION; AND

(VIII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
PROVIDER.

(C) THE GOVERNOR SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHAIR OR COCHAIRS OF
SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE HEALTH SERVICES
COST REVIEW COMMISSION SHALL COCHAIR THE COMMISSION.

(D) THE ~~INSTITUTE~~ HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION
JOINTLY SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COMMISSION.

(E) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

20–2403.

(F) THE COMMISSION SHALL DEVELOP STRATEGIES AND INITIATIVES TO
RECOMMEND TO STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES, HOSPITALS, AND HEALTH CARE
PROVIDERS TO REDUCE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIMES, INCLUDING:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 844 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ASSESS THE STATE OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES IN THE
~~STATE;~~

(2) DEVELOP STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE HOSPITAL EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT EFFICIENCIES, REDUCE WAIT TIMES, AND ENHANCE PATIENT CARE;

(3) COORDINATE WITH STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES, HOSPITALS,
~~AND~~ ~~HEALTH~~ ~~CARE~~ ~~PROVIDERS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~IMPLEMENT~~ ~~EFFECTIVE~~ ~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~CARE~~
~~PRACTICES;~~

(4) FACILITATE THE SHARING OF BEST PRACTICES AND
INNOVATIONS IN EMERGENCY MEDICINE;

(5) MONITOR AND REPORT ON THE PROGRESS AND CHALLENGES IN
EMERGENCY HEALTH CARE DELIVERY; AND

(6) OVERSEE THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF
~~STANDARDIZED~~ ~~PROTOCOLS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OPERATIONAL~~ ~~EFFICIENCIES~~ ~~IN~~ ~~HOSPITAL~~
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS UNDER § 13–509.2 OF THIS SUBTITLE

(1) INITIATIVES THAT:

(I) ENSURE THAT PATIENTS ARE SEEN IN THE MOST
APPROPRIATE SETTING TO REDUCE UNNECESSARY USE OF EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENTS;

(II) IMPROVE HOSPITAL EFFICIENCY, INCLUDING BY
INCREASING EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT AND INPATIENT THROUGHPUT; AND

(III) IMPROVE POSTDISCHARGE RESOURCES TO FACILITATE
TIMELY EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT AND INPATIENT DISCHARGES;

(2) BY IDENTIFYING AND RECOMMENDING IMPROVEMENTS FOR THE
COLLECTION AND SUBMISSION OF DATA THAT IS NECESSARY TO MONITOR AND
REDUCE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIMES;

(3) BY MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS TO STATE AND LOCAL
AGENCIES, HOSPITALS, AND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS; AND

(4) BY FACILITATING THE SHARING OF BEST PRACTICES FOR
REDUCING EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIMES.

20–2404.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 844

IN CARRYING OUT ITS DUTIES, THE COMMISSION MAY:

(1) RECOMMEND THAT STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES, HOSPITALS,
AND HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS IMPLEMENT THE STRATEGIES AND INITIATIVES
DEVELOPED UNDER § 20–2403 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) REQUEST INTERVIEWS WITH STATE AND LOCAL OFFICIALS;

(3) REQUEST DATA FROM:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT;

(II) THE MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICES SYSTEMS;

(III) THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION;

(IV) THE MARYLAND HEALTH CARE COMMISSION;

(V) THE STATE–DESIGNATED HEALTH INFORMATION
EXCHANGE;

(VI) HOSPITALS IN THE STATE;

(VII) OTHER PROVIDERS OF HEALTH CARE SERVICES; AND

(VIII) PAYORS FOR HEALTH CARE SERVICES; AND

(4) CREATE ADVISORY WORKGROUPS THAT DO NOT INCLUDE
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION.

20–2405.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, AN ENTITY
THAT RECEIVES A REQUEST FOR DATA UNDER § 20–2404 OF THIS SUBTITLE SHALL:

(1) FOR DATA THAT DOES NOT CONTAIN PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION, PROMPTLY TRANSMIT THE DATA TO THE STAFF OF THE COMMISSION
PROVIDED BY THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION; AND

(2) FOR DATA THAT CONTAINS PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 844 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) PROMPTLY ENTER INTO AN APPROPRIATE DATA SHARING
AND USE AGREEMENT WITH THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION;
AND

(II) ON THE APPROVAL OF AN APPROPRIATE AGREEMENT BY
THE PARTIES, PROMPTLY TRANSMIT THE DATA, THROUGH A SECURE AND
ENCRYPTED MANNER, TO THE STAFF OF THE COMMISSION PROVIDED BY THE
HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION.

(B) IF AN ENTITY THAT RECEIVES A DATA REQUEST UNDER § 20–2404 OF
THIS SUBTITLE IS PROHIBITED FROM SHARING THE DATA UNDER FEDERAL LAW,
THE COMMISSION MAY NOT REQUIRE THE SUBMISSION OF THE DATA.

(C) THE COMMISSION MAY USE PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION
REQUESTED UNDER § 20–2404 OF THIS SUBTITLE ONLY FOR THE PURPOSE OF
MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS OF § 20–2403 OF THIS SUBTITLE AND COMPLETING
THE REPORTS REQUIRED UNDER § 20–2406 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION SUBMITTED UNDER
SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE SHARED WITH:

(1) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION WHO IS NOT AN EMPLOYEE OF
THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW COMMISSION; OR

(2) ANY OTHER PERSON THAT IS NOT A PARTY TO THE DATA SHARING
AND USE AGREEMENT FOR THE INFORMATION.

(E) COMMISSION STAFF SHALL:

(1) ANALYZE PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION SHARED
WITH THE COMMISSION STAFF; AND

(2) SHARE THE FINDINGS OF THE ANALYSIS WITH THE MEMBERS OF
THE COMMISSION IN A MANNER THAT DOES NOT REVEAL PERSONALLY
IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION.

20–2406.

(G) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY NOVEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, BEGINNING IN
2025, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A
REPORT ON ITS ACTIVITIES AND ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS,
INCLUDING AN UPDATE ON THE ~~IMPLEMENTATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~STANDARDIZED~~ ~~PROTOCOLS~~

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 844

AND OPERATIONAL EFFICIENCIES IN HOSPITAL EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS, TO
THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY DEVELOPMENT, IMPLEMENTATION, AND
IMPACT OF THE RECOMMENDED POLICIES AND PROGRAMS DEVELOPED TO
IMPROVE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT WAIT TIMES.

~~13–509.2.~~

(A) THE INSTITUTE, WITH THE ADVICE OF THE MARYLAND EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT WAIT TIME REDUCTION COMMISSION AND IN CONSULTATION WITH
THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION AND THE HEALTH SERVICES COST
~~REVIEW~~ ~~COMMISSION,~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) DEVELOP STANDARDIZED OPERATIONAL PROTOCOLS TO
ENHANCE EFFICIENCY IN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS, INCLUDING:

~~(I)~~ ~~PATIENT~~ ~~TRIAGE;~~

(II) PATIENT TREATMENT AND CARE; AND

(III) PATIENT DISCHARGE PROCEDURES;

(2) DEVELOP ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY SOLUTIONS FOR REAL–TIME
~~TRACKING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~MANAGEMENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PATIENT~~ ~~FLOW~~ ~~IN~~ ~~HOSPITAL~~ ~~EMERGENCY~~
~~DEPARTMENTS;~~

(3) DEVELOP AND PROVIDE TRAINING PROGRAMS FOR EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT STAFF TO ADAPT TO, AND IMPLEMENT, THE PROTOCOLS DEVELOPED
UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(4) ESTABLISH A SYSTEM FOR THE REGULAR MONITORING AND
~~EVALUATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~HOSPITAL~~ ~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~DEPARTMENT~~ ~~PERFORMANCE~~ ~~REGARDING~~
WAIT TIMES AND QUALITY OF PATIENT CARE.

(B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, EACH HOSPITAL SHALL
SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE INSTITUTE AND THE HEALTH SERVICES COST REVIEW
COMMISSION ON THE COMPLIANCE OF THE HOSPITAL’S EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT
~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROTOCOLS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~EFFICIENCIES~~ ~~DEVELOPED~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of June 30, 2027,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 844 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8