START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1125 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1125 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Certified Nursing Assistants - Licensing Requirements and Administrative 
Updates 
 
 
This bill alters the designation of and licensure requirements for a certified nursing assistant 
(CNA), creating new designations of “certified nursing assistant-I” (CNA-I) and “certified 
nursing assistant-II” (CNA-II). On or after October 1, 2025, a geriatric nursing assistant 
(GNA) and any CNA that has passed a specified nursing assistant training program and 
competency evaluation will be designated as a CNA-I. Those that do not meet these 
requirements will be designated as a CNA-II. By June 1, 2025, the State Board of Nursing 
(MBON) must (1) notify individuals with a nursing assistant certification of the bill’s 
requirements and (2) update regulations to confirm with the bill in consultation with the 
Office of Health Care Quality. The bill also alters exemptions from specified certification 
requirements and makes clarifying and conforming changes. The bill generally takes 
effect October 1, 2025; provisions relating to the requirement for MBON to notify 
CNAs and update regulations take effect October 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MBON special fund expenditures increase by $209,900 in FY 2025 for staff 
and one-time only licensing system updates. Future years reflect annualization and 
elimination of one-time costs. Special fund revenues are not likely affected, as discussed 
below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
209,900 
103,600 
108,200 
112,900 
117,900 
Net Effect 
($209,900) 
($103,600) 
($108,200) 
($112,900) 
($117,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1125/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
New Designation of Certified Nursing Assistant Credentials 
 
The bill alters the designation of CNA credentials to include CNA-I and CNA-II. “CNA-I” 
means a CNA who meets the requirements set by MBON and federal law to practice in any 
setting. CNA-I includes (1) a CNA who was certified as a GNA on September 30, 2025; 
(2) a certified medicine aide; and (3) a CNA-II certified as a CNA-I by MBON on or after  
October 1, 2025, as specified. 
 
“CNA-II” means a CNA (1) who, on September 30, 2025, was certified as a nursing 
assistant and was not authorized to practice in a nursing facility or skilled nursing facility 
and (2) whose authority to practice in a nursing facility or skilled nursing facility continues 
to be restricted because the CNA has not been approved as a CNA-I. 
 
The bill repeals the GNA credential and replaces it with CNA-I. 
 
An individual who has met the requirements for a CNA credential by October 1, 2025, 
must be certified as a CNA-I. Beginning October 1, 2025, a CNA-II may be certified as a 
CNA-I by submitting an application to MBON and providing satisfactory evidence of 
(1) successful completion of an approved nursing assistant training program and 
(2) passing a “nursing assistant competency evaluation.” “Nursing assistant competency 
evaluation” means an examination approved by MBON that (1) determines the competency 
of the individual to practice as a CNA-I and (2) meets the requirements under federal law. 
 
MBON, after consultation with relevant stakeholders, must adopt regulations establishing 
qualifications for CNAs, including medicine aides. 
 
Certified Nursing Assistant Applications 
 
The bill clarifies the training requirements an applicant must meet when applying for a 
nursing assistant certificate. An applicant must provide evidence of successful completion 
of (1) an approved nursing assistant training program or approved acute care nursing 
assistant training program; (2) an approved dialysis technician training program; (3) an 
approved course in medication administration; or (4) a portion of an approved nursing 
education program that meet the requirements of an approved nursing assistant training 
program or medication course. The bill repeals the requirement that a certified 
medicine aide submit an additional application to MBON. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1125/ Page 3 
An applicant for certification as a CNA must submit to MBON satisfactory evidence of 
passing a nursing assistant competency evaluation. An applicant who has completed an 
approved acute care nursing assistant training program must be deemed to have fulfilled 
the classroom and clinical standards to sit for the nursing assistant competency evaluation. 
 
Exemptions from Certification Requirements 
 
The bill alters current exemptions from the requirement to be certified by MBON to 
practice as a nursing assistant, dialysis technician, or medication technician. The bill adds 
three new exemptions from the certification requirement for an individual who: 
 
 
performs nursing assistant tasks as a student while enrolled in an acute care nursing 
assistant training program;   
 
performs nursing assistant tasks as a student while enrolled in an accredited nursing 
program after the successful completion of the portion of the approved nursing 
education program that MBON determines meets the requirements of an approved 
nursing assistant training program or medication administration course; or 
 
practices as a CNA-I for less than four months in accordance with federal 
regulations. 
 
The exemptions do not preclude a registered nurse (RN) or licensed practical nurse (LPN) 
from delegating a nursing or other technical task to an unlicensed individual if acceptance 
of delegated nursing or other technical tasks does not become a routine part of the 
unlicensed individual’s job duties. 
 
Certification Renewal Requirements 
 
When renewing a CNA certificate, a certificate holder must provide satisfactory evidence 
of completion of either (1) 16 hours of active certified nursing assistant practice within the 
immediately preceding two-year period or (2) successful completion of an approved 
nursing assistant training program or passing a nursing assistant competency evaluation. 
 
MBON, after collaboration with relevant stakeholders, must adopt regulations to specify 
the circumstances under which a nursing assistant, as a condition of renewal, must 
complete an approved nursing assistant training program or pass a nursing assistant 
competency examination. 
 
Nursing Assistant Training Programs 
 
The bill alters the definition of “approved nursing assistant training program” to mean a 
course of training that (1) meets the requirements under federal and State law and (2) is 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1125/ Page 4 
approved by MBON. “Approved acute care nursing assistant training program” means a 
course of training that meets the acute care nursing curriculum approved by MBON. 
 
The curriculum content for an approved nursing assistant training program must include, 
among other things, content that meets all specified federal requirements and all basic skills 
required of a nursing assistant regardless of the setting of the practice. 
 
Nursing assistant training program requirements may not be interpreted to impose 
additional requirements for a CNA-I beyond those required under federal law. A nursing 
assistant training program may continue to operate during the approval process. 
 
Nursing Support Staff 
 
The bill alters the definition of “nursing support staff” to remove GNAs from the list of 
professionals who are eligible to receive funds from the Maryland Loan Assistance 
Repayment Program for Nurses and Nursing Support Staff to repay their educational loans. 
This change in the bill is only technical in nature. An individual currently certified as a 
GNA should still be able to qualify for repayment assistance from the program as a CNA. 
Current law specifies that nursing support staff includes certified medication technicians, 
certified medicine aides, CNAs, and GNAs. 
 
Current Law:  Under current law, an individual must be certified by MBON to practice 
as a nursing assistant in the State. A CNA routinely performs nursing tasks delegated by 
an RN or an LPN. CNAs can obtain additional certification as a GNA, home health aide, 
certified medicine aide, or dialysis technician. 
 
Geriatric Nursing Assistants 
 
A GNA means a CNA who has successfully completed the requirements for a GNA 
mandated under federal law and MBON regulations. MBON must grant an applicant for 
certification as a GNA the status of GNA on their CNA certificate if the applicant is 
(1) certified as a CNA; (2) has successfully completed a CNA/GNA training program 
approved by MBON; and (3) has passed the GNA competency examination. 
 
Nurse Aid Competency Training Programs 
 
Federal regulations set requirements for nurse aid competency evaluations  
(42 CFR § 483.154). States must review and approve nurse aide training and competency 
evaluation programs (42 CFR § 483.151) and establish and maintain a registry of nurse 
aids (42 CFR § 483.156). MBON, in conjunction with the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission, must approve each nursing assistant training program prior to its 
implementation and provide periodic survey of all programs in the State. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1125/ Page 5 
Under federal regulations (42 CFR § 483.152), a nurse aid training and competency 
evaluation program must, at minimum (1) consist of no less than 75 hours of training; 
(2) include specified subjects; (3) include at least 16 hours of supervised practical training; 
(4) ensure students do not perform services they are not trained for and remain under the 
general supervision of a licensed nurse or RN; (5) meet specified requirements for 
instructors; and (6) contain specified competency evaluation procedures. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires MBON, by June 1, 2025, to adopt regulations to 
implement the bill’s requirements and notify individuals with a nursing assistant 
certification of the bill’s requirements. All GNAs and any CNA that has passed a nursing 
assistant training program that satisfies federal and State requirements, and a nursing 
assistant competency evaluation must be designated as a CNA-I by October 1, 2025. All 
other CNAs not authorized to practice in a nursing facility or skilled nursing facility must 
be designated as a CNA-II. Also beginning October 1, 2025, MBON must accept 
applications from any CNA-II who has successfully completed an approved nursing 
assistant training program and passed a nursing assistant competency evaluation and 
applies for a CNA-I credential. MBON must also approve specified nursing assistant 
training programs and ensure each training program complies with State and federal law. 
Although MBON currently approves nursing assistant training programs, MBON advises 
that existing staff cannot absorb the bill’s requirements. 
 
Therefore, MBON special fund expenditures increase by $209,901 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a 90-day start up delay from the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one nurse program administrator to provide guidance to 
approved nursing assistant training programs and review program compliance with 
specified federal standards. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. MBON advises that one-time costs of approximately 
$150,000 in fiscal 2025 only are necessary to update the board’s licensing software system 
to reflect the bill’s changes to CNA certification requirements and designations. 
 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Position 
1.0 
- 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$52,915 
$102,503 
Licensing System Update 
150,000 
- 
Operating Expenses 
6,986 
1,091 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$209,901 
$103,594 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
This analysis assumes that individuals currently certified by MBON will not be required to 
pay additional certification fees for redesignation as a CNA-I or CNA-II. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1125/ Page 6 
Additional Comments:  MBON has previously advised that Maryland is the only state 
with both CNA and GNA certifications. Nationally, CNAs have the flexibility to work in 
a hospital, long-term residential facilities, nursing homes, rehabilitation centers, adult day 
care centers, and clinical facility settings. In Maryland, CNAs are only authorized to 
practice in acute-care settings. MBON noted that GNAs must meet additional requirements 
to be eligible for certification and are authorized to practice in all acute-care and long-term 
care settings (including nursing homes). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 370 of 2023 and SB 82 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 999 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6