START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1115 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1115 
(Delegates Solomon and Palakovich Carr) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
County Boards of Education – Budgets – Notice (Transparency in Education 
Spending Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Education (SBE) to adopt a process for the uniform 
reporting of information in a county board of education budget to timely share the 
information provided by a county board of education in that budget to a 
county governing body. County boards must prepare their annual budget to include as 
major categories (1) specified current funds held in reserve; (2) the amount of any 
federal funds received in the last fiscal year; and (3) the amount of funds held in trust or 
otherwise dedicated toward long-term obligations for retiree health care costs or other 
postemployment benefits, and information used to calculate the county board’s obligation 
for those costs. Both the (1) county board budget as presented to the county commissioners, 
county council, or county executive and (2) the budget as approved by the county 
commissioners or county council (and that must be sent to the State Superintendent), must 
be posted on the county board’s public-facing website, in an easily identifiable location. 
The results of an audit required under current law must, within three months after the close 
of the fiscal year, be reported to the county council or county commissioners. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The Maryland State Department of Education can adopt the required 
uniform reporting process using existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal. Local school system administrative costs may increase by a 
potentially minimal amount. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1115/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each county board of education must prepare an annual budget according 
to the major categories listed in § 5-101 of the Education Article as well as any other major 
categories required by SBE. The annual budget for each local school system must include 
certain revenue and expenditure categories for the current expense fund and school 
construction fund. Expenditure categories for the current expense fund include:   
 
 
administration; 
 
mid-level administration; 
 
instructional salaries; 
 
textbooks and classroom instructional supplies; 
 
other instructional costs; 
 
special education; 
 
student personnel services; 
 
health services; 
 
student transportation; 
 
operation of plant and equipment; 
 
maintenance of plant; 
 
fixed charges; 
 
food services; and 
 
capital outlay. 
 
The annual school budget must be submitted in writing to the county commissioners, 
county council, or the county executive. The budget must be submitted not less than 
45 days before the date for levying local taxes or on an earlier date on or after March 1, as 
may be requested by the county fiscal authority. 
 
All revenues received by a county board must be spent by the board in accordance with the 
major categories of its annual budget. Each county board must provide for an annual audit 
of its financial transactions and accounts. 
 
Each county board must prepare, publish, and make available to interested parties an 
annual report on the condition, current accomplishments, and needs for improvement of 
the schools as well as a statement of the business and financial transactions of the 
county board. At the request of the county governing body made in writing at least 30 days 
before the reporting deadline, the county board or superintendent must report to the 
county governing body on or before November 1 and March 1 of each fiscal year on the 
school system’s operations, including any adjustment made to the approved annual budget. 
At the request of the county board made in writing at least 30 days before the reporting 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1115/ Page 3 
deadline the county governing body must report to the county board on or before 
November 1 and March 1 of each fiscal year on the county’s fiscal status for the immediate 
fiscal year and the subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local school system administrative costs may increase to meet the 
bill’s requirements. Increased costs may be driven by additional required budget categories 
and will depend upon the degree to which the reporting procedures adopted by SBE under 
the bill differ from current practice for each of the local school systems. However, any such 
costs should be minimal for most local school systems. 
 
Additional information on State and local funding for local school systems is provided in 
the Local Government Overview Report. The report shows the State funding amount and 
local appropriation to each local school system over a five-year period and the level of 
State and local support on a per pupil basis. A copy of the report is available on the 
Department of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1026 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public 
Schools; Prince George’s County; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State 
Department of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3