START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1155 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1155 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals - Opioid Overdose and Opioid-Related Emergency Medical Conditions 
- Treatment 
 
 
This bill requires each hospital to establish and maintain protocols and capacity to 
(1) provide appropriate, evidence-based interventions that reduce the risk of subsequent 
harm and fatality before discharging a patient after an opioid-related overdose or a visit for 
an opioid-related emergency medical condition; (2) possess specified medications used for 
the treatment of opioid use disorder (OUD); and (3) treat a patient who presents in a 
hospital emergency department (ED) for an opioid-related overdose or emergency medical 
condition with a medication for OUD, as specified. The bill takes effect January 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill primarily pertains to private-sector activities. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill primarily pertains to private-sector activities. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Each hospital must have the protocols and capacity to treat a patient who 
presents in a hospital ED for care and treatment of an opioid-related overdose or 
opioid-related emergency medical condition with a medication for OUD if the treatment 
occurs as recommended by the treating health care practitioner and is voluntarily agreed to 
by the patient. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1155/ Page 2 
A hospital must possess at least one formulation of each U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration-approved full and partial opioid agonist used for the treatment of OUD. 
 
A protocol established by a hospital must include:  
 
 
any Maryland Department of Health requirement regarding prescribing opioid 
agonist treatment;  
 
uniform practices for screening and diagnosing specified individuals who present 
with an OUD based on the criteria in the most recent edition of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; 
 
uniform practices for offering and administering opioid agonist medication to treat 
an opioid-related overdose or OUD; and 
 
uniform practices to identify community-based treatment services that are 
appropriate for treating OUDs and assisting patients to voluntarily access ongoing 
community-based treatment at discharge. 
 
Before discharging a patient who is diagnosed with an OUD or administered or prescribed 
medication for OUD, a hospital must (1) make a referral of the patient to an appropriate 
provider or facility for a timely appointment, when possible, to voluntarily continue 
treatment in the community and (2) work with peer support professionals, as available, or 
other resources to assist the patient in accessing the identified treatment services. 
 
Current Law:  The Secretary of Health must establish guidelines for the co-prescribing of 
opioid overdose reversal drugs that are applicable to all licensed health care providers in 
the State who are authorized to prescribe a monitored prescription drug. The guidelines 
must address the co-prescribing of opioid overdose reversal drugs for patients who are at 
an elevated risk of overdose and are (1) receiving opioid therapy for chronic pain; 
(2) receiving a prescription for benzodiazepines; or (3) being treated for OUD. 
 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 10.13.03.01 et. seq.) authorize a prescribing licensed 
health care provider (if the provider determines it to be appropriate) to co-prescribe an 
opioid overdose reversal drug if the individual is at an elevated risk of experiencing an 
opioid overdose by virtue of belonging to one or more categories of the targeted patient 
population. “Targeted patient population” means an individual likely to experience or 
witness an opioid overdose and includes an individual who (1) is being prescribed opioids 
for acute or chronic pain; (2) is being treated for an OUD; (3) is receiving a prescription 
for an opioid and a benzodiazepine; or (4) resides or spends time with an individual who 
is prescribed opioids, misuses opioids, or has an OUD. The prescribing licensed health care 
provider may provide risk monitoring and education and should document any education 
or clinical services related to the provision of an opioid overdose reversal drug in the 
patient’s medical chart. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1155/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1071 (Senator McKay) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3