START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1134 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1134 
(Delegates Bagnall and Lopez) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Hospitals and Related Institutions – Residential Treatment Centers – 
Accreditation 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of “accredited residential treatment center” to include a 
center accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF) 
or the Council on Accreditation (COA), in addition to the Joint Commission on 
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations under current law. The bill also makes 
conforming changes.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s changes can be absorbed within existing budget resources for the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An “accreditation organization” is a private entity that inspects and surveys 
health care facilities based on nationally recognized and developed standards. A “health 
care facility” includes a hospital, health maintenance organization, freestanding 
ambulatory care facility, assisted living facility, laboratory, home health agency, residential 
treatment 
center, 
comprehensive 
rehabilitation 
facility, 
forensic 
laboratory, 
substance-related disorder program, or mental health program.   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1134/ Page 2 
A “residential treatment center” means a psychiatric institution that provides campus-based 
intensive and extensive evaluation and treatment of children and adolescents with severe 
and chronic emotional disturbances who require a self-contained therapeutic, educational, 
and recreational program in a residential setting. An “accredited residential treatment 
center” means a residential treatment center that is accredited by the Joint Commission on 
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.  
 
If the Secretary of Health receives a final report from an approved accreditation 
organization that a health care facility or a health care staff agency is in substantial 
compliance with the organization’s standards, MDH must accept the report as evidence 
that the facility or agency has met the State’s licensure requirements and must grant the 
health care facility or staff agency “deemed status,” meaning the facility may be exempt 
from routine surveys conducted by MDH. 
 
A health care facility or staff agency that fails to achieve substantial compliance with the 
standards of an approved accreditation organization may be subject to requirements 
relating to the correction of deficiencies and may be required to take certain corrective 
action.  
 
MDH may inspect an accredited health care facility or a health care staff agency to 
(1) determine compliance with any quality requirement; (2) follow up on any serious 
problem identified by an approved accreditation organization; (3) investigate a complaint; 
or (4) validate the findings of an approved accreditation organization. MDH may also 
participate in or observe a survey or inspection of a health care facility or a health care staff 
agency conducted by an approved accreditation organization.  
        
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that a residential treatment center is a small business, 
the options for accreditation are expanded under the bill and the cost of obtaining 
accreditation may be more competitive. 
 
Additional Comments:  CARF is an independent, nonprofit accreditor of health and 
human services. Its stated mission is to promote the quality, value, and optimal outcomes 
of services through a consultative accreditation process and continuous improvement 
services that center on enhancing the lives of persons served.  
 
COA offers an independent, objective, and reliable verification that organizations and 
programs qualify for the confidence and support of their stakeholders. It involves a detailed 
review and analysis of an organization’s or program’s administrative functions and services 
delivery practices. All of which are measured against international standards of best 
practice. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1134/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 403 (Senator Klausmeier) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 9, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3