START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1127 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1127 
(Delegate Bartlett, et al.) 
Judiciary 
Finance 
 
Sexual Assault Forensic Examinations Conducted Through Telehealth - 
Reimbursement and Study 
 
 
This bill requires specified health care providers to provide sexual assault forensic exams 
conducted through “peer-to-peer telehealth” without charge to victims and makes those 
services eligible for reimbursement by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB). 
In addition, existing provisions that provide immunity from civil liability to physicians or 
qualified health care providers who provide specified examinations apply to sexual assault 
forensic exams conducted through peer-to-peer telehealth. The bill also requires the 
Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee to study and make 
recommendations on the feasibility of a telehealth program in the State, as specified; the 
committee must report its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly by 
December 1, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024; the study and reporting provisions 
terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2025 to process 
additional claims and provide additional reimbursements, but a reliable estimate of any 
such increase cannot be made at this time, as discussed below. State revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1127/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
“Peer-to-peer telehealth” means, as it relates to the performance of a forensic examination, 
the use of interactive audio, video, or other telecommunications or electronic technology 
by a forensic nurse examiner to assist in the performance of a forensic examination when 
the forensic nurse examiner is in one location and the patient is with a qualified health care 
provider in another location. “Peer-to-peer telehealth” does not include (1) an email 
message between a health care provider and a patient, or (2) a facsimile transmission 
between a health care provider and a patient. 
 
Required Study 
 
The Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee must study and 
make recommendations on the feasibility of a telehealth program in the State that includes 
a TeleSAFE Pilot Program, which uses telehealth to support the provision of sexual assault 
forensic examinations. The study must include (1) the framework of a TeleSAFE Pilot 
Program; (2) a plan for the development and implementation of the TeleSAFE Pilot 
Program; and (3) a process to expand the TeleSAFE Pilot Program over time.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Post-sexual Assault Care and Provider Reimbursement – In General  
 
Under § 11‐1007 of the Criminal Procedure Article, if a physician, qualified health care 
provider, or hospital provides any of the following services to a victim of an alleged rape, 
sexual offense, or child sexual abuse, the services must be provided without charge and the 
physician/provider or hospital is entitled to be reimbursed by CICB, a board within the 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP), for the costs of providing the 
services:  (1) a physical and sexual assault forensic examination to gather information and 
evidence as to an alleged crime, as specified; (2) emergency hospital treatment and 
follow-up medical testing for up to 90 days after the initial physical examination; and (3) up 
to five hours of professional time to gather information and evidence, as specified.  
 
The Sexual Assault Reimbursement Unit (SARU) within GOCPP oversees the 
reimbursement for the physical examination, collection of evidence, and emergency 
treatment of individuals for injuries resulting from alleged rape, sexual assault, or child 
sexual abuse. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $1.3 million in general funds 
for SARU. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1127/ Page 3 
A physician or qualified health care provider who examines a victim of alleged child sexual 
abuse under applicable provisions is immune from any civil liability that may result from 
the failure of the physician or qualified health care provider to obtain consent from the 
child’s parent, guardian, or custodian for the examination or treatment of the child. The 
immunity extends to any hospital with which the physician or qualified health care provider 
is affiliated or to which the child is brought and any individual working under the control 
or supervision of the hospital.   
 
Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and Funding Committee 
 
Chapter 659 of 2017 established the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence Kit Policy and 
Funding Committee to develop and disseminate best practices information and 
recommendations regarding, among other things, the creation and operation of a statewide 
sexual assault evidence collection kit tracking system that is accessible to victims of sexual 
assault and law enforcement. In January 2024, the committee released its annual report, 
which includes discussion and related recommendations regarding the establishment of 
TeleSAFE Programming. According to the report, “TeleSAFE” generally means 
teleconference sexual assault forensic exams. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2025 to 
process additional claims and provide additional reimbursements, as discussed below, but 
a reliable estimate of any such increase cannot be made at this time. 
 
Administrative Expenses 
 
GOCPP advises that it anticipates an increase in reimbursement claims that SARU must 
process as a result of the bill and that existing staff cannot handle the increase in workload. 
Specifically, GOCCP advises that it needs to hire one administrator at an estimated cost of 
approximately $91,800 in fiscal 2025, increasing to $94,700 in fiscal 2029. While the 
Department of Legislative Services acknowledges that GOCCP may need staff if the 
volume of claims is significant; however, without actual experience under the bill, the 
number of additional claims SARU must process – and the corresponding need for 
additional staff – is unclear. 
 
Peer-To-Peer Telehealth Reimbursements 
 
General fund expenditures increase to the extent victims seek sexual assault forensic 
examination services via peer-to-peer telehealth and health care providers seek 
reimbursement from SARU for those services. The extent to which this will occur, 
however, cannot be predicted in advance. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1127/ Page 4 
Mandated Study and Report 
 
The Office of the Attorney General, which staffs the Maryland Sexual Assault Evidence 
Kit Policy and Funding Committee, advises that the committee can conduct the required 
study and complete the required report using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 950 (Senator Hettleman) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Office of the 
Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4