START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1198 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1198 
(Delegate Amprey) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – 40th Alcoholic Beverages District – 
Revisions 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class M-F (Municipal Family Fun Center) alcoholic beverages 
license in the 40th alcoholic beverages district in Baltimore City and authorizes the 
Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners to issue a license for use at a municipal 
bowling alley and skating rink located on the odd side of the 1600 block of 
Pennsylvania Avenue. The annual license fee is $500. The bill also authorizes the board to 
issue a Class B beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license for a restaurant on the even side of 
the 400 block of West 29th Street in the 40th alcoholic beverages district if (1) the applicant 
executes a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Greater Remington 
Improvement Association and (2) the board waives a minimum seating requirement, as 
specified. The bill specifies a Class A license issued for a premises on the odd side of the 
unit block of West Biddle Street must be considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, for the 
purpose of being renewed. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and the provision related 
to the expiration of a specified license on West Biddle Street terminates July 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues increase by at least $3,000 in FY 2025 due to the 
issuance of three new Class M-F licenses, and to the extent Class B BWL licenses are 
issued under the bill, as discussed below. Baltimore City can handle any additional 
enforcement activity with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall but potential meaningful for a bowling alley or 
skating rink located at the specified location in the bill. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1198/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Class M-F license established by the bill in the 40th Alcoholic 
Beverages District of Baltimore City may be issued by the board to an individual who  
(1) is authorized by the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City through a management 
agreement to sell food and beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption, and (2) has 
executed an MOU with the Upton West Community Association. The licensee is 
authorized to sell beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises consumption during the hours of 
sale for alcoholic beverages specified in the bill.  
 
The board must adopt regulations to carry out the bill’s provisions, including regulations 
concerning the holding of events that are closed to the public. The licensee may not 
participate in or publicize, in or outside of the licensed premises, a pub crawl authorized 
under the Alcohol and Cannabis Article or allow an open bar to be operated unless the 
event is closed to the public.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Specified Venue Licenses  
 
In Baltimore City, the board is authorized to issue specified alcoholic beverages licenses, 
if certain conditions are met, for use by a range of different venues. Examples of such 
venues include arenas; marketplaces; municipal golf courses; racetracks; video lottery 
concessionaires; video lottery facilities; and a zoo. Also, the board is authorized to issue 
multiple licenses for the same premises, or to an individual, as specified, if the licenses are 
Class D beer or Class D beer and light wine licenses, and each premises is a bowling 
establishment that has at least 30 lanes with automatic pinsetters.  
 
Pub Crawl Promoter’s Permit 
 
A “pub crawl” means an event during which an organized group of at least three alcoholic 
beverages license holders with premises within walking distance of each other participate 
in a coordinated promotion to sell or provide alcoholic beverages during a specified time 
period and at least 75 individuals are reasonably expected to participate. A pub crawl 
promoter or a participating license holder on behalf of a promoter must obtain the permit 
from the board before the pub crawl promoter may publicize, sell tickets for, organize, 
operate, produce, or stage a pub crawl.  
 
Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
  
A Class B BWL license authorizes the holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor at a hotel or 
restaurant for on-or off-premises consumption. Annual license fees are $1,320 for a 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1198/ Page 3 
licensed premises with a seating capacity of up to 200 and $1,800 for a licensed premises 
with a seating capacity of more than 200. A license holder must annually pay an additional 
$500 fee to provide live entertainment and/or a $200 fee to provide outdoor table service. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City advises that currently there are three bowling alley 
and skating rink facilities that will apply for the Class M-F license in the 40th alcoholic 
beverages district. Accordingly, Baltimore City revenues increase by $3,300 in fiscal 2025 
from license fee revenues and $1,650 annually thereafter. The estimate reflects an initial 
$600 application fee, an annual license fee of $500, and a subsequent $50 renewal fee for 
each license. 
 
To the extent the board issues a Class B BWL license under the bill, revenues increase by 
$1,920 to $2,400 at the time of application in fiscal 2025, and $1,370 to $1,850 annually 
thereafter. The estimate reflects an initial $600 application fee, the annual license fee of 
$1,320 or $1,800, depending upon the seating capacity of the licensed premises, and a 
subsequent $50 renewal fee for each license.      
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1008 (Senator Hayes) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3