START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1103 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1103 
(Delegate Wolek, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Miriam Kelty Aging and Senior Social Connection Hub and Spoke Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Miriam Kelty Aging and Senior Social Connection Hub and Spoke 
Pilot Program in the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA). The goal of the pilot 
program is to support “villages” that seek to take advantage of operational proficiencies 
and existing systems, knowledge, skills, and resources to expand services to more residents 
in the geographic region. MDOA must select the Montgomery County Village Consortium 
to implement the pilot program for a three-year period. For fiscal 2026 through 2028, the 
Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $80,000 for the pilot 
program. Funds must be transferred by MDOA to the Montgomery County Village 
Consortium to be used for (1) employing an operations manager; (2) fundraising; 
(3) marketing and outreach; and (4) programming. By September 1, 2027, the 
Montgomery County Village Consortium must submit a final report to MDOA on the 
implementation of the pilot program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates 
June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDOA general fund expenditures increase by $80,000 in FY 2026 through 
FY 2028 to reflect the mandated appropriation for the pilot program. Revenues are not 
affected. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2026 through 2028. 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
80,000 
80,000 
80,000 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($80,000) 
($80,000) 
($80,000) 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1103/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Village” means local, volunteer-led organizations that aim to support 
community members who choose to age-in-place, including by fostering social 
connections through activities and events, and coordinating volunteer help at home using 
neighbor-helping-neighbor model. 
 
The purpose of the pilot program is to (1) learn, test, and develop best practices using a 
hub and a spoke model for village administration; (2) centralize administrative tasks and 
relieve the burden on volunteers; (3) better coordinate resources and operations to 
maximize the reach of services provided; (4) help develop new and developing or emerging 
villages; and (5) build social connection and combat loneliness for seniors aging-in-place. 
 
Strategic Plan and Annual Report 
 
The Montgomery County Village Consortium must (1) establish a three-year strategic plan 
for the implementation of the pilot program and (2) submit a report to MDOA each year, 
using quantitative data if available, regarding the implementation of the strategic plan. 
 
The report must include a description of the progress of the plan in the following areas: 
administration, direct services provided, communications, operations, programming, 
fundraising, outreach, financials (including an accounting of the appropriated funds), and 
client satisfaction among leaders of villages that participate in the pilot program. 
 
Final Report 
 
By September 1, 2027, the Montgomery County Village Consortium must submit a report 
to MDOA on the implementation of the pilot program, including (1) comprehensive best 
practices for creating and operating a hub and spoke model, as specified; and 
(2) recommendations regarding how to support interested diverse and underserved 
communities with the development of villages. 
 
Current Law:  Aging-in-place programs allow individuals to remain in their home while 
participating in their community safely, independently, and comfortably, regardless of their 
age, income, or ability level. Under § 10-801 of the Human Services Article, the Maryland 
Communities for a Lifetime Program within MDOA must establish a comprehensive State 
plan to address the aging-in-place preference of current and future seniors. MDOA must 
collect and make available best practices on policies to encourage aging-in-place. 
 
State Expenditures:  MDOA general fund expenditures increase by $80,000 as a result of 
the bill’s mandatory appropriation in fiscal 2026 through 2028. Funds must be passed 
through MDOA to the Montgomery County Village Consortium to implement the pilot 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1103/ Page 3 
program as required under the bill. Any limited administrative expenditures for MDOA, 
such as executing an agreement, monitoring, and oversight can be absorbed with existing 
budgeted resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  There are several villages in Montgomery County aimed to 
support community members who choose to age-in-place. 
 
In general, the hub and spoke model allows for specified services to be provided at the 
“spokes” and central leadership to be provided by the “hub.” In November 2022, 
Millcreek Village in Montgomery County completed a hub and spoke villages survey. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 875 (Senator Kelly) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Montgomery County; 
Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3