START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 488

Chapter 488

(House Bill 1147)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – Playground Surfacing Materials – Prohibitions

FOR the purpose of prohibiting, on or after a certain date, a person from ~~using~~ installing,
supplying, selling, soliciting, or offering for sale playground surfacing materials that
contain a certain concentration of lead or a component product, material, or
substance to which PFAS chemicals were previously intentionally added for certain
purposes ~~certain~~ ~~concentrations~~ ~~of~~ ~~certain~~ ~~chemicals~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~construction~~ ~~or~~
~~renovation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~ground~~ ~~surface~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~playground~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State;~~ prohibiting a county,
municipality, or unit of local government from adopting any ordinance, rule, or
regulation related to the use of certain playground surfacing materials that is less
stringent than the requirements of this Act; requiring a certain manufacturer to
establish and provide to the Department of the Environment a certain certificate of
compliance under certain circumstances; and generally relating to playground
surfacing materials.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 6–16A–01 through 6–16A–05 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 16A.
Playground Surfacing Materials”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

SUBTITLE 16A. PLAYGROUND SURFACING MATERIALS.

6–16A–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “PAH” MEANS POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS.

(C) (B) “PFAS CHEMICALS” MEANS A CLASS OF FLUORINATED ORGANIC
CHEMICALS THAT CONTAIN AT LEAST ONE FULLY FLUORINATED CARBON ATOM,
INCLUDING PER– AND POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 488 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (C) “PLAYGROUND” MEANS A PUBLIC OUTDOOR RECREATION AREA
FOR CHILDREN EQUIPPED WITH ONE OR MORE PLAY STRUCTURES.

(E) (D) “PLAYGROUND SURFACING MATERIALS” MEANS PRODUCTS,
MATERIALS, OR SUBSTANCES USED OR INSTALLED ON THE GROUND SURFACE OF A
PLAYGROUND IN THE STATE THAT COME INTO DIRECT CONTACT WITH A PERSON.

6–16A–02.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS SECTION, THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT LIMIT
THE POWER OF A COUNTY, MUNICIPALITY, OR UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO
ADOPT ORDINANCES, RULES, OR REGULATIONS RELATED TO PLAYGROUND
SURFACING MATERIALS THAT CONTAIN PAH, PFAS, PFAS CHEMICALS OR LEAD.

(B) A COUNTY, MUNICIPALITY, OR UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT MAY NOT
ADOPT ANY ORDINANCE, RULE, OR REGULATION RELATED TO PLAYGROUND
SURFACING MATERIALS THAT CONTAIN PAH, PFAS, PFAS CHEMICALS OR LEAD
THAT IS LESS STRINGENT THAN THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THIS SUBTITLE DOES NOT AFFECT THE AUTHORITY OF A COUNTY,
MUNICIPALITY, OR UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO ENACT AND ENFORCE
STANDARDS OR REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO PLAYGROUND SURFACING MATERIALS
THAT CONTAIN PAH, PFAS, PFAS CHEMICALS OR LEAD THAT ARE MORE
STRINGENT THAN THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

6–16A–03.

(A) ON OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2024, A PERSON MAY NOT USE INSTALL,
SUPPLY, SELL, SOLICIT, OR OFFER FOR SALE IN THE STATE PLAYGROUND
SURFACING MATERIALS THAT CONTAIN:

(1) MORE THAN 90 PARTS PER MILLION OF LEAD; OR

(2) A COMPONENT PRODUCT, MATERIAL, OR SUBSTANCE TO WHICH
PFAS CHEMICALS WERE PREVIOUSLY INTENTIONALLY ADDED IN THE FORMATION
OF THAT COMPONENT WHERE THE CONTINUED PRESENCE OF THE PFAS
CHEMICALS WAS DESIRED IN THE COMPONENT TO PROVIDE A SPECIFIC
CHARACTERISTIC.

(2) FLUORINATED ORGANIC CHEMICALS THAT CONTAIN AT LEAST 1
FULLY FLUORINATED CARBON ATOM, INCLUDING PFAS SUBSTANCES; AND

(3) MORE THAN 20 MILLIGRAMS PER KILOGRAM OF PAH.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 488

(B) A MANUFACTURER THAT MANUFACTURES, SELLS, OFFERS FOR SALE,
OR DISTRIBUTES FOR USE IN THE STATE PLAYGROUND SURFACING MATERIALS
SHALL ESTABLISH A CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE TO ATTEST THAT THE
PLAYGROUND SURFACING MATERIALS ARE IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) ON REQUEST OF THE DEPARTMENT AND WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE
REQUEST IS MADE, A MANUFACTURER SHALL PROVIDE THE CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLIANCE ESTABLISHED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
DEPARTMENT.

6–16A–04.

THE DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SUBTITLE.

6–16A–05.

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, THE
PROVISIONS OF §§ 9–334 THROUGH 9–341 AND 9–343 THROUGH 9–344 OF THIS
ARTICLE APPLY TO ENFORCE VIOLATIONS OF:

(1) THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) ANY REGULATION ADOPTED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(3) ANY ORDER ISSUED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SUBTITLE IS SUBJECT TO:

(1) A CIVIL PENALTY UP TO $2,500 FOR EACH VIOLATION; OR

(2) AN ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY UP TO $2,500 FOR EACH
VIOLATION, BUT NOT EXCEEDING $100,000 TOTAL.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or
application to any contract awarded for the installation, supply, sale, solicitation, or offer
for sale of playground surfacing materials before the effective date of this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3