START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1122 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1122 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission – Nursing Homes – Acquisitions 
 
 
This bill requires a person, at least 60 days before the closing date of the acquisition of a 
nursing home, to submit a request for “acquisition” to the Maryland Health Care 
Commission (MHCC) and provide specified notice to the residents, resident 
representatives, and employees of the nursing home. The executive director of MHCC must 
review a completed request for acquisition within 45 days and, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Health (or their designee), may approve the acquisition, approve the 
acquisition with conditions, deny the acquisition, or refer the request for acquisition to 
MHCC for a final decision. The bill (1) removes the requirement for MHCC to provide 
specified written findings and recommendations to the Office of Health Care Quality 
(OHCQ) when evaluating a notice of acquisition or transfer of interest of a nursing home 
and (2) alters the requirement for the Secretary of Health to consider MHCC’s findings and 
decisions before taking action to approve, deny, approve with conditions, or revoke a 
nursing home license. By January 1, 2025, MHCC must adopt specified regulations, to be 
applicable to nursing home acquisitions executed after the adoption of the regulations. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MHCC special fund expenditures increase by $107,100 in FY 2025 for staff, 
as discussed below. Future years reflect annualization and ongoing operating costs. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
107,100 
130,200 
135,900 
141,900 
148,100 
Net Effect 
($107,100) 
($130,200) 
($135,900) 
($141,900) 
($148,100)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1122/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Acquisition” means (1) a transfer or stock of assets that results in a 
change of the person that controls a health care facility or (2) the transfer of more than 25% 
of stock or ownership interest in a health care facility. 
 
A person must provide notice to MHCC at least 30 days before the closing of a change of 
ownership of a nursing home that (1) involves at least a 5% transfer in ownership interest 
and (2) is not an acquisition that requires approval under the bill. 
 
At least 60 days before the closing date of the acquisition of a nursing home, a person must 
submit to MHCC a request for acquisition and provide notice to the residents, resident 
representatives, and employees of the nursing home that (1) the request for acquisition was 
submitted to MHCC and (2) there will be an opportunity to submit comments. This 
requirement does not apply to an acquisition that involves only changes of ownership 
interests among existing owners of a nursing home. 
 
The executive director of MHCC must review a completed request for acquisition within 
45 days after receiving the request from the applicant. To approve a request, the executive 
director must find that the acquisition is consistent with the State Health Plan and is in the 
public interest. In determining if the acquisition is in the public interest, the executive 
director must consult with the Attorney General on whether the acquisition raises public 
interest concerns and solicit and accept comments from individuals who (1) reside in the 
nursing home; (2) have family members who reside in the nursing home; or (3) are 
employees of the nursing home. 
 
If the executive director refers a request for acquisition to MHCC, the commission must 
use the criteria specified in the bill and regulations adopted by MHCC to make a final 
decision within 60 days after receiving the completed request from the applicant. If the 
executive director denies a request for acquisition or imposes a condition on the approval 
of the acquisition, a person that is a party to the acquisition may submit a written request 
for MHCC to review the decision in accordance with regulations adopted by MHCC. 
 
The executive director’s decision must be a final decision for the purpose of judicial 
review. A person that is a party to the acquisition may take a direct judicial appeal within 
30 days after MHCC makes a final decision. MHCC must send each final decision to the 
Secretary of Health, the Secretary of Aging, OHCQ, the Office of the Attorney General 
(OAG), and the State Long-Term Care Ombudsman. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1122/ Page 3 
Required Reporting 
 
By July 1 immediately following the acquisition of a nursing home and each year for 
three years thereafter, the person that acquired the nursing home must submit a report to 
MHCC in accordance with regulations. MHCC must provide the report required to the 
Secretary of Health, the Secretary of Aging, OHCQ, OAG, and the State Long-Term Care 
Ombudsman. 
 
Required Regulations 
 
MHCC must adopt regulations through an update to the State Health Plan for Facilities and 
Services that:   
 
 
require the person that acquired ownership of a nursing home to (1) reduce the 
number of resident rooms that contain more than two beds in accordance with 
standards established by MHCC or (2) receive a waiver from this requirement; 
 
(1) if necessary, allow the person that acquired ownership of a nursing home to 
temporarily delicense beds for at least three years immediately following the 
acquisition to reduce the number of resident rooms that contain more than two beds 
and (2) authorize MHCC to extend the period the beds are temporarily delicensed 
beyond three years for good cause shown, including demonstrated progress toward 
eliminating multibedded rooms by expanding the existing facility or transferring the 
beds to another facility within a merged asset system in the same jurisdiction; 
 
establish standards for the evaluation of the quality of the nursing homes currently 
or previously owned, whether in the State or outside the State, by the person that 
submitted a request for acquisition; and 
 
establish criteria for the executive director and MHCC to consider when making a 
decision regarding a request for acquisition. 
 
The established criteria must require that MHCC take into consideration whether any 
nursing home currently or previously owned, within or outside the State, by the person 
submitting the request, for the period of three years immediately preceding the submission 
of the request (1) maintained a quality assessment and assurance committee that met at 
least quarterly; (2) was the subject of an enforcement action, a special focus facility 
designation, or a deficiency involving serious or immediate threat, actual harm, or 
immediate jeopardy to a resident; or (3) was the subject of a lawsuit, a judgement, or an 
arbitration finding, following a complaint filed by a resident, resident representative, or a 
government agency. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1122/ Page 4 
Nursing Home Licensure 
 
An applicant for licensure as a nursing home must submit evidence that a request for 
acquisition for the nursing home was approved as specified under the bill. 
 
Current Law:  A nursing home is a facility that offers nonacute care to patients suffering 
from a disease, chronic illness, condition, disability of advanced age, or terminal disease 
requiring maximal nursing care without continuous hospital services. In Maryland, nursing 
homes are licensed by OHCQ within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH). 
 
MHCC is an independent commission within MDH with a mission to plan for health 
system needs, promote informed decision making, increase accountability, and improve 
access in a rapidly changing health care environment by providing timely and accurate 
information on availability, cost, and quality of services to policymakers, purchasers, 
providers, and the public. 
 
Certificate of Need 
 
The Certificate of Need (CON) program, located within MHCC, requires review and 
approval of certain types of proposed health care facility and service projects by MHCC, 
including before a person acquires a health care facility, with specified exceptions. A CON 
is not required for acquisition of a health care facility if, at least 30 days before making the 
contractual arrangement to acquire the facility, written notice of intent is filed with MHCC 
and MHCC finds, within 30 days of receipt of the notice, that the health services or bed 
capacity of the facility will not change. 
 
As part of the nursing home licensure process, the person acquiring a nursing home must 
also provide MDH with written notice of the acquisition or change in the operator of a 
nursing home at the same time the written notice of intent is filed with MHCC. 
 
Nursing Home Ownership Interest 
 
A nursing home must include in the application for licensure the identity of any person 
with an ownership interest in a nursing home and any management company, landlord, or 
other business entity that will operate or contract with the applicant to manage the nursing 
home. If there are any changes to this information, a nursing home must notify MDH within 
30 days after the effective date of the change. On review of the required ownership 
information, (and other information that affirmatively demonstrates an applicant’s ability 
to comply with specified standards) the Secretary of Health may approve or deny a nursing 
home license application, as specified, or revoke a license to operate a nursing home. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1122/ Page 5 
Nursing Home Acquisition Requirements 
 
Chapters 288 and 289 of 2023 required MHCC, when evaluating a notice of acquisition or 
transfer of interest of a nursing home, to provide specified written findings and 
recommendations to OHCQ, including:   
 
 
the quality ratings of facilities currently or previously owned, within or outside the 
State, by the purchaser, as specified; 
 
for the immediately preceding three-year period, for facilities currently or 
previously owned, within or outside the State, by the purchaser (1) evidence that 
facilities maintained quality assessment and assurance committees that met at least 
quarterly; (2) inspection of care reports and corrective action plans; (3) licensing 
and certification surveys and corrective action plans; and (4) lawsuits or arbitration 
filings by any patient or patient representative against facilities; 
 
the tax identification number of each purchaser; 
 
the personal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services certification number of 
each purchaser; and  
 
a summary of the findings and the basis for the recommendations. 
 
The Secretary of Health must consider MHCC’s findings and recommendations before 
taking action to approve, deny, approve with conditions, or revoke a nursing home license. 
 
Chapters 288 and 289 also required MHCC, in consultation with specified stakeholders, to 
(1) complete a specified study regarding the expansion of the CON program over the 
acquisition of nursing homes and (2) submit a specified report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee. The report 
recommended, among other things, (1) for MHCC to provide a report to the Secretary of 
Health, OHCQ, and OAG for each nursing home acquisition; (2) a seller to notify all 
residents and their families of a pending acquisition; and (3) MHCC to provide an update 
regarding the nursing home acquisition for three years after the acquisition date. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill requires MHCC to adopt regulations, review and make 
decisions regarding completed requests for acquisition, and periodically review specified 
reports from the person that acquired the nursing home. MHCC advises that the bill’s 
nursing home acquisition regulations require in depth analysis and expertise that cannot be 
absorbed within existing staff. Therefore, MHCC special fund expenditures increase by 
$107,058 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This 
estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program manager to review and analyze nursing 
home acquisitions. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1122/ Page 6 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$99,802 
Operating Expenses 
      7,256 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$107,058 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDH advises that the bill is consistent with MHCC’s 
January 2024 report Nursing Home Acquisitions and Licensures Recommendations 
required under Chapters 288 and 289. The Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) 
advises that MHCC’s acquisition review process will run parallel to MDOA’s acquisition 
review process for continuing care retirement communities when those facilities also 
licensed as nursing homes. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been not introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1000 (Senator Beidle) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Office of the Attorney General; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 24, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 24, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6