START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1147 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1147 
(Delegate Guyton, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment - Playground Surfacing Materials - Prohibitions 
 
 
This bill prohibits, beginning October 1, 2024, a person from installing, supplying, selling, 
soliciting, or offering for sale in the State playground surfacing materials that contain 
(1) more than 90 parts per million of lead or (2) a component product, material, or 
substance to which “PFAS chemicals” were previously intentionally added in the formation 
of that component where the continued presence of the PFAS chemicals was desired in the 
component to provide a specific characteristic. The bill establishes provisions relating to 
(1) certificates of compliance by manufacturers; (2) enforcement; and (3) the ability of 
local governments to adopt ordinances, rules, or regulations related to playground surfacing 
materials that contain PFAS chemicals or lead. The Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE) may adopt regulations to carry out the bill. The bill must be construed 
to apply only prospectively, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $118,900 in FY 2025; out-years 
reflect annualization and ongoing costs. Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
118,900 
97,700 
68,700 
70,800 
72,900 
Net Effect 
($118,900) 
($97,700) 
($68,700) 
($70,800) 
($72,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1147/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “PFAS chemicals” means a class of fluorinated organic chemicals that 
contain at least one fully fluorinated carbon atom, including per- and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances. “Playground surfacing materials” means products, materials, or substances 
used or installed on the ground surface of a playground in the State that come into direct 
contact with a person. 
 
A manufacturer that manufactures, sells, offers for sale, or distributes for use in the State 
playground surfacing materials must establish a certificate of compliance to attest that the 
materials are in compliance with the bill’s provisions. On request by MDE and within 
30 days of such a request, a manufacturer must provide such a certificate to MDE. 
 
The bill specifies that the provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 and §§ 9-343 through 9-344 
of the Environment Article apply to enforce violations of the bill or any regulation or order 
issued under the bill. In addition, a person who violates the bill is subject to a civil penalty 
of up to $2,500 for each violation or an administrative penalty of up to $2,500 for each 
violation, not exceeding $100,000 total. 
 
The bill does not limit the power of a county, municipality, or unit of local government to 
adopt ordinances, rules, or regulations related to playground surfacing materials that 
contain PFAS chemicals or lead. A county, municipality, or local government may not 
adopt any ordinance, rule, or regulation related to playground surfacing materials that 
contain PFAS chemicals or lead that is less stringent than the bill’s requirements. The bill 
does not affect the authority of a county, municipality, or unit of local government to enact 
and enforce standards or requirements that are more stringent than the bill’s requirements. 
 
The bill must be construed to apply only prospectively and may not be applied or 
interpreted to have any effect on or application to any contract awarded for the installation, 
supply, sale, solicitation, or offer for sale of playground surfacing materials the bill’s 
effective date. 
 
Current Law:  Current law does not specifically address the content of playground 
surfacing materials. 
 
Existing Restrictions on Lead and PFAS Chemicals in Products 
 
Title 6, Subtitle 16 of the Environment Article governs PFAS chemicals and addresses the 
use, manufacture, sale, distribution, and disposal of Class B fire-fighting foam that contains 
intentionally added PFAS chemicals in the State as well as the manufacture, sale, and 
distribution for sale or use in the State a rug or carpet to which PFAS chemicals have been 
intentionally added. Manufacturers of rugs or carpets for sale or use in the State must 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1147/ Page 3 
establish a certificate of compliance to attest that the rug or carpet is in compliance and 
must provide the certificate to MDE on request. 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 19 of the Environment Article governs toxics in packaging and generally 
prohibits a manufacturer or distributor from selling or offering for sale (or for promotional 
purposes) any package or packaging component or any product in a package or packaging 
component to which lead, cadmium, mercury, or hexavalent chromium was intentionally 
added during manufacture or distribution. In addition, a manufacturer or distributor may 
not manufacture or knowingly sell, offer for sale, or distribute for sale or use in the State a 
food package or food packaging component designed and intended for direct food contact 
to which PFAS chemicals were intentionally added. 
 
Under the Health-General Article, effective January 1, 2025, a person may not knowingly 
manufacture, sell, deliver, hold, or offer for sale in the State a cosmetic product that 
contains specified PFAS chemicals (and their salts) if intentionally added. 
 
Relevant Enforcement Provisions 
 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 of the Environment Article, which are 
established under provisions relating to Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article 
(Water Pollution Control), establish enforcement procedures that govern (1) the ability of 
MDE to issue complaints, conduct hearings, issue corrective orders, and obtain injunctive 
relief and (2) judicial review of final decisions. 
 
Under § 9-343 of the Environment Article, a person who violates any provision of or fails 
to perform any duty imposed by Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article, or who 
violates any provision or fails to perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order, or 
permit adopted or issued under that subtitle, is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction 
is subject to a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year for a 
first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years for 
a subsequent offense. The person may also be enjoined from continuing the violation. 
Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation. 
 
In addition, a person is guilty of misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum 
fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years if the person (1) knowingly makes 
any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, 
or other document filed or required to be maintained under the subtitle or (2) falsifies, 
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required 
to be maintained under the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or 
issued under the subtitle. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1147/ Page 4 
Pursuant to § 9-344 of the Environment Article, the Attorney General is in charge of 
prosecuting and defending cases that arise on behalf of the State. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland Department of the Environment Administrative Costs 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $118,858 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the 
bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the costs for (1) MDE to hire 
one environmental compliance specialist to enforce the bill’s prohibition, including 
requesting, reviewing, and verifying manufacturer certificates of compliance, sampling and 
testing products being offered for sale in the State, and meeting with manufacturer and 
distributor representatives; (2) a vehicle for the environmental compliance specialist; and 
(3) contractual laboratory services to test playground surfacing materials. The estimate 
includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs (including the purchase of a 
vehicle), and ongoing operating costs (including laboratory services). 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$56,952 
Vehicle Purchase 
32,000 
Laboratory Services 
20,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
      9,906 
Total FY 2025 MDE Expenditures 
$118,858 
 
Future years reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Once the bill’s prohibition has been in 
effect for a period of time and manufacturers and purchasers are aware of the prohibition, 
it is assumed that the environmental compliance specialist is able to transition from a 
full-time position to a part-time (50%) position. Accordingly, beginning in fiscal 2027, the 
estimates reflect that transition. 
 
Impacts to State Agencies and Local Governments as Purchasers/Users 
 
The bill’s prohibition may result in increased costs for State agencies (primarily the 
Department of Natural Resources (DNR)) and local governments (including school 
systems) that construct or renovate playgrounds on or after October 1, 2024, to the extent 
the installation and/or maintenance costs of playground surfacing materials that comply 
with the bill’s prohibition are higher than the costs of surfacing materials installed in the 
absence of the bill. The extent of any impact cannot be reliably estimated but may be 
relatively minimal. Of the State agencies, local governments, and school systems that 
responded to requests for information regarding the fiscal impact of this bill, several 
(including DNR, due to the type of surfacing materials currently used by the department) 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1147/ Page 5 
do not expect a significant impact on them as purchasers/users of playground surfacing 
materials. 
 
Penalties 
 
The application of existing penalty provisions, and the civil/administrative penalties 
established by the bill, are not anticipated to materially affect State or local government 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses involved in the construction or renovation of 
playgrounds in the State, or the manufacture of playground surfacing materials, may be 
meaningfully affected by the bill’s prohibition to the extent they do not already use/produce 
compliant surfacing materials. Any small business manufacturers that manufacture, sell, or 
distribute playground surfacing materials in the State may also incur costs to establish and 
provide certificates of compliance. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll, Harford, and Queen Anne’s counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 
Maryland Municipal League; Town of Bel Air; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Department of Juvenile Services; 
Department of Natural Resources; Baltimore City Public Schools; Montgomery County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy and 
Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5