START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 168

Chapter 168

(House Bill 1163)

AN ACT concerning

State Department of Education – Division of Rehabilitation Services – Funding

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Governor to include in the annual budget bill a certain
appropriation to the Division of Rehabilitation Services in the State Department of
Education in accordance with certain federal acts; and generally relating to the
Division of Rehabilitation Services.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 21–302
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

21–302.

(a) The State of Maryland assents to the federal acts.

(b) The State Treasurer shall:

(1) Be the custodian of any money received under the federal acts; and

(2) Disburse this money in accordance with the federal acts.

(c) The State Board of Education shall:

(1) Cooperate with the appropriate federal agencies in administering the
federal acts; and

(2) Do anything necessary to secure the benefits of the federal acts.

(D) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “STATE MATCH AMOUNT” MEANS THE
AMOUNT OF THE STATE’S SHARE OF FUNDING REQUIRED UNDER THE FEDERAL
ACTS.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 168 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
INCREASE IN THE GENERAL FUND APPROPRIATION TO ENSURE THE STATE MATCH
AMOUNT FOR THE DIVISION IS MET.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2