START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1105 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1105 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses - Certification Requirement and 
Exceptions 
 
 
This bill requires an individual to be certified as an advanced practice registered nurse 
(APRN) before practicing advanced practice registered nursing in the State, except as 
specified. The requirement does not apply to (1) a student enrolled in a graduate level 
accredited program for advanced practice registered nursing while practicing advanced 
practice registered nursing in that program or (2) an individual permitted to practice 
advanced practice registered nursing under rules and regulations adopted by the Maryland 
Board of Nursing (MBON). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Practice registered nursing” means the performance of acts requiring 
substantial specialized knowledge, judgment, and skill based on the biological, 
physiological, behavioral, or sociological sciences as the basis for assessment, nursing 
diagnosis, planning, implementation, and evaluation of the practice of nursing to maintain 
health, prevent illness, or care for or rehabilitate the ill, injured, or infirm. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1105/ Page 2 
“Practice advanced practice registered nursing” means to practice registered nursing within 
the scope of practice in the area of specialty for which the individual holds certification 
from a nationally recognized certifying body recognized by MBON. 
 
“Practice licensed practical nursing” means to perform in a team relationship an act that 
requires specialized knowledge, judgment, and skill based on principles of biological, 
physiological, behavioral, or sociological science to administer treatment or medication, 
aid in rehabilitation, promote preventive measures in community health, give counsel, 
safeguard life and health, teach or supervise, or perform additional acts authorized by 
MBON. 
 
Generally, an individual must be licensed by MBON to practice registered nursing or 
licensed practical nursing in the State; however, this does not apply to:   
 
 
a student enrolled in an approved education program while practicing registered 
nursing or licensed practical nursing in that program; 
 
an individual employed by the federal government to practice registered nursing or 
licensed practical nursing while practicing within the scope of that employment, if 
the individual is authorized by any state to practice registered nursing or licensed 
practical nursing; 
 
an individual permitted to practice registered nursing or licensed practical nursing 
under rules and regulations adopted by MBON, if the individual (1) otherwise has 
qualified to practice registered nursing or licensed practical nursing in any other 
state or country and is in this State temporarily or (2) has an application for a license 
pending before MBON, under specified circumstances; 
 
an individual who provides gratuitous care for friends, domestic partners, or family 
members; 
 
an individual who responds to a disaster situation in this State to practice registered 
nursing or licensed practical nursing, as specified; or 
 
an individual has been granted multistate licensing privileges under the Nurse 
Multistate Licensure Compact. 
 
In Maryland, an individual must be licensed as a registered nurse and certified as an APRN 
by MBON to practice as a nurse practitioner, nurse anesthetist, nurse midwife, or clinical 
nurse specialist. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1105/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3