START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1117 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1117 
(Delegate Stewart, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Landlord and Tenant - Failure to Repair Serious and Dangerous Defects - 
Tenant Remedies (Tenant Safety Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill generally (1) establishes that a landlord that offers a dwelling unit for rent is 
deemed to warrant the dwelling “fit for human habitation”; (2) establishes remedies if a 
landlord breaches the warranty of habitability; and (3) establishes additional remedies if a 
landlord fails to repair serious and dangerous defects, as required under existing statute. 
Remedies created by the bill include authorizing multiple tenants to join as plaintiffs in 
actions based on a breach of the warranty of habitability or the failure of a landlord to repair 
serious and dangerous defects. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Repair of Serious and Dangerous Defects  
 
In General:  Statutory provisions under current law provide tenants with a mechanism for 
encouraging the repair of serious and dangerous defects that exist within or as part of any 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1117/ Page 2 
residential dwelling unit, or upon certain common property, as specified. The defects are 
those in which a substantial and serious threat of danger to the life, health, and safety of 
the occupants is present. Current statutory provisions provide a remedy and impose an 
obligation upon landlords to repair and eliminate the serious and dangerous conditions and 
defects. 
 
Available Remedies and Notice Requirements:  Under current law, in order to use specified 
remedies available when serious and dangerous defects are present, a tenant must notify 
the landlord of the existence of the defects or conditions using specified methods 
(e.g., written communication sent by certified mail listing the asserted defects, a written 
violation from an appropriate State/local agency, etc.). A landlord then has a reasonable 
time after receipt of notice in which to make the repairs or correct the conditions, as 
specified. 
 
Under current law, if the landlord refuses to make the repairs or correct the conditions, or 
if after a reasonable time the landlord has failed to do so, the tenant may (1) bring an action 
of rent escrow to pay rent into court because of the asserted defects or conditions or 
(2) refuse to pay rent and raise the existence of the asserted defects or conditions as an 
affirmative defense to an action for distress for rent or to any complaint proceeding brought 
by the landlord to recover rent or the possession of the leased premises. The bill authorizes 
(1) a tenant to take one or both of these actions; (2) multiple tenants to join as plaintiffs in 
an action, in accordance with the Maryland Rules on joinder; and (3) a court to order 
separate trials or issue any other order necessary to prevent delay or avoid prejudice. 
 
Under the bill, there is a rebuttable presumption that a tenant is entitled to the adjudication 
of a request for rent abatement. Furthermore, there is a rebuttable presumption that a tenant 
is entitled to an abatement of prospective rent in an amount to be determined by the court. 
A determination is without prejudice to a final disposition of rent that is due and unpaid to 
the landlord. 
 
There is also a rebuttable presumption (under the bill) that a court order requiring rent 
escrow is limited to the payment of rent that is due and unpaid subsequent to the court 
order. A party may request that the court adjust the amount of rent that a tenant pays into 
court at any time. If a tenant alleges that a defect or condition exists at the leased premises 
at a trial for failure to pay rent, the court may grant a postponement on request of either 
party in order for the parties to provide evidence and additional information regarding the 
alleged defect or condition. 
 
Under current law, after rent escrow has been established, a court may, among other things 
and after a hearing (if one is requested by the tenant), order that if no repairs are made or 
if no good faith effort to repair is made within six months of the initial decision to place 
money in the escrow account, that the money in the account be disbursed to the tenant. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1117/ Page 3 
Under current law, such an order will not discharge the right on the part of the tenant to 
pay rent into court and an appeal will stay the forfeiture. Under the bill, such an order may 
be stayed on appeal by the landlord. 
 
Under the bill, if the court orders any relief to a tenant who brings an action, the tenant may 
recover reasonable attorney’s fees and costs and reasonable expenses related to litigation. 
However, if the court finds that a tenant filed a complaint in bad faith or without substantial 
justification, the court may enter a judgment in favor of the landlord for reasonable 
attorney’s fees and costs and expenses related to litigation.  
 
These aforementioned provisions supersede any local law or ordinance comparable in 
subject matter except to the extent that local law or ordinance provides broader 
applicability or more protection for tenants. 
 
Breach of the Warranty of Habitability  
 
Under the bill, “fit for human habitation” means that a dwelling unit and property of which 
the dwelling unit is a part are free from serious defects or conditions that constitute, or will 
constitute if not promptly corrected, a fire hazard or other serious and substantial threat to 
the life, health, or safety of occupants of the dwelling unit. 
 
A landlord that offers a residential dwelling unit for rent, whether by written or oral lease 
agreement, must be deemed to warrant that the dwelling unit is fit for human habitation. 
The warranty of habitability exists throughout a tenant’s tenancy. 
 
The bill further establishes additional relief for breach of the warranty of habitability, 
applicable to landlords, tenants, and residential dwelling units that are subject to the above 
provisions (regarding the repair of serious and dangerous defects). Relief may not be 
conditioned on payment by the tenant of rent into escrow with the court.  
 
In order to seek the remedies discussed below, a tenant must notify the landlord of the 
existence of the defects or conditions. The notice must be given by (1) a written 
communication sent by certified mail listing the asserted defects or conditions; (2) actual 
notice of the defects or conditions; or (3) a written violation, condemnation, or other notice 
from an appropriate State, county, municipal, or local government agency stating the 
asserted defects or conditions. Within a reasonable period of time after receipt of notice, 
the landlord must make the repairs or correct the conditions, as specified. 
 
If a landlord breaches the warranty of habitability and refuses to make the repairs or correct 
the conditions, or if after a reasonable time the landlord has failed to do so, the tenant may 
(1) bring an action for damages and the abatement of rent against the landlord and (2) refuse 
to pay rent and raise the existence of the asserted defects or conditions as an affirmative 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1117/ Page 4 
defense to an action of distress for rent or to any other action brought by the landlord to 
recover rent or the possession of the leased premises. Multiple tenants may join as plaintiffs 
in an action in accordance with applicable Maryland Rules and these remedies are in 
addition to any other remedies provided under law.  
 
The bill establishes the following as defenses to a claim for breach of the warranty of 
habitability:  (1) the tenant, the tenant’s family, agent, employees, assignees, or social 
guests caused the asserted defects or conditions; or (2) the landlord or the landlord’s agents 
were denied reasonable and appropriate entry for the purpose of correcting or repairing the 
asserted conditions or defects. 
 
The court must make appropriate findings of fact and issue any order that the justice of the 
case may require, including ordering any of the following:   
 
 
an award of actual damages; 
 
an abatement of rent due and unpaid; or 
 
the termination of the lease, return of any unused portion of a security deposit to the 
tenant, and relocation expense for a tenant. 
 
Under the bill, if the court orders any relief to a tenant who brings action, the tenant may 
recover reasonable attorney’s fees and costs and reasonable expenses related to litigation. 
However, if the court finds that a tenant filed a complaint in bad faith or without substantial 
justification, the landlord may recover reasonable attorney’s fees and costs and expenses 
related to litigation.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Among other effects, landlords and other entities with control 
over residential property (including property management companies) are subject to more 
complex litigation in rent escrow cases (e.g., single causes of action from multiple tenants) 
and awards of attorney’s fees. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 691 and SB 807 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 946 (Senator Kelly) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Office of the Attorney 
General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1117/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5