START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1150 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1150 
(The Speaker)(By Request - State Treasurer) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Uniform Disposition of Abandoned Property Act – Maryland 529 
Program – Exemption 
 
 
This bill exempts certain accounts under the Maryland 529 Program from the provisions 
of the Maryland Uniform Disposition of Abandoned Property Act (MUDAPA) and 
clarifies that sums payable on a check drawn against such accounts are subject to the 
provisions of MUDAPA. Accounts exempted under the bill are those contained within the 
(1) Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid College Trust (MPCT); (2) Maryland  
Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer College Investment Plan (MCIP); and (3) Maryland 
Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) program. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill codifies an existing interpretation of current law and is not 
anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not directly affect local government finance or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland 529 
 
In accordance with Chapter 113 of 2023, the Maryland 529 Program is administered by the 
State Treasurer. Maryland 529 currently offers two savings plans:  one savings plan for 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1150/ Page 2 
individuals with disabilities; and one savings plans for higher education expenses. The 
savings plan for individuals with disabilities is the Maryland ABLE Program, which allows 
certain individuals with disabilities to save for qualified disability expenses. The savings 
plan for higher education is MCIP, which works similarly to an investment account. 
Generally, funds in MCIP may only be used for qualified education expenses, which 
historically meant certain expenses related to higher education. However, under the federal 
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, investment plans like MCIP may be used to pay for tuition 
expenses at K-12 public, private, and parochial schools. 
 
The State Treasurer also oversees MPCT, another plan for higher education expenses. 
However, Chapter 113 required the gradual phase-out of MPCT by, as of June 1, 2023, 
prohibiting the creation of new MPCT accounts (either directly or via rollover). 
 
Both higher education savings plans (MPCT and MCIP) are also known as 529 plans after 
the section in the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) that allows an individual to either prepay 
or contribute to an account established for paying a student’s qualified education expenses 
at an eligible educational institution. 
 
State income tax deductions are available independently for both qualified tuition plans 
(MPCT and MCIP) and ABLE accounts, generally for up to $2,500 per year. MCIP 
accounts established after December 31, 2016, are also eligible for a State matching 
contribution under specified conditions. An investment account holder may not claim an 
income tax deduction in the same year that a State match is received. 
 
 
Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer Prepaid College Trust 
 
While no new accounts may be opened under the plan, MPCT allows those with accounts 
open prior to June 1, 2023, to prepay the cost of higher education tuition and mandatory 
fees on behalf of a child by purchasing a contract based on the weighted average of tuition 
and mandatory fees at Maryland public institutions of higher education (at the time of 
contract purchase), the selected payment plan, the number of years until the child enters 
college, and other factors. 
 
Each account holder entered into a contract with the trust for prepayment of tuition and 
mandatory fees for a specified number of years of community college and/or semesters or 
years of university tuition. Payments may be made in single, monthly, or annual 
installments. For a child enrolled in a Maryland public institution of higher education, the 
trust will pay the full in-state tuition and mandatory fees. If a child attends an eligible 
private or out-of-state institution of higher education, the trust will pay up to the calculated 
weighted average tuition of the tuition plan selected or the calculated minimum benefit, 
whichever is greater. Calculated minimum benefits are generally the amount paid into the 
account, less any operating fees plus a certain rate of return. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1150/ Page 3 
 
Maryland Senator Edward J. Kasemeyer College Investment Program 
 
MCIP allows contributions to an investment account established to provide for tuition, fees, 
books, supplies, equipment, and room and board for a designated beneficiary. Under the 
plan, participants accept a level of investment based on their selected investment option. 
Account values in the investment plan are based solely on contributions and investment 
performance and are not guaranteed by the State. 
 
The plan began in December 2001 and is open to children or adults of any age. Enrollment 
is open year-round, and investors may choose how much and how often they wish to 
contribute. Contributions and investment earnings are available for eligible higher 
education expenses, including tuition, fees, room and board, and other expenses as defined 
by § 529 of the IRC. In 2017, the U.S. Congress passed a new tax reform measure that 
expanded eligible costs for 529 plans to distributions of up to $10,000 per beneficiary  
per year for tuition at elementary or secondary public, private, or religious schools; 
trade/technical schools; or certified apprenticeship programs. 
 
 
Maryland Achieving a Better Life Experience Program 
 
The Stephen Beck, Jr., Achieving a Better Life Experience Act of 2014 established a new 
§ 529A of the IRC that permits a state (or a state agency or instrumentality) to establish 
and maintain another type of tax-advantaged savings program, a qualified ABLE program, 
under which contributions may be made to an account that is established for the purpose 
of meeting the qualified disability expenses of the designated beneficiary of the account.  
Chapter 39 of 2016 required the Maryland 529 Board, in consultation with the Maryland 
Department of Disabilities, to establish, administer, manage, and promote the Maryland 
ABLE Program. As previously mentioned, Chapter 113 abolished the Maryland 529 Board 
and transferred administration of the Maryland ABLE Program to the State Treasurer. State 
programs must adhere to minimum federal guidelines to be considered qualified ABLE 
programs under federal law. Individuals with disabilities for whom the onset of the 
disability occurred prior to age 26 are considered “eligible individuals” under Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) regulations. Eligible individuals who establish an ABLE account 
and are the owner of such account are “designated beneficiaries” under IRS regulations. 
 
Chapter 637 of 2023 allowed for an ABLE account to be established by the eligible 
individual or a person selected by the eligible individual. If the eligible individual is unable 
to establish an ABLE account, the eligible individual’s agent under power of attorney may 
establish an account. If the eligible individual does not have a power of attorney, in priority 
order, an ABLE account may be opened for the eligible individual by the individual’s 
(1) conservator or legal guardian; (2) spouse; (3) parent; (4) sibling; (5) grandparent; or 
(6) representative payee appointed by the Social Security Administration. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1150/ Page 4 
Abandoned Property 
 
Title 17 of the Commercial Law Article (MUDAPA) generally governs abandoned 
property in the State; the Comptroller is the administrator of abandoned property. 
Generally, statutory provisions establish a process by which specified types of property are 
presumed abandoned under certain conditions. For example, certain accounts held by 
financial institutions are presumed abandoned three years after the later of the date (1) the 
holder is deemed to not have a valid address for the owner of the property or (2) the owner 
last took certain actions regarding the account, such as withdrawing or depositing funds or 
otherwise corresponding with the financial institution, as statutorily specified. The running 
of the three-year period of abandonment ceases immediately upon the occurrence of 
conditions specified in statute. 
 
Statute includes additional notice and procedural requirements regarding abandoned 
property. For example, a holder of presumed abandoned property valued at $100 or more 
is required to send written notice (by first-class mail) to the apparent owner of the presumed 
abandoned property, at the apparent owner’s last known address, informing the owner that 
the holder is in possession of the property and that the property will be considered 
abandoned unless the owner responds to the holder within 30 days after the notification. 
 
A person holding abandoned property must also file a report with the Comptroller including 
information on the nature of the property and the property’s presumed owner. The 
abandoned property specified in the report must be transferred to the Comptroller. The 
Comptroller is required to take specified actions, including those related to publication and 
the mailing of notice to apparent owners. 
 
In general, within one year of taking custody of abandoned personal property, the 
Comptroller must sell the property at auction (subject to limited exceptions, such as if the 
Comptroller has determined the property has no commercial value). A person who claims 
a legal interest in property delivered to the Comptroller must file a claim to the property or 
to the proceeds from its sale. For property sold at auction, if the Comptroller allows the 
claim, the Comptroller must pay the claimant an amount equal to the sales price. 
 
Background:  In 2019, the Department of Legislative Services, Office of Legislative 
Audits conducted an audit of Maryland 529 (as administered by the former 
Maryland 529 Board). Among other findings, the audit found that Maryland 529 likely had 
not complied with MUDAPA when it did not determine the disposition of uncashed checks 
totaling $1.7 million (as previously discovered during a prior audit). As discussed above, 
abandoned property generally must be transferred to the Comptroller until claimed. 
However, Maryland 529 had concerns regarding the legal and tax implications associated 
with transferring funds given the unique nature of 529 accounts, which are held in trust for 
a designated beneficiary. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1150/ Page 5 
In May 2023, the Office of the Attorney General issued an opinion providing guidance on 
whether MUDAPA applies to Maryland 529 accounts and how Maryland 529 should 
comply with such laws. The opinion noted that MUDAPA likely does not apply to 
Maryland 529 accounts, finding that “[a]pplication of the Act’s mandates would tend to 
interrupt family savings plans prematurely, trigger tax consequences and penalties that defy 
common sense, and clash with language in Maryland 529’s enabling statutes that seeks to 
safeguard account funds from diversion to other State uses.” However, while accounts 
themselves are likely exempt, provisions of MUDAPA are likely applicable to checks 
issued by the Maryland 529 Program that draw against Maryland 529 accounts. 
 
The State Treasurer’s Office (STO) advises that the bill clarifies ambiguities regarding the 
application of MUDAPA by explicitly exempting Maryland 529 Program accounts from 
its provisions and clarifying that uncashed checks from such accounts are subject to 
MUDAPA.   
 
STO also advises that there are currently 415,584 funded accounts under MCIP with an 
associated $9.1 billion in assets. Also, according to the Treasurer, Maryland ABLE has 
6,009 total funded accounts with total assets under management of $78.8 million. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, the bill codifies the existing interpretation 
regarding the applicability of MUDAPA to Maryland 529 Program accounts and checks 
that draw against Maryland 529 accounts. Therefore, the State Treasurer advises that, with 
the statutory clarification provided by the bill, it can continue to develop its own internal 
procedures for handling inactive accounts and coordinate as necessary with the 
Comptroller once uncashed checks are sent to the Unclaimed Property Division.  
 
This analysis assumes that, absent the bill, STO would have taken actions to transfer any 
sums payable on uncashed distribution checks that remain unclaimed to the Comptroller, 
consistent with the interpretation within the Attorney General’s opinion. Therefore, the 
bill’s codification of the existing interpretation of MUDAPA in regard to uncashed checks 
is not anticipated to impact State revenues.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 800 (The President)(By Request - State Treasurer) - Budget 
and Taxation. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1150/ Page 6 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Office 
of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6