START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1032

Chapter 1032

(House Bill 1198)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – 40th Alcoholic Beverages District –
Revisions

FOR the purpose of establishing a Class M–F (Municipal Family Fun Center) alcoholic
beverages license in the 40th alcoholic beverages district in Baltimore City;
authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City to issue a certain
Class B beer, wine, and liquor license to a restaurant in a certain location;
authorizing a certain Class A license issued for a certain location to remain
unexpired until a certain date for the purpose of renewal; and generally relating to
alcoholic beverages in Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–102 and 12–1603(b) and (c)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–1001.5 and 12–1603(c)(18)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–1603(c)(16) and (17)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–1001.5.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1032 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THERE IS A CLASS M–F (MUNICIPAL FAMILY FUN CENTER) LICENSE
FOR USE AT A MUNICIPAL BOWLING ALLEY AND SKATING RINK LOCATED ON THE ODD
SIDE OF THE 1600 BLOCK OF PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE TO AN INDIVIDUAL WHO:

(1) IS AUTHORIZED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF
BALTIMORE CITY THROUGH A MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT TO SELL FOOD, BEER,
WINE, AND LIQUOR FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION; AND

(2) HAS EXECUTED A MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITH THE
UPTON WEST COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION.

(C) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO SELL BEER, WINE, AND
LIQUOR FOR ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(D) THE HOURS OF SALE FOR ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE:

(1) FROM 11:30 A.M. TO 11 P.M. MONDAY THROUGH THURSDAY;

(2) FROM 11:30 A.M. TO MIDNIGHT ON FRIDAY;

(3) FROM 9 A.M. TO MIDNIGHT ON SATURDAY; AND

(4) FROM 9 A.M. TO 11 P.M. ON SUNDAY.

(E) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION,
INCLUDING REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE HOLDING OF EVENTS THAT ARE
CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC.

(F) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY NOT:

(1) PARTICIPATE IN OR PUBLICIZE, IN OR OUTSIDE OF THE LICENSED
PREMISES, A PUB CRAWL AUTHORIZED UNDER § 12–1101.1 OF THIS TITLE; OR

(2) EXCEPT FOR AN EVENT THAT IS CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC, ALLOW
AN OPEN BAR TO BE OPERATED.

(G) THE ANNUAL LICENSE FEE IS $500.

12–1603.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the Board may not issue a
new license in:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1032

(1) the 40th alcoholic beverages district;

(2) the 41st alcoholic beverages district;

(3) the 43rd alcoholic beverages district;

(4) the 44th alcoholic beverages district; and

(5) the 45th alcoholic beverages district.

(c) The Board may issue:

(1) in the alcoholic beverages districts specified in subsection (b) of this
section:

(i) a 1–day license; or

(ii) a Class B beer, wine, and liquor license to a restaurant that:

1. has a minimum capital investment, not including the cost
of land and buildings, of $200,000 for restaurant facilities; and

2. has a minimum seating capacity of 75 individuals;

(16) a Class C beer, wine, and liquor license in the 3600 block of Hickory
Avenue in the 40th alcoholic beverages district to a holder of a Class C beer and light wine
license; [and]

(17) a Class A–7 beer, wine, and liquor license in the 1200 block of West
North Avenue in the 40th alcoholic beverages district, if:

(i) the applicant executes a memorandum of understanding with the
Penn North Community Association;

(ii) alcoholic beverages are sold only as part of a gift basket or floral
arrangement; and

(iii) the applicant does not hold or apply for a Class BWLT beer, wine,
and liquor (on–premises) tasting license; AND

(18) A CLASS B BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE FOR A RESTAURANT
ON THE EVEN SIDE OF THE 400 BLOCK OF WEST 29TH STREET IN THE 40TH
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DISTRICT IF:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 1032 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE APPLICANT EXECUTES A MEMORANDUM OF
UNDERSTANDING WITH THE GREATER REMINGTON IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION;
AND

(II) THE BOARD WAIVES A MINIMUM SEATING REQUIREMENT
UNDER ITEM (1)(II)2 OF THIS SUBSECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding § 12–2202
of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, a Class A license issued for a premises on
the odd side of the unit block of ~~East~~ West Biddle Street shall be considered unexpired until
the end of July 1, 2025, for the purpose of being renewed to the current license year.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and,
at the end of July 31, 2025, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the
General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4