START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1199 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1199 
(Delegate Edelson, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Transportation - MobilityLink Paratransit Service Improvements - Study 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Transportation Institute (MTI) at the University of 
Maryland (UMD) to conduct a study to identify methods to improve the Maryland Transit 
Administration’s (MTA) Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) MobilityLink paratransit 
service. The Governor may include in the fiscal 2026 budget bill an appropriation of at 
least $150,000 for the purpose of carrying out the study. By July 1, 2025, MTI must submit 
a report of its findings and recommendations to the Governor, the General Assembly, 
specified members of the General Assembly, the Maryland Department of Transportation 
(MDOT), and specified local government entities. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and 
terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Higher education expenditures for UMD increase by $449,000 in FY 2025 
to complete the required study. General fund expenditures and higher education revenues 
for UMD are assumed to increase by $449,000 in FY 2026 as UMD is reimbursed for its 
study costs. Other affected State entities can provide data and information and consult with 
UMD using existing budgeted resources, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Higher Ed Rev. 
$0 
$449,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$449,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Higher Ed Exp. 
$449,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
($449,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations and finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1199/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The study conducted by MTI must:   
 
 
summarize and compare MTA’s MobilityLink service to similar entities nationwide 
that provide ADA paratransit services; 
 
identify the service structure of ADA paratransit services in other service areas 
nationwide and whether a public entity, private contractor, or hybrid model is used 
to provide the service, including consideration of how specified services are 
provided; 
 
analyze both the short- and long-term fiscal costs and savings associated with each 
type of ADA paratransit service model, including a comparison of the quality of 
service and reliability of each service model; 
 
analyze the performance metrics associated with the ADA paratransit services in 
various service areas nationwide based on the Federal Transit Administration’s 
ADA Guidance for metrics, including specified metrics;  
 
analyze the workforce metrics among the ADA paratransit services in various 
service areas nationwide, including specified metrics; 
 
in consultation with the Maryland Commission on Disabilities (MCOD) and the 
State Coordinating Committee for Human Services Transportation, solicit input and 
comments from the public and riders of MTA’s MobilityLink paratransit service;  
 
develop recommendations for service improvements to MTA’s MobilityLink 
paratransit service, considering long-term costs and benefits alongside a qualitative 
analysis to enhance the delivery of high-quality service to MobilityLink riders; 
 
develop recommendations for service improvements to individuals located in areas 
outside of three-quarters of a mile of a fixed transportation route; and 
 
develop recommendations to address interjurisdictional restrictions to paratransit 
services, including restrictions relating to medical appointments that cross 
jurisdictional lines. 
 
Current Law:  MTA is a modal unit within MDOT, and it operates a comprehensive transit 
system throughout the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 
50 local bus lines in Baltimore and other services, such as the light rail, Baltimore Metro 
subway, commuter buses, MARC trains, and mobility/paratransit vehicles. Except for the 
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, MDOT and MTA are generally the 
agencies responsible for the construction and operation of transit lines in the State. 
 
MobilityLink is MTA’s paratransit service. The service is offered to people, who because 
of a disability, are functionally unable to get to a bus stop, wait unassisted at a stop, or 
board or ride a bus or train by themselves. MobilityLink provides door-to-door service by 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1199/ Page 3 
picking up participating riders at the first exterior door of the rider’s home or pick-up 
location and dropping the rider off at the first exterior door of their destination. 
 
MCOD serves as the advisory board for the Maryland Department of Disabilities, which is 
charged with unifying and improving the delivery of services to people with disabilities. 
MCOD also assists in the development of the State Disabilities Plan, which is a 
comprehensive multi-year strategic plan that sets performance goals for all agencies in 
Maryland that serve people with disabilities. 
 
The State Coordinating Committee for Human Services Transportation, which was 
established and reconstituted by executive order, examines and plans for the transportation 
needs of the elderly, the disabled, and those who need affordable, accessible transportation 
to get to work, job training, and education programs. Among other things, the committee 
prepares a five-year plan for human services transportation; coordinates the efforts of 
federal, State, and local agencies; and serves as a clearinghouse for transportation issues. 
 
State Expenditures:  Higher education expenditures for UMD increase by $448,986 in 
fiscal 2025 to complete the required study. This estimate includes direct costs of $302,078 
for professors and graduate students to complete the necessary research and prepare the 
required report and indirect facilities and administration costs of $146,907, as authorized 
and negotiated by the university with the U.S. Health and Human Services Audit Agency 
to be included in UMD’s service contracts. 
 
Because the bill authorizes the Governor to include in the fiscal 2026 budget bill at least 
$150,000 to carry out the study, this analysis assumes that UMD is fully reimbursed for 
the costs it incurs to complete the required study. Therefore, general fund expenditures 
increase by $448,986 in fiscal 2026 and higher education revenues for UMD increase 
correspondingly. 
 
The study is likely to require MTA to provide a substantial amount of data and information 
to UMD about the operations of MobilityLink. This information can be provided using 
existing budgeted resources. 
 
MCOD and the State Coordinating Committee for Human Services Transportation can 
consult with UMD on the study using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1199/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 891 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of 
Disabilities; Maryland State Archives; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4