START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1192 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1192 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Video Lottery Facility Operations - Crimes of Moral Turpitude and Value of 
Table Game Chips - Alterations 
 
   
This bill exempts an applicant for a video lottery employee license from disqualification 
for conviction, active parole, or probation within the prior seven years or current 
prosecution for any crimes involving moral turpitude under the laws of the United States 
or of any state, if (1) the conviction, active parole, probation, or prosecution involves a 
nonviolent misdemeanor offense, other than a crime involving gambling; (2) the applicant 
will not be employed by the video lottery operation licensee in the operation of gaming or 
security; and (3) the video lottery operation licensee requests that the State Lottery and 
Gaming Commission (SLGCC) issue the license. Additionally, the bill alters the definition 
of “value” as it relates to crimes involving theft to include the face value of a chip 
designated for use in table games or, if no face value is depicted on the chip, the value 
designated by SLGCC based on the chip’s color. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the qualifications for video lottery employee licenses is not 
anticipated to significantly alter the number of license applications and, thus, associated 
administrative costs and fee revenues are not substantially affected. Altering the definition 
of “value” as it relates to crimes of theft to include the face value of a table game chip does 
not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1192/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To be employed by a video lottery operation licensee, an individual must 
hold a valid video lottery employee license or temporary video lottery employee license 
issued by SLGCC. SLGCC must deny a video lottery employee license to an applicant for 
several causes, including but not limited to the applicant’s (1) conviction, active parole, or 
probation for any crime involving moral turpitude or gambling under the laws of the 
United States or any state within the prior seven years or (2) current prosecution for any 
crime involving moral turpitude or gambling under the laws of the United States or any 
state, but at the request of the applicant, SLGCC may defer a decision on the application 
during the pendency of the charge.  
 
However, an applicant for a video lottery employee license is not disqualified from 
licensure if the conviction, active parole, probation or prosecution mentioned above 
involves a nonviolent misdemeanor offense, other than a crime involving gambling, for 
which the applicant participated in and completed a problem-solving court program. 
Problem-solving courts are those under the Office of Problem-Solving Courts, or a 
comparable program from another court system. 
 
While there is no specific provision of Maryland law that defines moral turpitude, a 
1996 Attorney General’s opinion described a crime of moral turpitude as a crime “for 
which fraudulent intent is a requisite element of proof.” Black’s Law Dictionary defines 
“moral turpitude” as “conduct that is contrary to justice, honesty, or morality” and 
especially “an act that demonstrates depravity.”        
 
General Theft Statute  
 
Under the general theft statute, a person may not, under specified circumstances, 
(1) willfully or knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over property; (2) obtain 
control over property by willfully or knowingly using deception; (3) possess stolen 
property knowing that it has been stolen or believing that it probably has been stolen; 
(4) obtain control over property knowing that the property was lost, mislaid, or delivered 
under a mistake as to the identity of the recipient or nature or amount of the property; or 
(5) obtain the services of another that are available only by compensation by deception or 
with knowledge that the services are provided without the provider’s consent. A violator 
is required to restore the owner’s property or pay the owner the value of the property or 
services and is subject to the penalties in Exhibit 1. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1192/ Page 3 
 
Exhibit 1 
Penalties for Theft 
 
Value of Property and/or Services 
Maximum Penalty 
 
 
Less than $100* 
Misdemeanor – 90 days imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine 
At least $100 but less than $1,500* 
Misdemeanor – 6 months imprisonment 
and/or $500 fine (first conviction) or 
1 year imprisonment 
and/or 
$500 
fine 
(second or subsequent conviction) 
Less than $1,500 (four or more prior theft 
convictions)** 
Misdemeanor – 5 years imprisonment and/or 
$5,000 fine 
At least $1,500 but less than $25,000 
Felony – 5 years imprisonment and/or 
$10,000 fine 
At least $25,000 but less than $100,000 
Felony – 10 years imprisonment and/or 
$15,000 fine 
$100,000 or more 
Felony – 20 years imprisonment and/or 
$25,000 fine 
 
* Subject to two-year statute of limitations. 
** Subject to specified notice requirements. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Section 7-110 of the Criminal Law Article specifies presumptions and permitted and 
prohibited defenses to the crime of theft. The District Court has concurrent jurisdiction 
with the circuit courts over felony theft violations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1192/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4