START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 341

Chapter 341

(House Bill 1103)

AN ACT concerning

Miriam Kelty Aging and Senior Social Connection Hub and Spoke Pilot
Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Miriam Kelty Aging and Senior Social Connection Hub
and Spoke Pilot Program in the Maryland Department of Aging; requiring the
Montgomery County Village Consortium to establish a certain plan and submit
certain reports; and generally relating to the Miriam Kelty Aging and Senior Social
Connection Hub and Spoke Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 10–1401 through 10–1405 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 14. Miriam
Kelty Aging and Senior Social Connection Hub and Spoke Pilot Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

SUBTITLE 14. MIRIAM KELTY AGING AND SENIOR SOCIAL CONNECTION HUB AND
SPOKE PILOT PROGRAM.

10–1401.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “PILOT PROGRAM” MEANS THE MIRIAM KELTY AGING AND SENIOR
SOCIAL CONNECTION HUB AND SPOKE PILOT PROGRAM.

(C) “VILLAGE” MEANS LOCAL, VOLUNTEER–LED ORGANIZATIONS THAT AIM
TO SUPPORT COMMUNITY MEMBERS WHO CHOOSE TO AGE IN PLACE, INCLUDING BY:

(1) FOSTERING SOCIAL CONNECTIONS THROUGH ACTIVITIES AND
EVENTS; AND

(2) COORDINATING VOLUNTEER HELP AT HOME USING THE
NEIGHBOR–HELPING–NEIGHBOR MODEL.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 341 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

10–1402.

(A) THERE IS A MIRIAM KELTY AGING AND SENIOR SOCIAL CONNECTION
HUB AND SPOKE PILOT PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO:

(1) LEARN, TEST, AND DEVELOP BEST PRACTICES USING A HUB AND
SPOKE MODEL FOR VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION;

(2) CENTRALIZE ADMINISTRATIVE TASKS AND RELIEVE THE BURDEN
ON VOLUNTEERS;

(3) BETTER COORDINATE RESOURCES AND OPERATIONS TO
MAXIMIZE THE REACH OF SERVICES PROVIDED;

(4) HELP DEVELOP NEW AND DEVELOPING OR EMERGING VILLAGES;
AND

(5) BUILD SOCIAL CONNECTION AND COMBAT LONELINESS FOR
SENIORS AGING IN PLACE.

(C) THE GOAL OF THE PILOT PROGRAM IS TO SUPPORT VILLAGES THAT
SEEK TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF OPERATIONAL PROFICIENCIES AND EXISTING
SYSTEMS, KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND RESOURCES TO EXPAND SERVICES TO MORE
RESIDENTS IN THE GEOGRAPHIC REGION.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE PILOT PROGRAM.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL SELECT THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY
VILLAGE CONSORTIUM TO IMPLEMENT THE PILOT PROGRAM FOR A 3–YEAR
PERIOD.

10–1403.

(A) THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY VILLAGE CONSORTIUM SHALL:

(1) ESTABLISH A 3–YEAR STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PILOT PROGRAM; AND

(2) SUBMIT TO THE DEPARTMENT A REPORT EACH YEAR, USING
QUANTITATIVE DATA IF AVAILABLE, REGARDING THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
PLAN REQUIRED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 341

(B) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(2) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL INCLUDE A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRESS OF THE PLAN IN THE
FOLLOWING AREAS:

(1) ADMINISTRATION, INCLUDING HIRING, BOARD MEMBERSHIP, AND
BOARD RESPONSIBILITIES;

(2) DIRECT SERVICES PROVIDED;

(3) COMMUNICATIONS;

(4) OPERATIONS;

(5) PROGRAMMING;

(6) FUND–RAISING;

(7) OUTREACH;

(8) FINANCIALS, INCLUDING AN ACCOUNTING OF THE FUNDS
REQUIRED TO BE APPROPRIATED UNDER § 10–1404 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(9) CLIENT SATISFACTION AMONG LEADERS OF VILLAGES THAT
PARTICIPATE IN THE PILOT PROGRAM.

10–1404.

(A) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2026 THROUGH 2028, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $80,000 FOR THE
PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THE FUNDS APPROPRIATED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION
SHALL BE TRANSFERRED BY THE DEPARTMENT TO THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY
VILLAGE CONSORTIUM TO BE USED FOR:

(1) EMPLOYING AN OPERATIONS MANAGER;

(2) FUND–RAISING;

(3) MARKETING AND OUTREACH; AND

(4) PROGRAMMING.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 341 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

10–1405.

ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2027, THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY VILLAGE
CONSORTIUM SHALL REPORT TO THE DEPARTMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING:

(1) COMPREHENSIVE BEST PRACTICES FOR CREATING AND
OPERATING A HUB AND SPOKE MODEL, INCLUDING:

(I) HOW TO CREATE A HUB;

(II) ESTABLISHING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
MONTGOMERY COUNTY VILLAGE CONSORTIUM AS THE HUB AND THE VILLAGES AS
THE SPOKES;

(III) ESTABLISHING THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HUB AND
THE SPOKES;

(IV) DESCRIBING THE POPULATION THAT WILL BE SERVED BY A
HUB;

(V) HOW TO ESTABLISH A BOARD OF DIRECTORS;

(VI) HOW TO IDENTIFY RESOURCES WITHIN EACH HUB
COMMUNITY, INCLUDING TIME, SKILLS, AND CAPABILITIES;

(VII) HOW TO IDENTIFY THE CAPACITY OF EACH HUB, INCLUDING
GEOGRAPHIC AND POPULATION CAPACITY;

(VIII) DESCRIBING WHICH SERVICES CAN BE PROVIDED;

(IX) HOW TO TRAIN VOLUNTEERS;

(X) HOW TO ADDRESS OVERLAPPING NEEDS OF MULTIPLE
VILLAGES’ UNIQUE SENIOR COMMUNITIES, INCLUDING:

1. SUPPORT AND SOCIAL ACTIVITIES;

2. HEALTH AND WELLNESS; AND

3. EDUCATION; AND

(XI) HOW TO WORK WITH VILLAGES, INCLUDING:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 341

1. HOW TO INCREASE VILLAGE CAPACITY;

2. HOW TO RECRUIT NEW VILLAGES; AND

3. HOW TO EXPAND OFFERINGS OF DEVELOPING
VILLAGES; AND

(2) RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING HOW TO SUPPORT INTERESTED
DIVERSE AND UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF
VILLAGES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2028,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5