START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1195 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1195 
(Delegate Palakovich Carr) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Child Care Providers - Anaphylactic Food Allergies - Guidelines and Indemnity 
(Elijah's Law) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) and the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH) to jointly develop guidelines to reduce the risk of exposure 
to anaphylactic major food allergens in child care settings. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE and MDH can develop the guidelines with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The guidelines must identify at least one free training resource on reducing 
the risk of exposure to anaphylactic major food allergens that is appropriate for child care 
providers. Based on the guidelines, MSDE must develop a model policy for child care 
providers that, at a minimum, includes (1) emergency protocols, including comprehensive 
guidelines for storage and administration of epinephrine; (2) cross-contamination 
prevention strategies; and (3) notification of a child’s anaphylactic allergy to staff who 
come in contact with the child and child care provider administrators. MSDE must post the 
guidelines, model policy, and training resources on its website. A registered large family 
child care home or licensed child care center with at least one enrolled child with a food 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1195/ Page 2 
allergy must (1) adopt and implement a policy on reducing the risk of exposure to 
anaphylactic major food allergens in child care settings in accordance with the guidelines 
developed under the bill; (2) monitor updates to MSDE’s guidelines and update the policy 
in accordance with MSDE’s revisions; and (3) provide a copy of the policy to the parent 
or guardian of each enrolled child each year. 
 
Except for any willfully or grossly negligent act, a child care provider (or employee of a 
provider) who responds in good faith to the anaphylactic reaction of a child in accordance 
with the guidelines implemented pursuant to the bill’s requirements or by use of 
auto-injectable epinephrine is immune from civil liability for any act or omission in the 
course of responding to the reaction. 
 
Current Law:  “Anaphylactic allergy” means a food allergy that causes a severe, 
systematic reaction resulting in circulatory collapse or shock that may be fatal. “Major food 
allergen” means milk, eggs, fish, crustacean shellfish, tree nuts, wheat, peanuts, soybeans, 
and sesame. “Auto-injectable epinephrine” means a portable, disposable drug delivery 
device that contains a premeasured single dose of epinephrine that is used to treat 
anaphylaxis in an emergency situation. 
 
Subject to limited exception, large family child care homes and child care centers may not 
operate in the State unless they are registered/licensed. The State Board of Education is 
required to adopt regulations that relate to the registration of large family child care homes 
and the licensing and operation of child care centers. A large family child care home is a 
residence in which family child care is provided for at least 9 children but not more than 
12 children. A child care center is an agency, institution, or establishment that, for part or 
all of a day, or on a 24-hour basis on a regular schedule, and at least twice a week, offers 
or provides child care to children who do not have the same parentage except as otherwise 
provided for in law or regulation. 
 
Chapter 770 of 2023 requires MSDE and MDH to jointly update the Maryland State School 
Health Services guidelines to reduce the risk of exposure to anaphylactic major food 
allergens in classrooms and common areas. Each local board of education must make a 
good faith effort to adopt and implement the updated guidelines before the 2023-2024 
school year but must do so before the 2024-2025 school year. Each public school must 
develop a system to disclose, within a reasonable time before service, the foods served in 
the school and the major food allergens contained in them. The principal of a public school 
that has a child attending with an anaphylactic allergy must implement, as necessary, the 
strategies developed in accordance with the Maryland State School Health Services 
guidelines and monitor and implement the guidelines ultimately adopted and implemented 
by the local board. The guidelines are available on MSDE’s website.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1195/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  MSDE advises that current regulations for all provider types 
(child care centers, family child care homes, large family child care homes, and letter of 
compliance programs) require six hours of medication administration training, which 
includes a training component related to allergies and anaphylaxis. In addition, there is a 
mandatory, three-hour training requirement for all family child care providers and child 
care center staff that must be met within 90 days of their hire date. This training also 
includes a unit focused on allergies and anaphylaxis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3