START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1153 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1153 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Environment – Water Pollution Control – Protecting State Waters From PFAS 
Pollution (Protecting State Waters From PFAS Pollution Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), in collaboration 
with publicly owned treatment works (POTWs) and specified “significant industrial users” 
in the State, to (1) by October 1, 2024, identify the significant industrial users that currently 
and intentionally use “PFAS chemicals”; (2) by June 1, 2025, develop PFAS action levels 
for addressing PFAS contamination from industrial discharge for pretreatment permits; and  
(3) by September 1, 2025, develop specified mitigation plans for addressing PFAS 
contamination from industrial discharge for pretreatment permits. In addition, MDE must 
(1) by January 1, 2025, develop PFAS monitoring and testing protocols for significant 
industrial users in accordance with guidance from the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) and (2) by December 1, 2025, update the department’s PFAS Action Plan 
with an evaluation of PFAS disposal methods and the progress made on the bill’s 
requirements. The bill also establishes measurement, reporting, implementation, and PFAS 
storage and disposal requirements for specified significant industrial users. Federal, State, 
and local governments are excluded from the bill’s definition of “significant industrial 
users.” The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDE can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. The 
application of existing penalty provisions to violations of the bill is not anticipated to 
materially affect State finances. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances. Affected locally 
owned POTWs can likely collaborate with MDE as necessary with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1153/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Definitions 
 
The bill establishes several definitions applicable to new Part VII of Title 9 of the 
Environment Article (Protecting State Waters from PFAS Pollution). Several of the most 
pertinent definitions are listed below. 
 
“Significant industrial user” means an industrial user that:   
 
 
is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. Part 403.6; 
 
discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of processed wastewater 
to a POTW, not including sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown 
wastewater; 
 
contributes processed wastewater that makes up 5% or more of the average 
dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or 
 
is designated as a significant industrial user by the POTW on the basis that the 
industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater 
treatment plant’s operations and sewer system or violated a pretreatment standard 
or requirement. 
 
“Significant industrial user” does not include the federal, State, and local governments. 
 
“Pretreatment permit” means a document issued by MDE or MDE’s designee that 
authorizes a significant industrial user to introduce industrial wastes into a POTW in 
compliance with the pretreatment requirements under COMAR 26.08.01.01A(69). 
 
“PFAS chemicals” means a class of fluorinated organic chemicals that contain at least 
one fully fluorinated carbon atom, including perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl 
substances. 
 
Applicability 
 
The bill applies to a significant industrial user (as defined by the bill) that has a pretreatment 
permit and is currently and intentionally using PFAS. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1153/ Page 3 
Mitigation Plans 
 
The mitigation plans developed pursuant to the bill must include strategies and options for 
reducing the presence of PFAS in industrial discharge, including (1) substituting or 
eliminating products containing PFAS; (2) taking precautions to avoid accidental 
discharges; (3) decontaminating or replacing equipment contaminated with PFAS; or 
(4) using any other method MDE determines is necessary for the reduction or elimination 
of PFAS in water. 
 
New Responsibilities for Affected Significant Industrial Users 
 
A significant industrial user must (1) by September 1, 2025, measure the levels of PFAS 
in its industrial wastewater, using methods approved by MDE, and report the levels of 
PFAS in the industrial wastewater in a manner approved by MDE and (2) by July 1, 2026, 
implement measures to reduce PFAS from water discharged to a POTW. 
 
A significant industrial user must safely store PFAS that were captured after reducing 
PFAS from water in accordance with the bill’s requirements. A significant industrial user 
may dispose of stored PFAS using safe disposal systems or technologies approved by 
MDE. 
 
A significant industrial user must provide documentation of PFAS storage or reuse on 
request to any State or local government entity and report the storage or disposal of PFAS 
chemicals under 40 C.F.R. Part 372 (Toxic Chemical Release Reporting). 
 
Current Law:   
 
Federal Clean Water Act and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
 
The federal Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes the basic structure for regulating 
discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States. The National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), a component of CWA, is a permit program that 
addresses water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants to 
U.S. waters. In Maryland, EPA delegates authority to issue NPDES permits to MDE. The 
national pretreatment program is a component of NPDES; under the program, EPA and 
authorized NPDES state pretreatment programs approve local municipalities to perform 
permitting, administrative, and enforcement tasks for discharges into the municipalities’ 
POTW. The national pretreatment program is designed to protect POTW infrastructure and 
reduce conventional and toxic pollutant levels discharged by industries and other 
nondomestic wastewater sources into municipal sewer systems and the environment. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1153/ Page 4 
According to Cornell Law School’s Legal Information Institute, POTW means a treatment 
works, as that term is defined by section 112(5) of CWA, which is owned by a municipality, 
a state, an intermunicipal or interstate agency, or any department, agency, or 
instrumentality of the federal government. This definition includes any intercepting sewers, 
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power, and other equipment. The 
wastewater treated by these facilities is generated by industrial, commercial, and domestic 
sources. 
 
Federal regulations (40 C.F.R.§ 122.41) specify conditions applicable to all NPDES 
permits, which must be incorporated into the permit, either expressly or by reference. 
Further, the permittee must comply with all permit conditions; any noncompliance 
constitutes a violation of CWA. 
 
State Permitting for Wastewater Discharges 
 
MDE’s Water and Science Administration and Land and Materials Administration issue 
discharge permits to protect Maryland’s water resources by controlling industrial and 
municipal wastewater discharges. Surface water discharges are regulated through 
combined State and federal permits under NPDES. Groundwater discharges are regulated 
through State-issued groundwater discharge permits. 
 
Statute explicitly authorizes MDE, by rule, regulation, order, permit, or otherwise, to 
require the owner or operator of any source of a discharge of pollutants or of any source 
that is an industrial user of a POTW, to (1) keep records; (2) make reports; (3) install, 
calibrate, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or methods, including where 
appropriate, biological monitoring materials; (4) to sample discharges in accordance with 
the methods, at the locations, at the intervals, and in the manner MDE requires; and (5) to 
provide MDE with any information MDE reasonably requires regarding the discharge of 
pollutants into waters of the State or the introduction of pollutants into POTW. 
 
“Industrial user” means (1) a person who is engaged in manufacturing, fabricating, or 
assembling goods or (2) a member of any class of significant producers of pollutants 
identified by rules or regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Environment or EPA. 
Federal, State, and local governments are not excluded from the definition of “industrial 
user” under State water pollution control laws. Whether a user is a significant industrial 
user depends on the type of wastewater and the volume of wastewater being discharged by 
a user. 
 
Under State regulations (COMAR 26.08.08), certain POTWs must develop and implement 
a pretreatment program in accordance with pretreatment requirements. New and existing 
industrial users that discharge industrial waste to POTWs are regulated by the State and 
POTW owners under authority delegated by the State. A person is prohibited from 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1153/ Page 5 
introducing industrial wastes into a POTW unless in compliance with pretreatment 
requirements. 
 
Various enforcement provisions apply to violations of Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the 
Environment Article (Water Pollution Control). In addition to being subject to an injunctive 
action, a violator is subject to a maximum penalty of $10,000 to be collected in a civil 
action brought by MDE; each day a violation occurs is a separate violation. MDE may also 
impose a maximum administrative penalty of $10,000 per violation and $100,000 total; 
each day a violation occurs is a separate violation, and administrative penalties must be 
assessed with consideration given to specified factors. Criminal (misdemeanor) penalties 
may also be imposed, with a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
one year for a first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 
two years for a subsequent offense. Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate 
violation. Additional criminal penalties apply for knowingly making false statements in 
required documents and for other specified actions. 
 
Maryland’s PFAS Action Plan 
 
The George “Walter” Taylor Act, Chapters 138 and 139 of 2022, required MDE and the 
Maryland Department of Health to prepare a PFAS Action Plan that identifies strategies, 
actions, and funding alternatives to meet several specified objectives. MDE submitted the 
required PFAS Action Plan in December 2023. Among other things, the plan addresses 
minimizing future releases of PFAS chemicals, including from municipal wastewater 
treatment plants, landfills, and industrial facilities. 
 
Relevant Recent Federal Action 
 
On December 5, 2022, EPA issued a memo addressing PFAS discharges in NPDES permits 
through the pretreatment and monitoring programs. The memo also provides guidance for 
addressing sewage sludge PFAS contamination. The memo recommends that states use the 
most current sampling and analysis methods in state NPDES programs to identify known 
or suspected sources of PFAS and to take actions using pretreatment and permitting 
authorities, such as imposing technology-based limits on sources of PFAS discharges. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses that are significant industrial users are 
required to meet the bill’s requirements for PFAS measurement, reduction, and 
storage/disposal. Among other things, expenditures may include testing and purchasing 
additional equipment for treatment and storage. MDE notes, however, that most significant 
industrial users in the State are not considered small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1153/ Page 6 
For water quality testing laboratories that are small businesses, the bill could potentially 
result in a meaningful increase in business. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 956 (Senator Hester) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Environmental Service; Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority; Harford County; 
cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission; U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency; Cornell Law Legal Information Institute; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 10, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 10, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6