START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1116 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1116 
(Delegate Harrison) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Business Regulation - Restaurants and Traders - Licensing Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires a licensed restaurant to also have a trader’s license if the restaurant does 
business as a trader or exhibitor in the State. However, the bill exempts from the 
requirement to obtain a trader’s license a licensed restaurant that generates 10% or less of 
its annual sales from nonfood items.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in a limited number of cases, it is not 
anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. The circuit courts can likely 
handle any increase in licensing activity with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues are likely minimally affected, as discussed 
below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Except in Montgomery County, a person must have a restaurant license 
whenever the person operates a restaurant or other eating place in the State. 
 
Generally, a person must have a trader’s license whenever the person (1) does business as 
a trader in the State or (2) does business as an exhibitor in the State. However, this 
requirement does not apply to:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1116/ Page 2 
 
a grower, maker, or manufacturer of goods;  
 
a nonresident traveling salesperson, sample merchant, or representative of a foreign 
mercantile or manufacturing business while selling to or soliciting an order from a 
licensed trader in the State; or 
 
a private individual while publicly selling the individual’s personal effects on the 
individual’s property, if the individual holds only one sale not exceeding 
14 consecutive days in a calendar year; or 
 
a restaurant licensed under Title 17, Subtitle 16 of the Business Regulation Article. 
 
Licensing revenues under Title 17 of the Business Regulation Article are generally split 
between the State general fund and the counties in which the licenses are issued. In general, 
the State retains 8% of the fees in the general fund and the counties retain 92% of the 
licensing revenue. 
 
Chapter 315 of 2022 updates, clarifies, and alters numerous provisions governing 
miscellaneous State business licenses under Title 17 of the Business Regulation Article. 
Among other changes, Chapter 315 also alters numerous provisions relating to other 
specific types of licenses, including restaurant licenses and trader’s licenses. 
 
Local Revenues:  As the bill repeals an exception for licensed restaurants to hold both a 
trader’s license and a restaurant license, local revenues may increase as a result of issuing 
additional licenses; overall, however, the bill’s changes to this licensing requirement is 
expected to be minimal, and thus have no material effect on local revenues. For example, 
Anne Arundel and Frederick counties report this requirement has no fiscal impact on the 
counties. However, the repeal of the existing exception is likely partially offset by the new 
exception established by the bill (i.e., for restaurants that generate 10% or less of 
annual sales from nonfood items). 
 
Small Business Effect:  Restaurants that are small businesses may, in some cases, be 
required to obtain both a trader’s license and a restaurant license under the bill, to the extent 
such restaurants do not qualify for an exemption under other provisions of law. However, 
the additional exception established by the bill may allow many restaurants to remain 
exempt, to the extent they remain below the annual sales threshold for nonfood items. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1116/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Office of 
the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of 
the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3