START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 183

Chapter 183

(House Bill 1139)

AN ACT concerning

Growing Family Child Care Opportunities Pilot Program – Permanent
Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Growing Family Child Care Opportunities Pilot
Program as a permanent program; and generally relating to the Growing Family
Child Care Opportunities Pilot Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.5–114
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 437 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 2

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 438 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2021
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

9.5–114.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Child care licensing region” means any one of 13 regions designated by
the Department to provide licensing and oversight for family child care programs.

(3) “Family child care” means the care given to a child under the age of 13
years or to a developmentally disabled person under the age of 21 years that is in place of
parental care for less than 24 hours a day, in a residence other than the child’s residence,
for which the family child care provider is paid.

(4) “Family child care provider” means an individual who cares for children
in a registered family child care home or a registered large family child care home.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 183 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) “Local [pilot] program” means a local jurisdiction or child care licensing
region that participates in the Program.

(6) “Program” means the Growing Family Child Care Opportunities [Pilot]
Program.

(7) “Start–up assistance” means the funding for starting a family child care
program including the cost of materials, curriculum, and renovations.

(b) (1) There is a Growing Family Child Care Opportunities [Pilot] Program
in the Department.

(2) The purpose of the Program is to provide grants to establish and
support local [pilot] programs in the State.

(3) The Department shall partner with the Maryland Child Care Resource
Network to administer the Program.

(c) (1) Except as provided in subsection (g) of this section, on or before
September 1, 2022, the Department shall award at least three grants, each of which does
not exceed $150,000, in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection to establish and
support family child care providers in the State.

(2) (i) To be eligible for a grant under this section, a county governing
body or multiple county governing bodies shall sign a memorandum of understanding with
a child care resource center that serves the child care licensing region that contains one of
the counties.

(ii) The county or counties and the child care resource center jointly
shall apply for the grant and administer the local [pilot] program.

(d) Grant recipients shall:

(1) Use the grants to:

(i) Establish and support a local [pilot] program; and

(ii) Target the use of the grant to increase the supply and ensure the
sustainability of family child care providers in areas with above average rates of poverty
and unemployment or areas with a lack of available child care providers;

(2) Raise local matching funds, including in–kind matching resources at a
1:1 match;

(3) Collaborate with existing family child care providers during the
implementation of the Program;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 183

(4) Provide multilingual outreach to recruit individuals to become
registered family child care providers with the Department;

(5) Provide technical assistance, financial incentives, and start–up
assistance for recruited individuals as they navigate the Department’s process to become a
registered family child care provider;

(6) Assist newly registered and established family child care providers
through technical assistance to achieve quality benchmarks, peer–to–peer mentoring, and
financial incentives; and

(7) Establish partnerships with local chambers of commerce, or other local
or state organizations for family child care providers that support small businesses and
women and minority–owned businesses to provide:

(i) Assistance to recruited individuals or registered family child care
providers in implementing best business practices; and

(ii) Assistance in achieving financial sustainability.

(e) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, for [each of] fiscal years
2023 [and], 2024, AND 2026, AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, the Governor shall
include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $450,000 to the Program.

(2) To the extent authorized under federal law, the Governor shall use
federal funds to satisfy the requirement of paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(f) The Department shall develop guidelines, in consultation with the Maryland
Child Care Resource Center, for the grant application process and grant recipients.

(g) (1) The Department may seek funding to start the Program.

(2) If the Department receives funding before July 1, 2022, the Department
shall begin awarding grants as soon as possible under the Program.

(h) Each year, the Department shall develop and publish goals for the Program.

(i) On or before December 1, 2021, and each December 1 thereafter, the
Department shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, on the status of the Program and an evaluation of local [pilot]
programs in meeting the Program goals.

Chapter 437 of the Acts of 2021

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 183 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2021. [It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2025,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

Chapter 438 of the Acts of 2021

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2021. [It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2025,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4