START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1171 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1171 
(Delegate Williams, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance and Judicial Proceedings 
 
Nonprescription Drugs and Devices – Provision by Registered Nurses and Sale of 
Contraceptives Through Automatic Devices 
 
 
This bill repeals the prohibition against and related penalty for selling or offering for sale 
a nonlatex condom by means of a vending machine or other automatic device. Instead, the 
bill prohibits a person from selling or offering for sale a natural membrane condom by 
means of a vending machine or other automatic device; violators are excluded from 
existing criminal and civil penalties under current law. The Committee on Registered 
Nurses Personally Preparing and Dispensing Drugs and Devices in Local Health 
Departments must include additional information on nonprescription contraceptive drugs 
and devices approved for over-the-counter (OTC) use within its formulary. A registered 
nurse (RN) may provide nonprescription drugs and devices, without a prescription, in 
compliance with specified provisions in current law. The bill also makes other conforming 
changes.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The committee can include the specified OTC nonprescription drugs and 
devices within the formulary using existing budgeted resources. The repeal of the criminal 
penalty provision under the bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on State 
finances or operations, including the work of the District Court. 
  
Local Effect:  Any operational impact on local health departments (LHDs) is not 
anticipated to affect local finances. The repeal of the criminal penalty provision under the 
bill is not anticipated to have a material impact on local finances or operations, including 
local law enforcement. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1171/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Sale of Condoms by Vending Machine 
 
Under current law (specifically, under the Criminal Law Article), a person may not sell or 
offer for sale a nonlatex condom by means of a vending machine or other automatic device. 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a fine of up to 
$1,000 for each violation. Each vending machine or other automatic device in violation of 
this prohibition is considered a separate violation. 
 
The bill repeals the prohibition against, and associated penalty for, selling or offering for 
sale a nonlatex condom by means of a vending machine or other automatic device. Instead, 
the bill prohibits a person from selling or offering for sale a natural membrane condom by 
means of a vending machine or other automatic device and places that prohibition under 
the Maryland Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (within the Health-General Article). 
 
Under the Maryland Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as administered by the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), a person who violates any prohibition in the Act is subject 
to both criminal and civil penalties. More specifically, a violator is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and, upon conviction, is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 and imprisonment for up to 
one year for the first conviction, and a fine of up to $25,000 and imprisonment for up to 
three years for a second or subsequent conviction. In addition, a person who violates the 
Act is subject to a civil penalty of up to $5,000 in an action in any District Court and can 
be enjoined from continuing the violation. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate 
violation. 
 
The bill excludes the prohibition against selling or offering for sale a natural membrane 
condom by means of a vending machine or other automatic device from the current law 
penalties under the Maryland Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. 
 
Committee on Registered Nurses Personally Preparing and Dispensing Drugs and Devices 
in Local Health Departments 
 
Chapter 44 of 2015 established the committee to develop and approve a formulary for use 
by RNs and annually review the formulary to ensure compliance with current prescribing 
standards. 
 
The bill requires that the formulary also include all nonprescription contraceptive drugs 
and devices approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for OTC use. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1171/ Page 3 
Registered Nurses Preparing and Dispensing Drugs and Devices 
 
Chapter 44 also authorizes an RN to personally prepare and dispense drugs and devices, if 
the RN (1) complies with the formulary developed by the committee; (2) successfully 
completes an MDH training program; (3) maintains the patient’s health record in a manner 
that ensures the confidentiality of the patient’s drug and device medication record in 
accordance with State and federal laws; (4) complies with drug and device storage and 
inventory procedures in accordance with MDH policy; and (5) has received a prescription 
from an authorized prescriber employed at an LHD. 
 
The bill expands this authorization for an RN to provide, without a prescription, 
nonprescription drugs and devices, subject to compliance with the specified current law 
provisions. 
 
Under current law, an RN who complies with the above provisions is also authorized to 
personally prepare and dispense prescription drugs and devices in an LHD (1) in 
accordance with the Overdose Response Program or the Expedited Partner Therapy Pilot 
Program or (2) to patients in need of communicable disease, alcohol and drug abuse, family 
planning, or reproductive health services. 
 
The bill expands this authorization for an RN in an LHD to provide, without a prescription, 
nonprescription drugs and devices, subject to compliance with the specified current law 
provisions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 944 (Senator Kelly) - Finance and Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Maryland State 
Department of Education; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County 
Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
Prince George’s County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1171/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4