START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1101 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1101 
(Delegate Love, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Standing - Environmental and Natural Resources Protection Proceedings (Clean 
Water Justice Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill establishes standing, for a person that meets the threshold standing requirements 
under federal law, in civil claims arising under specified standards relating to (1) nontidal 
wetlands that do not have a continuous surface connection to surface water and 
(2) discharges of pollutants affecting ephemeral streams or intermittent streams. The bill 
authorizes a person that has standing pursuant to the bill to bring a civil action against any 
person or political subdivision that is alleged to be in violation of those standards. The bill 
also authorizes a person that meets the threshold standing requirements under federal law 
to intervene in a civil action brought by the Secretary of the Environment relating to 
nontidal wetlands (similar authority already exists, and is reestablished under the bill, with 
respect to a civil action relating to the discharge of pollutants to waters of the State). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Maryland Department of the Environment 
(MDE) increase by $86,400 in FY 2025; future years reflect annualization and inflation. 
General fund expenditures may also increase for the Judiciary beginning in FY 2025 (not 
reflected below). Special fund revenues may increase, as discussed below. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$86,400 
$103,600 
$108,200 
$112,900 
$117,900 
Net Effect 
(-)/- 
(-)/- 
(-)/- 
(-)/- 
(-)/-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures may increase, as discussed below. Revenues 
are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1101/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill makes changes to State law to provide standing and certain 
remedies to a person with respect to civil claims arising under any “standard.” 
 
“Person” means an individual, receiver, trustee, guardian, personal representative, 
fiduciary, or representative of any kind and any partnership, firm, association, corporation, 
or other nongovernmental entity. 
 
“Standard” means any requirement, prohibition, limitation, or condition established by 
statute, regulation, permit, order, or license issued by the Secretary of the Environment in 
accordance with (1) Title 5, Subtitle 9 (“Nontidal Wetlands”) of the Environment Article, 
if the requirement, prohibition, limitation, or condition is related to nontidal wetlands that 
do not have a continuous surface connection to surface water or (2) Title 9, Subtitle 3 
(“Water Pollution Control”) of the Environment Article, if the requirement, prohibition, 
limitation, or condition is related to an ephemeral stream or an intermittent stream. 
 
“Ephemeral stream” means a body of water with (1) a stream bed located above the water 
table year-round; (2) a stream flow primarily sourced from rainfall runoff; and (3) flowing 
water only during, and for a short duration after, precipitation events in a typical year. 
 
“Intermittent stream” means a body of water with (1) flowing water during certain times 
of year, when groundwater provides water for stream flow and (2) a stream flow 
supplemented by runoff from rainfall. 
 
The bill makes the following changes:   
 
 
Standing – The bill establishes that a person that meets the threshold standing 
requirements under federal law has standing in civil claims arising under any 
“standard” (as defined above). 
 
Authorization to Bring a Civil Action – The bill establishes that a person that has 
standing may bring a civil action on the person’s own behalf against any person or 
political subdivision that is alleged to be in violation of any “standard.” However, 
an action may not be brought unless the plaintiff first gives 60 days’ notice of the 
alleged violation to the Secretary of the Environment, the Attorney General, any 
local jurisdiction in which the violation is alleged to occur, and an alleged violator 
of the standard. A person may not bring an action if the secretary has commenced 
and is diligently prosecuting a civil action, or a consent order is entered, to require 
compliance. An action must be brought in any circuit court of a county where the 
condition, activity, or failure is alleged to be a violation of a standard. 
 
Consent Judgment or Settlement Agreement – A plaintiff must give notice of and 
provide a complete and unredacted copy of a proposed consent judgment to which 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1101/ Page 3 
MDE is not a party, or a settlement agreement, to MDE and the Attorney General 
at least 45 days before the date that the proposed consent judgment or settlement 
agreement is filed with the court. The bill authorizes a court to approve a consent 
judgment or settlement agreement between the parties that includes a supplemental 
environmental project. 
 
Authorized Relief – The bill authorizes a court to (1) order the enforcement of a 
standard and (2) grant temporary or permanent equitable relief or, except as 
otherwise provided under the bill, any other relief provided under a standard. 
 
Civil Penalties – The bill authorizes a court to impose a civil penalty authorized 
under the applicable statute (and deposited in accordance with existing statute); 
however, the State may not be held liable for civil penalties in any action under the 
bill. 
 
Costs of Litigation – The bill authorizes the court, in an action pursuant to the bill, 
to award costs of litigation to (1) a prevailing plaintiff; (2) a substantially prevailing 
plaintiff; or (3) a substantially prevailing defendant if the plaintiff’s claim was 
frivolous, unreasonable, or groundless. 
 
Authorization to Intervene in a Civil Action Brought by the Secretary – The bill 
gives a person that meets the threshold standing requirements under federal law the 
unconditional right and authority to intervene in a civil action brought by the 
Secretary of the Environment under Title 5, Subtitle 9 or Title 9, Subtitle 3 (not 
limited only to civil actions relating to nontidal wetlands that do not have a 
continuous surface connection to surface water and discharges of pollutants that 
affect ephemeral streams or intermittent streams). In the case of a civil action 
brought by the secretary under Title 9, Subtitle 3, however, this new provision 
replaces/reestablishes a similar existing provision, enacted under Chapters 618 and 
619 of 2021 (described below, under Current Law), that is repealed by the bill. A 
person that has standing to intervene has the same rights as an interested person or 
aggrieved party under the federal Clean Water Act (CWA) and must exercise the 
right to intervene in accordance with the applicable practices, procedures, and laws 
in the State. 
 
Authorization for the State to Intervene in a Civil Action Brought by a Person –
The State may intervene in any proceeding brought pursuant to the bill at any time. 
 
“Political subdivision” means (1) a county; (2) Baltimore City; (3) a multicounty agency; 
(4) a municipality; (5) a single-purpose district; or (6) a sanitary district. 
 
The bill establishes the General Assembly’s intent that the bill:   
 
 
provide certain remedies to abate the pollution, destruction, or substantial or 
unreasonable impairment to the public health, water quality, or any other natural 
resources of the State; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1101/ Page 4 
 
may not abridge or alter any right of action or remedies that exist under law; and 
 
may not be construed as stopping or limiting the State or any person in the exercise 
of the right to (1) protect the natural resources of the State; (2) suppress nuisances; 
or (3) abate pollution. 
 
Finally, the bill includes a severability provision. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Enforcement under the Environment Article 
 
The Secretary of the Environment is required to carry out and enforce the provisions of the 
Environment Article and rules and regulations adopted under the article. 
 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 9 
 
Title 5, Subtitle 9 has the purpose of preserving nontidal wetlands in the State and, among 
other things, requires a person to obtain a permit for activities affecting nontidal wetlands. 
 
A person who violates the provisions of the subtitle or any regulation, order, or permit 
under the subtitle is subject to a civil penalty of up to $10,000. Each day a violation occurs 
is a separate violation and a court may issue an injunction requiring the person to cease the 
violation and restore the area unlawfully disturbed. A person who violates any provision 
of or fails to perform any duty imposed by the subtitle or a regulation, order, or permit 
under the subtitle is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $10,000 for 
a first offense or $25,000 for a second or subsequent offense (and the court may order the 
person to restore the area unlawfully disturbed). MDE is also authorized to revoke a permit 
and/or issue a stop work order. Civil and criminal penalties are deposited in the Nontidal 
Wetland Compensation Fund and used for the creation, restoration, or enhancement of 
nontidal wetlands. 
 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 3 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 3 has the purpose of preventing, abating, and controlling water pollution 
in the State and, among other things, requires a person to hold a permit for specified 
activities that could cause or increase the discharge of pollutants into the waters of the 
State. 
 
Sections 9-334 through 9-344 establish the enforcement provisions of Title 9, Subtitle 3. 
The provisions of §§ 9-334 through 9-341 govern (1) the ability of MDE to issue specified 
complaints, notices, and corrective orders, and to seek an injunction against any person 
who violates the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under 
the subtitle and (2) a person’s ability to seek judicial review of final decisions of the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1101/ Page 5 
department in connection with an order or permit issued under the subtitle if the person is 
aggrieved by a final decision. 
 
In addition to being subject to an injunctive order, under § 9-342 a person who violates any 
provision of the subtitle or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under 
the subtitle is subject to a civil penalty of up to $10,000. Each day a violation occurs is a 
separate violation. In addition, MDE may impose an administrative penalty of up to 
$10,000 for each violation, but not exceeding $100,000 total. Each day a violation occurs 
is a separate violation. An administrative penalty must be assessed with consideration given 
to several specified factors. 
 
Under § 9-343, a person who violates any provision of or fails to perform any duty imposed 
by the subtitle, or who violates any provision of or fails to perform any duty imposed by a 
rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under the subtitle, is guilty of a 
misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to a maximum fine of $25,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to one year for a first offense and a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or 
imprisonment for up to two years for a subsequent offense. The person may also be 
enjoined from continuing the violation. Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate 
violation. In addition, a person is guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction is subject to 
a maximum fine of $50,000 and/or imprisonment for up to two years if the person 
(1) knowingly makes any false statement, representation, or certification in any 
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained or 
(2) falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or 
method required to be maintained. Pursuant to § 9-344, the Attorney General is in charge 
of prosecuting and defending, on behalf of the State, cases that arise under provisions of 
the subtitle. 
 
There are also additional administrative penalty provisions under § 9-328.1 applicable to 
certain permit holders that remain in significant noncompliance with discharge permits. 
These administrative penalties range from $250 to $10,000 depending on specified factors. 
 
Civil and administrative penalties, and fines, imposed under the subtitle are deposited in 
the Maryland Clean Water Fund and used for various activities specified in statute. 
 
 
Title 9, Subtitle 3 – Right to Intervene in a Civil Action 
 
Pursuant to Chapters 618 and 619, under § 9-344.1, a person who meets the threshold 
standing requirements under CWA has an unconditional right and the authority to intervene 
in a civil action that the State initiates in State court to require compliance with Title 9, 
Subtitle 3, regulations adopted in accordance with the subtitle, or any discharge permit, 
effluent limitation, or order issued in accordance with the subtitle. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1101/ Page 6 
A person must exercise the right to intervene in accordance with the applicable practices, 
procedures, and laws in the State. A person who meets the (standing) requirements to 
intervene has the same rights as an interested person or aggrieved party under CWA, 
including the right to apply for judicial appeal. 
 
Certain Authorizations/Standing Related to Environment/Natural Resources Enforcement 
 
 
Environmental Standing Act 
 
The Environmental Standing Act, under the Natural Resources Article, includes a finding 
by the General Assembly that the State’s courts are an appropriate forum for seeking the 
protection of the environment and that an unreasonably strict procedural definition of 
“standing to sue” in environmental matters is not in the public interest. 
 
The Act authorizes the Attorney General, a political subdivision of the State, and any other 
person – regardless of whether the person possesses a special interest different from that 
possessed generally by the residents of the State, or whether the person is under threat of 
substantial personal or property damage – to bring and maintain an action for mandamus 
or equitable relief against any officer or agency of the State or a political subdivision for  
(1) failure to perform a nondiscretionary ministerial duty or (2) failure to enforce an 
applicable environmental quality standard for the protection of the air, water, or other 
natural resources of the State. 
 
The Act’s authorization is subject to specified limitations, including that in order for an 
individual to bring an action the individual must either reside in the county or 
Baltimore City where the action is brought or must demonstrate that the alleged condition, 
activity, or failure complained of affects the environment where the individual resides. 
 
 
Specified Environmental Permits/Licenses and Critical Area Variances 
 
Chapters 650 and 651 of 2009 establish the following authorizations for a person to request 
judicial review of specified permits/licenses under the Environment Article or to participate 
in an administrative proceeding regarding a specified variance for development activity 
(and petition for judicial review) under the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical 
Area Protection Program under the Natural Resources Article:   
 
 
Specified Permits/Licenses under the Environment Article – A final 
determination/decision on the issuance, denial, renewal, or revision of specified 
permits/licenses (including a permit under Title 5, Subtitle 9 and a permit to 
discharge pollutants to waters of the State under Title 9, Subtitle 3) is subject to 
judicial review at the request of any person that meets the threshold standing 
requirements under federal law and (1) is the applicant or (2) participated in a public 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1101/ Page 7 
participation process through the submission of written or oral comments, unless an 
opportunity for public participation was not provided. 
 
Variances under the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area 
Protection Program – A person who meets the threshold standing requirements 
under federal law is authorized to participate as a party in specified administrative 
proceedings involving a specified variance for development activity and to petition 
for judicial review. 
 
Chapters 650 and 651 establish the General Assembly’s intent, in uncodified language, that 
the references to “threshold standing requirements under federal law” be construed, among 
other things (1) in the context of the entire body of federal case law regarding standing, as 
that case law existed when Chapters 650 and 651 took effect and as it evolved/evolves in 
subsequent rulings and (2) in accordance with the ruling in Hunt v Washington State Apple 
Advertising Commission, 432 U.S. 333 (1977). 
 
Under federal law, the constitutional minimum of standing requires that (1) the plaintiff 
suffered an injury in fact (an actual or imminent concrete and particularized invasion of a 
legally protected interest); (2) the injury must be fairly traceable to the challenged action 
of the defendant; and (3) it must be likely that the injury will be redressed by a favorable 
decision. Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560-561 (1992). 
 
In Hunt v. Washington State Apple Advertising Commission, the U.S. Supreme Court stated 
that “an association has standing to bring suit on behalf of its members when:  (a) its 
members would otherwise have standing to sue in their own right; (b) the interests it seeks 
to protect are germane to the organization’s purpose; and (c) neither the claim asserted nor 
the relief requested requires the participation of individual members in the lawsuit.” Hunt 
at 343. 
 
Federal Clean Water Act 
 
 
In General 
 
Congress established CWA (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) to restore and protect the quality of 
the nation’s surface waters. CWA protects “navigable waters,” defined in the statute as 
“waters of the United States, including the territorial seas,” but does not clearly define 
“waters of the United States.” 
 
 
Citizen Suits 
 
In addition to enforcement authority of the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), and states, under the Act, CWA authorizes any citizen (a person 
or persons having an interest which is or may be adversely affected) to commence a civil 
action on the person’s own behalf against any person (including government entities) who 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1101/ Page 8 
is alleged to be in violation of specified effluent standards or limitations under CWA or an 
order issued by the EPA Administrator, or a state, with respect to such a standard or 
limitation. Similar to the bill, CWA requires 60 days’ notice to be provided to the 
EPA Administrator, the state in which the alleged violation occurs, and the alleged violator, 
and prohibits commencement of an action if the EPA Administrator or state has 
commenced and is diligently prosecuting an action. 
 
 
Sackett v. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Under Sackett v. EPA (decided in May 2023), the U.S. Supreme Court concluded that the 
term “waters” used in the definition of “navigable waters” under CWA encompasses only 
those relatively permanent, standing or continuously flowing bodies of water forming 
geographical features that are described in ordinary parlance as streams, oceans, rivers, and 
lakes (also described by the Court as “relatively permanent bod[ies] of water connected to 
traditional interstate navigable waters”). The case focused on the extent to which CWA 
applies to wetlands and the Court held that CWA extends only to wetlands that are, as a 
practical matter, indistinguishable from waters of the United States, requiring a party 
asserting jurisdiction over adjacent wetlands to establish (1) that the adjacent body of water 
constitutes “waters of the United States” and (2) that the wetland has a continuous surface 
connection with that water, making it difficult to determine where the “water” ends and the 
“wetland” begins. 
 
State Revenues:  Special fund revenues may increase as a result of any increased civil 
penalties collected as a result of civil actions brought pursuant to the bill. Civil penalties 
collected under Title 5, Subtitle 9 and Title 9, Subtitle 3 are deposited in the 
Nontidal Wetland Compensation Fund and the Maryland Clean Water Fund, respectively. 
Any increase in State revenues from court filing fees resulting from the bill is not expected 
to be material. 
 
State Expenditures:  
 
Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $86,397 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2024, effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one assistant 
Attorney General to (1) manage the department’s actions in response to 60-day notices 
received from persons intending to bring civil actions under the bill (including reviewing 
the proposed civil actions and associated MDE records and advising the department);  
(2) manage the department’s initiation of, monitoring of, and/or intervention in, any 
resulting legal actions; (3) address any discovery-related requests submitted to MDE as a 
part of an action; and (4) review, and provide advice to MDE with respect to, any consent 
judgments or settlement agreements submitted to the department prior to being filed with 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1101/ Page 9 
the court. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$79,141 
Operating Expenses 
   7,256 
Total FY 2025 MDE Expenditures 
$86,397 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary indicates that costs may be incurred for training for circuit court judges 
relating to providing equitable relief in the environmental actions brought pursuant to the 
bill. These costs have not been quantified, however. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local governments may incur increased costs associated with 
litigation resulting from the bill as regulated entities (potential defendants in an action), 
including costs of litigation (potentially including the opposing party’s costs) and any costs 
associated with relief granted by the court or the terms of a consent judgment or settlement 
agreement. MDE indicates, however, that the extent of any potential litigation is likely to 
be relatively limited, due to the scope of the bill (e.g., the limited definition of “standard”) 
and existing MDE enforcement of Title 5, Subtitle 9 and Title 9, Subtitle 3. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that are regulated entities under Title 5, 
Subtitle 9 and Title 9, Subtitle 3 of the Environment Article may be meaningfully affected 
by litigation costs and any penalties, costs associated with consent judgments or settlement 
agreements, or costs associated with relief granted, under a civil action brought pursuant 
to the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 653 (Senator Augustine, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Environmental Service; Harford County; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1101/ Page 10 
City of Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department 
of Transportation; Standing Last in Line:  The Hurdles to Bringing Environmental 
Accountability Lawsuits in Maryland, Isaacson, Evan, Chesapeake Legal Alliance, 
Nicholas, Betsy, Waterkeepers Chesapeake, Schmitt, Katlyn, Center for Progressive 
Reform (December 2022); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
an/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy and 
Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 10