START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1167 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1167 
(Delegate Foley, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Center for School Safety - Secure Schools Emergency Response Grant 
Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Secure Schools Emergency Response Grant Program in the 
Maryland Center for School Safety (MCSS). The purpose of the program is to provide 
grants to local school systems to improve emergency notification systems and 
communication between public elementary and secondary school personnel, a public safety 
answering point (PSAP), and a public safety agency during emergency events. Local 
school systems that apply for and receive grants must use the funds to improve emergency 
notification systems or enhance communications within the school and with public safety 
agencies. By September 1, 2026, MCSS must ensure that the program is operating and 
available to each local school board. The Governor may include an appropriation in the 
annual budget bill for the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $3.0 million annually beginning in 
FY 2025. MCSS can otherwise implement the bill with existing resources. No effect on 
revenues.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
3.0 
Net Effect 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.0) 
($3.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase by as much as $3.0 million 
annually beginning in FY 2025 to the extent local school systems apply for and receive 
grants.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1167/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An emergency notification system may include:   
 
 
a cellular phone application-based emergency event system with specified features;  
 
the capability to generate an automatic emergency alert notification to all public and 
nonpublic schools located in reasonable proximity to an emergency situation that is 
determined to be an imminent threat to school campuses or school personnel; and 
 
intercoms, school public address systems, bidirectional antennas or boosters, and 
other technology that will improve emergency notification and communication, as 
identified by MCSS. 
 
Current Law:   
 
School Safety Grant Program 
 
Chapter 14 of 2018 created the School Safety Grant Program (SSGP) to provide grants to 
local school systems for security improvements, including:  
 
 
secure and lockable doors for every classroom;  
 
an area of safe refuge in every classroom; and  
 
surveillance and other security technology for school monitoring purposes. 
 
The Governor is required to include $10.0 million in the annual operating or capital budget 
that may be used only to make grant awards (the program has been funded with general 
funds for the past three years). Statute provides the funding to the Interagency Commission 
for School Construction (IAC) and requires IAC to administer the program; however, under 
a memorandum of understanding, MCSS manages the grant awards process and IAC 
manages the program’s finances. 
 
Maryland’s 9-1-1 System and the Maryland 9-1-1 Board 
 
The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through PSAPs, which are generally owned 
and operated by local governments. 9-1-1 specialists working within PSAPs answer, 
redirect, and take action on 9-1-1 calls received based on the location of the originating 
9-1-1 call. State and local governments are preparing for “next generation” 
9-1-1 technology that will allow PSAPs to access not only more accurate information about 
caller location but also other information that will assist emergency personnel in 
communicating with callers and responding more efficiently. Legislation has been enacted 
in recent years to, among other things:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1167/ Page 3 
 
transfer the Maryland 9-1-1 Board that is responsible for administering the 
9-1-1 Trust Fund and overseeing the State’s 9-1-1 system from the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services to the Maryland Department of Emergency 
Management; 
 
expand the uses of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funding for 
9-1-1 specialist training activities; and 
 
increase funding for the State’s 9-1-1 system. 
 
The Maryland 9-1-1 Board’s other responsibilities include (1) dispersing funds to local 
governments from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund for authorized costs; (2) reviewing and approving 
or disapproving requests for reimbursement of the costs of enhancing 9-1-1 systems; 
(3) ensuring the inspection of PSAPs; (4) auditing counties to ensure that 9-1-1 Trust Funds 
are being used for authorized purposes; (5) establishing training standards for PSAP 
personnel based on national best practices and related to Next Generation 9-1-1; and 
(6) consulting with the Maryland Cybersecurity Council to establish cybersecurity 
standards for PSAPs. 
 
State Expenditures:  The bill authorizes the Governor to include an appropriation of 
unspecified amount in the annual budget bill for the program. Based on feedback from 
MCSS, $3.0 million annually is necessary for a viable grant program to serve 
approximately 1,400 public schools in the State. Therefore, general fund expenditures 
increase by $3.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to provide grants to local school 
systems to improve emergency notification and communication systems. As the bill creates 
a program that is similar to SSGP, MCSS can implement the bill with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill authorizes local boards of education, in consultation with 
local law enforcement and PSAPs, to apply for grants from the program. To the extent they 
do and are awarded grants, local school system revenues and expenditures increase by as 
much as $3.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1090 (Senators Waldstreicher and Kagan) - Education, 
Energy, and the Environment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1167/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
cities of Baltimore and Havre de Grace; Montgomery and Talbot counties; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Maryland 
Municipal League; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Center for School 
Safety; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4