START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 293

Chapter 293

(House Bill 1167)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Center for School Safety – ~~Statewide~~ Secure Schools Emergency
Response Grant Program – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the ~~Statewide~~ Secure Schools Emergency Response Grant
Program to be administered by the Maryland Center for School Safety to provide
funds to improve ~~the~~ ~~safety~~ ~~and~~ ~~security~~ ~~of~~ ~~public~~ ~~schools~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~by~~
~~implementing~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ emergency notification ~~system~~ systems and communications
between certain entities; and generally relating to the establishment of the
~~Statewide~~ Secure Schools Emergency Response Grant Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–1502(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–1502(g)(20) and (21)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–1502(g)(22) and 7–1513
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 1–301(a), (j), (t), and (u)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–1502.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 293 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) There is a Maryland Center for School Safety.

(g) The Center shall perform the following functions and duties:

(20) Review and comment on school emergency plans developed under §
7–1510 of this subtitle; [and]

(21) Report to the General Assembly and the Governor on life–threatening
incidents as required under § 7–1510 of this subtitle; AND

(22) ADMINISTER THE STATEWIDE SECURE SCHOOLS EMERGENCY
RESPONSE GRANT PROGRAM UNDER § 7–1513 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

7–1513.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “EMERGENCY EVENT” MEANS AN EMERGENCY SITUATION THAT
REQUIRES AN IMMEDIATE RESPONSE BY FIRST RESPONDERS.

(2) (3) “FIRST RESPONDER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 1–301
OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

(3) “PANIC BUTTON EVENT” MEANS AN EMERGENCY SITUATION THAT
~~COMPELS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~USER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~NOTIFICATION~~ ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PRESS~~ ~~A~~ ~~PANIC~~
~~BUTTON~~ ~~TO~~ ~~INSTANTLY~~ ~~SUMMON~~ ~~HELP~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THEIR~~ ~~LOCATION~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~FIRST~~
RESPONDERS OR OTHER PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY PERSONNEL.

(4) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE STATEWIDE SECURE SCHOOLS
EMERGENCY RESPONSE GRANT PROGRAM.

(5) “PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 1–301
OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

(6) “PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT” HAS THE MEANING STATED
IN § 1–301 OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY ARTICLE.

(B) (1) THERE IS A STATEWIDE SECURE SCHOOLS EMERGENCY
RESPONSE GRANT PROGRAM ADMINISTERED BY THE CENTER.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO
LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEMS TO IMPROVE ~~THE~~ ~~SAFETY~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SECURITY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PUBLIC~~
SCHOOLS IN THE STATE BY IMPLEMENTING A STATEWIDE EMERGENCY

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 293

NOTIFICATION ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~FACILITATES~~ SYSTEMS AND COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN PUBLIC ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY SCHOOL PERSONNEL, A PUBLIC
SAFETY ANSWERING POINT, AND A PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY IN LIFE–THREATENING
AND EMERGENCY SITUATIONS, INCLUDING MEDICAL EMERGENCIES AND THE
~~PRESENCE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ACTIVE~~ ~~SHOOTER~~ ~~OR~~ ~~INTRUDER~~ ~~AT~~ ~~A~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~SCHOOL~~ DURING
EMERGENCY EVENTS.

(3) A LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM AWARDED A GRANT BY THE CENTER
UNDER THE PROGRAM SHALL USE THE FUNDS TO:

(I) IMPROVE EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION SYSTEMS; OR

(II) ENHANCE COMMUNICATIONS WITHIN THE SCHOOL AND
WITH PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCIES.

(4) EACH COUNTY BOARD, IN CONSULTATION WITH LOCAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND A LOCAL PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT, MAY APPLY TO
THE CENTER FOR A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(C) THE PROGRAM SHALL PROCURE AND IMPLEMENT AN EMERGENCY
COMMUNICATION PLATFORM FOR A SECURE SCHOOLS EMERGENCY RESPONSE
PROGRAM THROUGH WHICH ALL SCHOOL FACULTY AND STAFF ARE ABLE TO ALERT
A PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT TO REPORT A LIFE–THREATENING OR AN
EMERGENCY SITUATION.

(D) (C) THE COMMUNICATION PLATFORM REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION SHALL AN EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION SYSTEM
AND THE COMMUNICATIONS UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(3) OF THIS SECTION MAY
INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:

(1) A CELLULAR PHONE APPLICATION–BASED PANIC BUTTON
EMERGENCY EVENT SYSTEM THAT:

(I) CAN BE INTEGRATED WITH A LOCAL PUBLIC SAFETY
ANSWERING POINT; AND

(II) IS ABLE TO:

1. PLACE A STANDARD TELEPHONE CALL TO 9–1–1;

2. TEXT COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN AUTHORIZED
USERS AND A PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT AND PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 293 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. PROVIDE TEXT MESSAGES, E–MAILS, AND PUSH
NOTIFICATIONS TO AUTHORIZED USERS, INCLUDING SCHOOL PERSONNEL, FIRST
RESPONDERS, AND OTHER PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY PERSONNEL; AND

4. AUTOMATICALLY TRANSMIT SCHOOL FLOOR PLANS,
SCHOOL EMERGENCY PLANS, AND RELEVANT CONTACT INFORMATION TO FIRST
RESPONDERS OR PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY PERSONNEL RESPONDING TO A PANIC
BUTTON EVENT AT A SCHOOL WITHOUT FURTHER ACTION NEEDED BY THE USER
REPORTING THE EMERGENCY; AND

(2) CAPABILITY THE CAPABILITY TO GENERATE AN AUTOMATED
EMERGENCY ALERT NOTIFICATION TO ALL PUBLIC AND NONPUBLIC SCHOOLS
LOCATED IN REASONABLE PROXIMITY TO AN EMERGENCY SITUATION THAT IS
DETERMINED TO BE AN IMMINENT THREAT TO SCHOOL CAMPUSES OR SCHOOL
PERSONNEL BY THE PUBLIC SAFETY ANSWERING POINT RECEIVING THE REPORT,
INCLUDING REPORTS OF:

(I) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO WAS KILLED;

(II) AN ACCIDENT OR THREAT THAT RESULTED IN SERIOUS
BODILY INJURY;

(III) AN INDIVIDUAL WHO WAS ASSAULTED WITH A DEADLY
WEAPON AND THE ALLEGED ASSAILANT REMAINS AT LARGE;

(IV) THE DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM; AND

(V) ANY OTHER EMERGENCY SITUATION AGREED TO BY A
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY AND A COUNTY BOARD; AND

(3) INTERCOMS, SCHOOL PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS,
BIDIRECTIONAL ANTENNAS OR BOOSTERS, AND OTHER TECHNOLOGY THAT WILL
IMPROVE EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION AND COMMUNICATION, AS IDENTIFIED BY THE
CENTER.

(E) THE COMMUNICATION PLATFORM PROCURED UNDER SUBSECTION (C)
OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE CERTIFIED BY THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY UNDER THE FEDERAL SUPPORT ANTI–TERRORISM BY FOSTERING
~~EFFECTIVE~~ ~~TECHNOLOGIES~~ ~~ACT.~~

(F) (D) (1) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2026, THE CENTER SHALL
ENSURE THAT THE PROGRAM HAS BEEN IMPLEMENTED IN EACH PUBLIC SCHOOL IN
THE STATE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 293

(2) (I) A PUBLIC SCHOOL WITH AN EXISTING PROGRAM THAT IS
SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO THE PROGRAM MAY SUBMIT A REQUEST TO THE
CENTER TO OPT OUT OF THE PROGRAM.

(II) IF THE CENTER DETERMINES THAT A PUBLIC SCHOOL’S
EXISTING PROGRAM IS SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO THE PROGRAM, THE CENTER
SHALL GRANT THE SCHOOL’S REQUEST TO OPT OUT OF THE PROGRAM IS
OPERATING AND AVAILABLE TO EACH COUNTY BOARD.

(G) (E) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE THE GOVERNOR SHALL MAY
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $4,500,000 FOR THE
PROGRAM.

Article – Public Safety

1–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(j) (1) “First responder” means an employee of a State or local public safety
agency that provides emergency response services.

(2) “First responder” includes:

(i) a firefighter;

(ii) a paramedic;

(iii) an emergency medical technician;

(iv) a rescue squad member;

(v) a sworn member of the Office of the State Fire Marshal;

(vi) a member of a volunteer fire or rescue company who is a covered
employee under § 9–234 of the Labor and Employment Article;

(vii) an individual who is licensed or certified under § 13–516 of the
Education Article; and

(viii) a 9–1–1 specialist.

(t) “Public safety agency” means:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 293 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) a functional division of a public agency that provides fire fighting,
police, medical, or other emergency services; or

(2) a private entity that provides fire fighting, police, medical, or other
emergency services on a voluntary basis.

(u) “Public safety answering point” means a communications facility that:

(1) is operated on a 24–hour basis;

(2) first receives 9–1–1 requests for emergency services in a 9–1–1 service
area; and

(3) as appropriate:

(i) dispatches public safety services directly;

(ii) transmits incident data to appropriate public safety agencies
within the State for the dispatch of public safety services; or

(iii) transfers 9–1–1 requests for emergency services or transmits
incident data to:

1. an appropriate federal emergency communication center
responsible for the delivery of public safety services on a federal campus or federal
reservation; or

2. an appropriate public safety answering point located
within or outside the State.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6