START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 556

Chapter 556

(House Bill 1153)

AN ACT concerning

Environment – Water Pollution Control – Protecting State Waters From PFAS
Pollution
(Protecting State Waters From PFAS Pollution Act)

FOR the purpose of ~~establishing~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~discharge~~ ~~limit~~ ~~for~~ ~~PFAS~~ ~~chemicals~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~water,~~
~~including~~ ~~stormwater,~~ ~~discharged~~ ~~from~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~significant~~ ~~industrial~~ ~~user;~~
~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~significant~~ ~~industrial~~ ~~user~~ ~~to~~ ~~reduce~~ ~~PFAS~~ ~~chemicals~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~
~~water~~ ~~it~~ ~~discharges~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~publicly~~ ~~owned~~ ~~treatment~~ ~~works~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~manner;~~
requiring the Department of the Environment to identify certain significant
industrial users in a certain manner by a certain date; requiring the Department to
develop certain PFAS monitoring and testing criteria for certain users in a certain
manner by a certain date; requiring the Department to develop certain PFAS action
levels and certain mitigation plans in a certain manner by a certain date; requiring
a certain significant industrial user to store, ~~reuse,~~ ~~and~~ ~~dispose~~ ~~of~~ certain PFAS
chemicals in a certain manner; authorizing a certain significant industrial user to
dispose of stored PFAS chemicals in a certain manner ~~and~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~certain~~
~~requirements;~~ requiring a certain significant industrial user to measure levels of
~~organic~~ ~~fluorine~~ PFAS chemicals in industrial wastewater by a certain date and to
report those levels to the Department ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environment;~~ requiring the Department
to update a certain action plan on or before a certain date; and generally relating to
State waters and PFAS pollution.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Environment
Section 9–101(a) through (c), (g), and (i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 9–353 ~~through~~ ~~9–356~~ and 9–354 to be under the new part “Part VII.
Protecting State Waters From PFAS Pollution”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

9–101.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 556 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Discharge” means:

(1) The addition, introduction, leaking, spilling, or emitting of a pollutant
into the waters of this State; or

(2) The placing of a pollutant in a location where the pollutant is likely to
pollute.

(c) (1) “Disposal system” means a system for disposing of wastes by surface,
above surface, or underground methods.

(2) “Disposal system” includes a treatment works and a disposal well.

(g) “Pollutant” means:

(1) Any waste or wastewater that is discharged from:

(i) A publicly owned treatment works; or

(ii) An industrial source; or

(2) Any other liquid, gaseous, solid, or other substance that will pollute any
waters of this State.

(i) “Publicly owned treatment works” means a facility that is:

(1) Owned by this State or a political subdivision, municipal corporation,
or other public entity; and

(2) Used for the treatment of pollutants.

9–351. RESERVED.

9–352. RESERVED.

PART VII. PROTECTING STATE WATERS FROM PFAS POLLUTION.

9–353.

(A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 556

(B) (1) “INDUSTRIAL USER” MEANS:

(1) (I) A PERSON WHO IS ENGAGED IN MANUFACTURING,
FABRICATING, OR ASSEMBLING GOODS; OR

(2) (II) A MEMBER OF ANY CLASS OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCERS OF
POLLUTANTS IDENTIFIED UNDER REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY:

(I) 1. THE SECRETARY; OR

(II) 2. THE ADMINISTRATOR OF THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY.

(2) “INDUSTRIAL USER” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE FEDERAL, STATE,
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.

(C) “PFAS CHEMICALS” MEANS A CLASS OF FLUORINATED ORGANIC
CHEMICALS THAT CONTAIN AT LEAST ONE FULLY FLUORINATED CARBON ATOM,
INCLUDING PERFLUOROALKYL AND POLYFLUOROALKYL SUBSTANCES.

(D) “PRETREATMENT PERMIT” MEANS A DOCUMENT ISSUED BY THE
DEPARTMENT OR THE DEPARTMENT’S DESIGNEE THAT AUTHORIZES A SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER TO INTRODUCE INDUSTRIAL WASTES INTO A PUBLICLY OWNED
TREATMENT WORKS IN COMPLIANCE WITH THE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
UNDER COMAR 26.08.01.01A(69).

(E) (1) “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” MEANS AN INDUSTRIAL USER
THAT:

(1) (I) IS SUBJECT TO CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
UNDER 40 C.F.R. PART 403.6;

(2) (II) DISCHARGES AN AVERAGE OF 25,000 GALLONS PER DAY OR
MORE OF PROCESSED WASTEWATER TO A PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS,
NOT INCLUDING SANITARY, NONCONTACT COOLING, AND BOILER BLOWDOWN
WASTEWATER;

(3) (III) CONTRIBUTES PROCESSED WASTEWATER THAT MAKES UP
5% OR MORE OF THE AVERAGE DRY–WEATHER HYDRAULIC OR ORGANIC CAPACITY
OF THE PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS; OR

(4) (IV) IS DESIGNATED AS A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER BY
THE PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS ON THE BASIS THAT THE INDUSTRIAL
USER HAS:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 556 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) 1. A REASONABLE POTENTIAL FOR ADVERSELY
AFFECTING THE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT’S OPERATIONS AND SEWER
SYSTEM; OR

(II) 2. VIOLATED A PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR
REQUIREMENT.

(2) “SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER” DOES NOT INCLUDE THE
FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.

(F) “WATERS OF THE STATE” INCLUDE:

(1) BOTH SURFACE AND UNDERGROUND WATERS WITHIN THE
BOUNDARIES OF THE STATE SUBJECT TO ITS JURISDICTION;

(2) THAT PORTION OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN WITHIN THE
BOUNDARIES OF THE STATE;

(3) THE CHESAPEAKE BAY AND ITS TRIBUTARIES;

(4) ALL PONDS, LAKES, RIVERS, STREAMS, PUBLIC DITCHES, TAX
DITCHES, AND PUBLIC DRAINAGE SYSTEMS WITHIN THE STATE, OTHER THAN THOSE
DESIGNED AND USED TO COLLECT, CONVEY, OR DISPOSE OF SANITARY SEWAGE; AND

(5) THE FLOODPLAIN OF FREE–FLOWING WATERS DETERMINED BY
THE DEPARTMENT ON THE BASIS OF THE 100–YEAR FLOOD FREQUENCY.

9–354.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES TO A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER THAT:

(1) HAS A PRETREATMENT PERMIT; AND

(2) (I) IS CURRENTLY AND INTENTIONALLY USING PFAS
CHEMICALS; OR

(II) OPERATES ON A SITE WHERE A PRIOR HISTORY OF PFAS
CHEMICAL USE IS KNOWN OR REASONABLY KNOWN.

(B) A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER SHALL ELIMINATE THE PRESENCE OF
PFAS CHEMICALS IN THE WATER THAT IT DISCHARGES TO A PUBLICLY OWNED
TREATMENT WORKS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER
1, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL, IN COLLABORATION WITH PUBLICLY OWNED

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 556

TREATMENT WORKS AND SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS IN THE STATE, IDENTIFY
THE SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS THAT CURRENTLY AND INTENTIONALLY USE
PFAS CHEMICALS.

(C) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, IN ACCORDANCE WITH GUIDANCE
FROM THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL
DEVELOP PFAS MONITORING AND TESTING PROTOCOLS FOR SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USERS IDENTIFIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION.

(D) (1) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2025, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL, IN
COLLABORATION WITH ~~THE~~ PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS AND THE
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS IN THE STATE IDENTIFIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, DEVELOP PFAS ACTION LEVELS FOR
ADDRESSING PFAS CONTAMINATION FROM INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE FOR
PRETREATMENT PERMITS.

(2) ON OR BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2025, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL,
IN COLLABORATION WITH ~~THE~~ PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS AND THE
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS IN THE STATE IDENTIFIED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, DEVELOP MITIGATION PLANS FOR ADDRESSING
PFAS CONTAMINATION FROM INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE FOR PRETREATMENT
PERMITS.

(3) THE MITIGATION PLANS UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE STRATEGIES AND OPTIONS FOR REDUCING THE
PRESENCE OF PFAS IN INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE, INCLUDING:

(I) SUBSTITUTING OR ELIMINATING PRODUCTS CONTAINING
PFAS CHEMICALS;

(II) TAKING PRECAUTIONS TO AVOID ACCIDENTAL
DISCHARGES;

(III) DECONTAMINATING OR REPLACING EQUIPMENT
CONTAMINATED WITH PFAS CHEMICALS; OR

(IV) USING ANY OTHER METHOD THE DEPARTMENT
DETERMINES IS NECESSARY FOR THE REDUCTION OR ELIMINATION OF PFAS
CHEMICALS IN WATER. IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGARDING THE ELIMINATION OF PFAS
CHEMICALS IN WATER, THE DISCHARGE LIMIT FOR PFAS CHEMICALS IN ANY

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 556 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

WATER, INCLUDING STORMWATER, DISCHARGED FROM ANY SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER IS 4 PARTS PER TRILLION.

(D) IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGARDING THE ELIMINATION OF PFAS
CHEMICALS IN WATER, A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER SHALL REDUCE PFAS
~~CHEMICALS~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~WATER~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IT~~ ~~DISCHARGES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~PUBLICLY~~ ~~OWNED~~
TREATMENT WORKS TO A CONCENTRATION OF NOT MORE THAN 4 PARTS PER
TRILLION, INCLUDING BY:

(1) SUBSTITUTING OR ELIMINATING PRODUCTS CONTAINING PFAS
~~CHEMICALS;~~

(2) TAKING PRECAUTIONS TO AVOID ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES;

(3) DECONTAMINATING OR REPLACING EQUIPMENT CONTAMINATED
WITH PFAS CHEMICALS; OR

(4) USING ANY OTHER METHOD THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY DETERMINES IS NECESSARY FOR THE ELIMINATION OF PFAS
CHEMICALS IN WATER.

(E) (1) IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REGARDING THE STORAGE OF PFAS
CHEMICALS, A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER SHALL SAFELY STORE PFAS
CHEMICALS THAT WERE CAPTURED AFTER REDUCING PFAS CHEMICALS FROM
WATER IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(2) IN ACCORDANCE WITH ANY FEDERAL, STATE, OR LOCAL LAW,
REGULATION, OR POLICY, A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER MAY REUSE STORED
PFAS CHEMICALS IN ITS FACILITY OPERATIONS.

(F) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A A
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER MAY DISPOSE OF STORED PFAS CHEMICALS USING
SAFE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS OR TECHNOLOGIES APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT OR
IN ANOTHER MANNER APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT BY REGULATION.

(2) A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER MAY NOT DISPOSE OF STORED
PFAS CHEMICALS IN ANY MANNER INVOLVING:

(I) DISPOSAL AT A SOLID WASTE LANDFILL;

(II) INCINERATION; OR

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 556

~~(III)~~ ~~LAND~~ ~~APPLICATION.~~

(G) A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER SHALL:

(1) (I) BY APRIL SEPTEMBER 1, 2025, MEASURE THE LEVELS OF
ORGANIC FLUORINE PFAS CHEMICALS IN ITS INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER USING
METHODS APPROVED BY THE DEPARTMENT; AND

(II) REPORT THE LEVELS OF ORGANIC FLUORINE PFAS
CHEMICALS IN THE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER IN A MANNER APPROVED BY THE
DEPARTMENT;

(2) BY OCTOBER JULY 1, 2025 2026, AND IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SECTION, IMPLEMENT MEASURES TO REDUCE PFAS CHEMICALS FROM WATER
DISCHARGED TO A PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS;

(3) PROVIDE DOCUMENTATION OF PFAS STORAGE OR REUSE ON
REQUEST TO:

(I) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL;

(II) THE DEPARTMENT;

(III) A COUNTY COUNCIL;

(IV) A STATE’S ATTORNEY;

(V) A CITY ATTORNEY; OR

(VI) ANY OTHER STATE OR LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY; AND

(4) REPORT THE STORAGE OR DISPOSAL OF PFAS CHEMICALS
UNDER 40 C.F.R. PART 372 (TOXIC CHEMICAL RELEASE REPORTING).

(H) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSIDER THE MEMORANDUM ADDRESSING
PFAS DISCHARGES IN NPDES PERMITS AND THROUGH THE PRETREATMENT
PROGRAM AND MONITORING PROGRAMS ISSUED BY THE U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY ON DECEMBER 5, 2022, WHEN DETERMINING PERMISSIBLE
~~LEVELS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ORGANIC~~ ~~FLUORINE~~ ~~CHEMICALS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~INDUSTRIAL~~ ~~WASTEWATER~~ ~~UNDER~~
SUBSECTION (G)(1) OF THIS SECTION.

(I) ANY CONTRACT OR AGREEMENT BETWEEN A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL
~~USER~~ ~~AND~~ ~~A~~ ~~PUBLICLY~~ ~~OWNED~~ ~~TREATMENT~~ ~~WORKS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~AUTHORIZES~~ ~~A~~ ~~DISCHARGE~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 556 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

OF WATER INTO THE WATERS OF THE STATE THAT EXCEEDS THE DISCHARGE LIMIT
FOR PFAS CHEMICALS UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE
SUPERSEDED BY THIS SECTION.

~~9–355.~~

ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS TO INCLUDE THE DISCHARGE LIMIT FOR PFAS CHEMICALS
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 9–354(C) OF THIS SUBTITLE AS A CONDITION FOR ISSUING A
PRETREATMENT PERMIT TO A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.

~~9–356.~~

(A) THE PRESENCE OF TOTAL ORGANIC FLUORINE OR PFAS CHEMICALS
EXCEEDING 4 PARTS PER TRILLION IN ANY DISCHARGE INTO THE WATERS OF THE
STATE IS A VIOLATION OF THE TERMS OF A PRETREATMENT PERMIT.

(B) IN ADDITION TO A VIOLATION UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION,
THE DEPARTMENT MAY ENFORCE A VIOLATION OF THIS PART IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT.

SECTION 2. AND BE FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before December 1, 2025,
the Department of the Environment shall update the Department’s PFAS Action Plan with
an evaluation of disposal methods for PFAS chemicals and the progress made on the
requirements of this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8