START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

Chapter 535

(House Bill 1101)

AN ACT concerning

Standing – Environmental and Natural Resources Protection Proceedings
(Clean Water Justice Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of providing certain persons ~~and~~ ~~associations~~ standing in certain
environmental and natural resources protection proceedings, ~~including~~ ~~proceedings~~
~~arising~~ ~~under~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~law~~ ~~relating~~ ~~to~~ ~~water~~ ~~quality~~ ~~and~~ ~~water~~ ~~resources~~
~~protection,~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~certain~~ ~~conditions;~~ authorizing certain persons that meet
certain standing requirements to bring certain civil actions under certain
circumstances; requiring a plaintiff, under certain circumstances, to give certain
notice and provide certain documentation to the Department of the Environment and
the Attorney General in a certain manner and to file a certain affidavit; authorizing
a court to grant certain relief, award certain costs of litigation, and impose certain
civil penalties in certain civil actions under certain circumstances; authorizing
certain persons that meet certain standing requirements to intervene in certain
proceedings under certain circumstances; and generally relating to standing in
certain environmental and natural resources protection proceedings.

BY adding to
Article – Environment
Section 1–901 through ~~1–905~~ 1–904 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 9. Clean
Water Justice Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Environment
Section 9–344.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2014 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Environment

SUBTITLE 9. CLEAN WATER JUSTICE ACT.

1–901.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 535 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ASSOCIATION” MEANS AN ASSOCIATION, A CORPORATION, OR ANY
~~OTHER~~ ~~ORGANIZATION~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~CONSISTS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TWO~~ ~~OR~~ ~~MORE~~ ~~MEMBERS~~ ~~JOINED~~ ~~BY~~
MUTUAL CONSENT FOR A COMMON PURPOSE.

(C) (B) “COSTS OF LITIGATION” INCLUDES REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S
FEES, COURT COSTS, AND EXPERT WITNESS FEES, AND DOCUMENTED COSTS
INCURRED IN INVESTIGATING ALLEGED VIOLATIONS.

(D) (1) “INJURY IN FACT” MEANS AN INVASION OF A LEGALLY
PROTECTED INTEREST THAT IS:

(I) CONCRETE AND PARTICULARIZED;

(II) ACTUAL OR IMMINENT; AND

(III) NOT CONJECTURAL OR HYPOTHETICAL.

(2) “INJURY IN FACT” INCLUDES:

(I) A PROPERTY RIGHT OR PERSONAL INTEREST THAT IS
DISTINCT FROM, OR SPECIFICALLY AFFECTED IN A WAY THAT IS DISTINCT FROM, A
PROPERTY RIGHT OR PERSONAL INTEREST OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC; AND

(II) A NEGATIVE IMPACT, OR THE THREAT OF A NEGATIVE
IMPACT, TO A PERSON’S HEALTH OR TO THE USE AND ENJOYMENT OF A NATURAL
RESOURCE OR ENVIRONMENT, INCLUDING A NEGATIVE IMPACT TO AESTHETIC,
RECREATIONAL, CONSERVATIONAL, AND ECONOMIC INTERESTS THAT MAY BE
SHARED AMONG COMMUNITY MEMBERS.

(C) “EPHEMERAL STREAM” MEANS A BODY OF WATER WITH:

(1) A STREAM BED LOCATED ABOVE THE WATER TABLE YEAR–ROUND;

(2) A STREAM FLOW PRIMARILY SOURCED FROM RAINFALL RUNOFF;
AND

(3) FLOWING WATER ONLY DURING, AND FOR A SHORT DURATION
AFTER, PRECIPITATION EVENTS IN A TYPICAL YEAR.

(D) “INTERMITTENT STREAM” MEANS A BODY OF WATER WITH:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

(1) FLOWING WATER DURING CERTAIN TIMES OF THE YEAR, WHEN
GROUNDWATER PROVIDES WATER FOR STREAM FLOW; AND

(2) A STREAM FLOW SUPPLEMENTED BY RUNOFF FROM RAINFALL.

(E) “PERSON” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL, RECEIVER, TRUSTEE, GUARDIAN,
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE, FIDUCIARY, OR REPRESENTATIVE OF ANY KIND AND
ANY PARTNERSHIP, FIRM, ASSOCIATION, CORPORATION, OR OTHER
NONGOVERNMENTAL ENTITY.

(F) “POLITICAL SUBDIVISION” MEANS:

(1) A COUNTY;

(2) THE CITY OF BALTIMORE;

(3) A MULTICOUNTY AGENCY;

(4) A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION;

(5) A SINGLE–PURPOSE DISTRICT; OR

(6) A SOIL CONSERVATION OR SANITARY DISTRICT.

(F) “SECRETARY” MEANS THE SECRETARY OF ANY STATE AGENCY,
APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR.

(G) (F) (G) “STANDARD” MEANS ANY REQUIREMENT, PROHIBITION,
LIMITATION, OR CONDITION ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE, REGULATION, PERMIT,
ORDER, OR LICENSE ISSUED BY A SECRETARY THE SECRETARY OR ANY OTHER
OFFICE OR AGENCY OF THE STATE, A LOCAL GOVERNMENT, OR A POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION IN ACCORDANCE WITH:

(1) TITLE 4, TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 9 OF THIS ARTICLE, IF THE
REQUIREMENT, PROHIBITION, LIMITATION, OR CONDITION IS RELATED TO
NONTIDAL WETLANDS THAT DO NOT HAVE A CONTINUOUS SURFACE CONNECTION TO
SURFACE WATER; OR

(2) TITLE 9, SUBTITLE 3 OR TITLE 16 OF THIS ARTICLE, IF THE
REQUIREMENT, PROHIBITION, LIMITATION, OR CONDITION IS HYDROLOGICALLY
CONNECTED RELATED TO:

(I) AN EPHEMERAL STREAM; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 535 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) AN INTERMITTENT STREAM.

1–902.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN THIS
SUBSECTION SUBTITLE, A PERSON THAT MEETS THE THRESHOLD STANDING
REQUIREMENTS UNDER FEDERAL LAW HAS STANDING IN CIVIL CLAIMS ARISING
UNDER ANY STANDARD TITLE 4, TITLE 5, TITLE 9, OR TITLE 16 OF THIS ARTICLE OR
TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 3, TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 16, OR TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 18 OF THE
NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE IF THE PERSON SUFFERS AN INJURY IN FACT THAT:

(I) IS FAIRLY TRACEABLE TO THE CHALLENGED ACTION OR
CONDUCT OF THE DEFENDANT; AND

(II) IS LIKELY TO BE REDRESSED BY THE REQUESTED RELIEF
OR A FAVORABLE JUDICIAL DECISION.

(2) AN INTEREST OR INJURY ASSERTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL
FALL WITHIN THE ZONE OF INTERESTS SOUGHT TO BE PROTECTED BY TITLE 4,
TITLE 5, TITLE 9, OR TITLE 16 OF THIS ARTICLE AND TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 3, TITLE
5, SUBTITLE 16, OR TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 18 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE.

(B) IN ADDITION TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, AN ASSOCIATION
HAS STANDING IN CLAIMS ARISING UNDER TITLE 4, TITLE 5, TITLE 9, OR TITLE 16
OF THIS ARTICLE OR TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 3, TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 16, OR TITLE 8,
SUBTITLE 18 OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE IF:

(1) ONE OR MORE MEMBERS OF THE ASSOCIATION HAVE STANDING
UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION;

(2) THE INTERESTS THAT THE ASSOCIATION SEEKS TO PROTECT ARE
GERMANE TO ITS PURPOSES; AND

(3) NEITHER THE CLAIM ASSERTED NOR THE RELIEF REQUESTED
REQUIRES THE PARTICIPATION OF THE MEMBER.

1–903.

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A PERSON THAT HAS
STANDING UNDER § 1–902 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY BRING A CIVIL ACTION ON THE
PERSON’S OWN BEHALF AGAINST ANY PERSON OR POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OR
~~GOVERNMENTAL~~ ~~ENTITY~~ THAT IS ALLEGED TO ~~HAVE~~ ~~VIOLATED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TO~~ BE IN
VIOLATION OF ANY STANDARD.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN ACTION
MAY NOT BE BROUGHT UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION AT LEAST 60 DAYS
~~AFTER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PLAINTIFF~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~GIVEN~~ UNLESS THE PLAINTIFF ~~HAS~~ FIRST ~~BEEN~~ ~~GIVEN~~
GIVES 60 DAYS NOTICE OF THE ALLEGED VIOLATION.

(2) NOTICE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE:

(I) 1. BY CERTIFIED MAIL; OR

2. PERSONAL SERVICE; AND

(II) PROVIDED TO:

1. THE APPROPRIATE SECRETARY SECRETARY;

2. THE ATTORNEY GENERAL;

3. ANY LOCAL JURISDICTION IN WHICH THE ALLEGED
VIOLATION HAS OCCURRED IS ALLEGED TO OCCUR; AND

4. AN ALLEGED VIOLATOR OF THE STANDARD.

(3) (I) AN ACTION MAY NOT BE BROUGHT UNDER SUBSECTION (A)
OF THIS SECTION IF THE SECRETARY SECRETARY HAS COMMENCED AND IS
DILIGENTLY PROSECUTING A CIVIL OR CRIMINAL ACTION IN A COURT OF THE STATE
OR A CONSENT ORDER IS ENTERED TO REQUIRE COMPLIANCE FROM THE ALLEGED
VIOLATOR ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~UNDUE~~ ~~DELAY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~UNREASONABLE~~ ~~SCHEDULES~~ ~~FOR~~
RETURNING TO COMPLIANCE.

(II) NOTWITHSTANDING SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, A PERSON THAT HAS STANDING UNDER § 1–902 OF THIS SUBTITLE
MEETS THE THRESHOLD STANDING REQUIREMENTS UNDER FEDERAL LAW MAY
INTERVENE IN THE A CIVIL ACTION BROUGHT BY THE SECRETARY SECRETARY
~~UNDER:~~

1. TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 9 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

2. TITLE 9, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS ARTICLE, AS PROVIDED
IN § 1–904 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(4) NOTICE UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL IDENTIFY:

(I) A STANDARD VIOLATED;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 535 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) AN ACTIVITY CONSTITUTING THE VIOLATION;

(III) A PERSON SUSPECTED OF BEING RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
VIOLATION;

(IV) THE LOCATION OF THE VIOLATION;

(V) THE DATES OF VIOLATIONS IF KNOWN; AND

(VI) THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE PERSON GIVING NOTICE.

(C) AN ACTION BROUGHT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION SHALL BE
BROUGHT IN ANY CIRCUIT COURT OF A COUNTY WHERE THE ALLEGED CONDITION,
ACTIVITY, OR FAILURE IS OCCURRING, HAS OCCURRED, OR IS LIKELY TO OCCUR IS
ALLEGED TO BE A VIOLATION OF A STANDARD.

(D) BEFORE THE ENTERING OF ANY CONSENT JUDGMENT TO WHICH THE
DEPARTMENT IS NOT A PARTY OR BEFORE THE DISMISSAL OF ANY CASE FILED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE SUBJECT TO A SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT, THE
PLAINTIFF SHALL:

(1) GIVE NOTICE AND PROVIDE A COMPLETE AND UNREDACTED COPY
OF THE PROPOSED CONSENT JUDGMENT OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT TO THE
DEPARTMENT AND THE ATTORNEY GENERAL BY PERSONAL SERVICE OR CERTIFIED
MAIL AT LEAST 45 DAYS BEFORE THE DATE THAT THE PROPOSED CONSENT
JUDGMENT OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT IS FILED WITH THE COURT; AND

(2) FILE AN AFFIDAVIT WITH THE COURT UNDER PENALTY OF
PERJURY INDICATING COMPLIANCE WITH THE REQUIREMENT UNDER ITEM (1) OF
THIS SUBSECTION.

(E) A COURT MAY:

(1) ORDER THE ENFORCEMENT OF A STANDARD CHALLENGED
UNDER THIS SECTION;; AND

(2) GRANT:

(I) TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT EQUITABLE RELIEF; OR

(II) ANY EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY THIS SUBTITLE,
ANY OTHER RELIEF PROVIDED UNDER A ~~STATUTE~~ ~~CHALLENGED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~
SECTION STANDARD; AND

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

(3) IMPOSE CONDITIONS ON A DEFENDANT TO REQUIRE THE
PROTECTION OF LAND, AIR, WATER, AND OTHER NATURAL RESOURCES OR PUBLIC
HEALTH FROM POLLUTION, IMPAIRMENT, OR DESTRUCTION.

(E) (1) (F) IN AN ACTION UNDER THIS SECTION, THE COURT MAY
AWARD THE COSTS OF LITIGATION TO:

(I) (1)A PREVAILING PLAINTIFF; OR

(II) (2) A SUBSTANTIALLY PREVAILING PLAINTIFF; OR

(3) A SUBSTANTIALLY PREVAILING DEFENDANT IF THE PLAINTIFF’S
CLAIM WAS FRIVOLOUS, UNREASONABLE, OR GROUNDLESS. IF THE PLAINTIFF HAS:

1. PARTICIPATED IN AN ACTION TO ENFORCE A
VIOLATION FOLLOWING THE ISSUANCE OF NOTICE UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION; AND

2. A. SUCCESSFULLY ESTABLISHED THE LIABILITY
OF A DEFENDANT IN FEWER THAN ALL OF THE ASSERTED CLAIMS; OR

B. OTHERWISE ADVANCED THE PURPOSE OF THE
~~RELEVANT~~ ~~STATUTES~~ ~~THROUGH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~OUTCOME~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ACTION~~ ~~BY~~ ~~IMPROVING~~
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY, PROTECTING PUBLIC HEALTH, OR REDUCING
~~POLLUTION.~~

(2) IF A PARTY TO AN ACTION UNDER THIS SECTION ACTS IN BAD
~~FAITH~~ ~~OR~~ ~~WITHOUT~~ ~~SUBSTANTIAL~~ ~~JUSTIFICATION~~ ~~IN~~ ~~MAINTAINING~~ ~~OR~~ ~~DEFENDING~~
THE ACTION, THE COURT MAY AWARD TO THE ADVERSE PARTY THE COSTS OF
~~LITIGATION.~~

(F) (G) (1) (I) A EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A COURT MAY IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY AUTHORIZED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATUTE UNDER WHICH AN ACTION IS BROUGHT UNDER THIS SECTION.

(II) INSTEAD OF IMPOSING A CIVIL PENALTY UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A A COURT MAY ORDER APPROVE A
CONSENT JUDGMENT OR SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES THAT
INCLUDES A SUPPLEMENTAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECT.

(2) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A A CIVIL
PENALTY COLLECTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE DEPOSITED IN A MANNER
SPECIFIED BY THE STATUTE.
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 535 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) IF THE ENFORCEMENT OF A STATUTORY DUTY HAS BEEN
DELEGATED TO A LOCAL GOVERNMENT, UP TO 50% OF A CIVIL PENALTY COLLECTED
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE AWARDED TO THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT THE
STATE MAY NOT BE HELD LIABLE FOR CIVIL PENALTIES IN ANY ACTION UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE.

1–904.

(A) (1) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO § 1–903(B)(3) OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

(B) A SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A PERSON THAT
HAS STANDING UNDER § 1–902 OF THIS SUBTITLE MEETS THE THRESHOLD
STANDING REQUIREMENTS UNDER FEDERAL LAW ~~MAY~~ HAS THE UNCONDITIONAL
RIGHT AND THE AUTHORITY TO INTERVENE ~~AS~~ ~~A~~ ~~MATTER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~RIGHT~~ IN ~~AN~~ A CIVIL
ACTION ARISING UNDER TITLE 4, TITLE 5, TITLE 9, OR TITLE 16 OF THIS ARTICLE
OR TITLE 1, SUBTITLE 3, TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 16, OR TITLE 8, SUBTITLE 18 OF THE
NATURAL RESOURCES ARTICLE, UNLESS A DEFENDANT DEMONSTRATES THAT THE
PERSON’S INTEREST IS ADEQUATELY REPRESENTED BY EXISTING PARTIES ANY
STANDARD BROUGHT BY THE SECRETARY UNDER:

(I) TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 9 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

(II) TITLE 9, SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(2) A PERSON SHALL EXERCISE THE RIGHT TO INTERVENE UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE APPLICABLE
PRACTICES, PROCEDURES, AND LAWS IN THE STATE.

(3) A PERSON THAT HAS STANDING TO INTERVENE UNDER § 1–902 OF
THIS SUBTITLE PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION HAS THE SAME RIGHTS AS AN
INTERESTED PERSON OR AGGRIEVED PARTY UNDER THE FEDERAL CLEAN WATER
ACT.

(C) (B) THE STATE MAY INTERVENE AS A MATTER OF RIGHT AT ANY TIME
IN A ANY PROCEEDING BROUGHT UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) NOTWITHSTANDING § 1–903(B)(3) OF THIS SUBTITLE AND SUBSECTION
(A) OF THIS SECTION, A COURT MAY GRANT INTERVENTION ON MOTION BY ANY
~~PARTY.~~

~~1–905.~~

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 535

THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE SUPERSEDE ANY INCONSISTENT
PROVISION OF ANY STATE, COUNTY, OR MUNICIPAL LAW, ORDINANCE, OR
~~REGULATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~JUDICIAL~~ ~~INTERPRETATION~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EXTENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
~~INCONSISTENCY.~~

[9–344.1.

(a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, a person who meets the threshold
standing requirements under the federal Clean Water Act has an unconditional right and
the authority to intervene in a civil action that the State initiates in State court to require
compliance with:

(1) This subtitle;

(2) Regulations adopted by the Department in accordance with this
subtitle; or

(3) Any discharge permit, effluent limitation, or order issued by the
Department in accordance with this subtitle.

(b) A person shall exercise the right to intervene under subsection (a) of this
section in accordance with the applicable practices, procedures, and laws in the State.

(c) A person who meets the requirements to intervene under subsection (a) of this
section has the same rights as an interested person or aggrieved party under the federal
Clean Water Act, including the right to apply for judicial appeal.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, if any provision of this Act or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid for any reason in a
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or any other
application of this Act that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application,
and for this purpose the provisions of this Act are declared severable.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
Assembly that this Act:

(1) provide certain remedies to abate the pollution, destruction, or
substantial or unreasonable impairment to the public health, water quality, or any other
natural resource of the State;

(2) may not abridge or alter any right of action or remedies that exist under
law; and

(3) may not be construed as stopping or limiting the State or any person in
the exercise of the right to:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 535 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) protect the natural resources of the State;

(ii) suppress nuisances; or

(iii) abate pollution.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10