START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1118 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1118 
(Harford County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Harford County – Alcoholic Beverages – Performing Arts Theater License 
 
 
This bill alters existing eligibility criteria for a performing arts theater license in 
Harford County. The bill authorizes the Harford County Board of License Commissioners 
to issue the license to a for-profit organization instead of a nonprofit organization. 
Furthermore, the bill (1) authorizes the holder of a performing arts theater license to sell 
liquor for on-premises consumption in addition to beer and wine and (2) increases the 
annual license fee from $500 to $1,500. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Harford County license revenues increase by approximately $1,000 
annually beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. Harford County can monitor any 
additional licenses with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, a “performing arts theater” means an 
area, a building, or a structure designed and used for plays, acts, dramas, concerts, or 
histrionics by actors or actresses performing on a stage or the showing of movies or films. 
The bill removes language pertaining to the showing of movies or films from the definition 
of a performing arts theater. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1118/ Page 2 
Under current law, the performing arts theater license authorizes the holder to sell or serve 
beer and wine at retail for on-premises consumption (1) one hour before and after a 
performance; (2) during a performance; (3) during an intermission; and (4) during a 
reception one hour before or one hour after a performance. The bill adds liquor to the 
authorized alcoholic beverages that may be sold or served. 
 
Under both current law and the bill, the performing arts theater license is nontransferable, 
and the license holder must serve or offer for sale snacks at all times when alcoholic 
beverages are served. The license holder must purchase alcoholic beverages from an 
authorized licensed wholesaler. 
 
Under current law, issuance of a performing arts theater license does not prohibit the board 
from issuing a Class C per diem license that applies to the performing arts theater. The bill 
removes this provision. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Harford County revenues increase by $1,000 for each performing 
arts theater license issued under the bill. Harford County estimates that it will issue 
one license beginning in fiscal 2025. The current annual fee for the license is $500, and the 
bill increases this fee to $1,500; therefore, Harford County revenues increase by $1,000 
from license fees beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 933 (Harford County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2