START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1163 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1163 
(Delegate Atterbeary) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Department of Education - Division of Rehabilitation Services - Funding 
 
   
This bill authorizes the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an increase in the 
general fund appropriation to ensure the State’s share of funding under the federal 
rehabilitation acts for the Division of Rehabilitation Services (DORS) within the Maryland 
State Department of Education is met. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $700,000 in FY 2025, reflecting funds 
in the FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly, contingent on this legislation 
or its cross file. Otherwise, the bill is authorizing in nature and is consistent with the 
Governor’s current budgetary authority and, therefore, has no direct effect on State 
finances or operations.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
700,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($700,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  DORS is generally responsible for efforts to rehabilitate and place in 
gainful employment individuals who are disabled and susceptible to rehabilitation and to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1163/ Page 2 
rehabilitate individuals to function more independently. DORS is also responsible for 
providing a coordinated set of activities for transitioning students with a disability that 
promotes movement from school to postschool activities, including postsecondary 
education, vocational training, integrated employment, supported employment, adult 
services, independent living, and community participation.  
 
The State Board of Education must cooperate with the appropriate federal agencies in 
administering the rehabilitation acts of the U.S. Congress and do what is necessary to 
secure the benefit of the rehabilitation acts.  
 
Under federal regulations (34 CFR § 361.60), the federal share of funding to a State’s 
public vocational rehabilitation program is 78.7%; thus, in order for a State to receive its 
fully allotted share of the federal vocational rehabilitation grant, the State must contribute 
21.3% in funding for the vocational program. The State must also maintain at least its 
prior year funding amount for the program in order to attain its fully allotted federal share 
(34 CFR § 361.62).  
 
Chapter 331 of 2022 established a commission to study DORS. The commission was 
tasked with evaluating and making recommendations on specified subjects related to 
improvements to DORS’s programs and services. In its December 2022 report, among 
other recommendations, the commission recommended ensuring in statute (1) the 
provision of general funds to meet the 21.3% matching requirement and (2) 74 new 
positions to eliminate the vocational rehabilitation waitlist, reduce counselor caseload 
levels, and expand training and services in community-based settings.  
 
Maryland Budget Process 
 
The Maryland Constitution requires the Governor to submit, and the General Assembly to 
pass, a balanced budget. Generally, the General Assembly cannot add more spending to 
the budget introduced by the Governor, nor can general funds be used to restore reductions 
made by the General Assembly after adoption of the budget, except through an approved 
deficiency appropriation in the following year’s budget.  
 
Beginning with the 2023 session (fiscal 2024 budget bill), the General Assembly may 
amend the budget to increase appropriations made by the Governor as well as add items to 
appropriations for Executive Branch agencies if the total appropriation for the 
Executive Branch does not exceed the total proposed appropriation submitted by the 
Governor. Prior to the 2023 session, the legislature could only add or increase funding for 
the General Assembly and the Judiciary.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1163/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 934 and HB 1222 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 859 (Senators Zucker and Guzzone) - Budget and Taxation. 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 30, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3