START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1168 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1168 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Human Remains - Alkaline Hydrolysis and Natural Organic Reduction (Green 
Death Care Options Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Office of Cemetery Oversight (OCO), in conjunction with the State 
Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors, to adopt regulations establishing a process for 
regulating (1) crematories that use “alkaline hydrolysis”; (2) “reduction facilities” that use 
“natural organic reduction”; and (3) “registered reduction operators.” The bill conforms 
the definitions of “cremation” and “crematory” across the Business Regulation, 
Health-General, and Health Occupations articles. The bill exempts a funeral establishment, 
crematory, or reduction facility from the requirement to maintain a body in a manner that 
provides for complete coverage of the body and prevents leakage or spillage during 
placement inside a contained chamber or vessel without an external visual exposure during 
the process of alkaline hydrolysis or natural organic reduction. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  OCO and the board can adopt regulations and handle any additional 
workload with existing budgeted resources. OCO and board special fund revenues may 
increase minimally beginning in FY 2025 to the extent regulations are adopted and entities 
seek permits, certifications, or registrations to conduct natural organic reduction. 
  
Local Effect:  Local health departments may be required to monitor crematory and 
reduction facility compliance with regulations adopted under the bill. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1168/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The definition of “authorizing agent” is altered to mean the individual 
who has legal authority to arrange for and make decisions regarding the final disposition 
of a dead human body, including cremation, alkaline hydrolysis, or natural organic 
reduction. “Cremation” means the disposition of a dead human body by means of 
incineration. 
 
Alkaline Hydrolysis 
 
“Alkaline hydrolysis” means the process of reducing human remains using water, alkaline 
chemicals, and heat inside a watertight vessel to accelerate decomposition. “Hydrolyzed 
remains” means the bone fragments produced by the completion of alkaline hydrolysis. 
 
The definition of “crematory” is altered to mean a building, portion of a building, or 
structure that houses the necessary appliances and facilities for cremation or alkaline 
hydrolysis. 
 
Natural Organic Reduction 
 
“Natural organic reduction” means the contained accelerated conversion of human remains 
into soil. “Soil remains” means the soil produced at final disposition of a dead human body 
at a reduction facility by completion of natural organic reduction. “Human remains” does 
not include soil remains produced after the completion of natural organic reduction. 
 
A person may not use or dispose of soil remains produced by natural organic reduction 
(1) on public or private property without the prior permission of the owner of the public 
property, the surviving owners of public record of the private property, or if the decedent 
was sole owner of the property at death, the authorizing agent; (2) by using the soil remains 
to grow food for consumption by humans or livestock; (3) by selling or reselling the soil 
remains to a third party; or (4) by combining or incorporating the soil remains into compost 
offered for sale to consumers or for commercial or agricultural purchasers. 
 
Unless a funeral establishment or cemetery has otherwise agreed in writing, a reduction 
facility that produces soil remains is responsible for providing for the final disposition and 
disposal of the soil remains in accordance with written direction given by an authorizing 
agent. 
 
Except for acts of gross negligence or reckless disregard, a practitioner or reduction facility 
operator is not liable for (1) transferring possession of soil remains at a reduction facility 
or (2) delivering soil remains to another location according to the written direction provided 
by the authorizing agent. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1168/ Page 3 
Natural Organic Reduction Facilities 
 
“Reduction facility” means a building, portion of a building, or structure that houses the 
necessary appliances, containers, and facilities for performing natural organic reduction. 
“Registered reduction operator” means an individual registered to operate a reduction 
facility as a sole proprietor or on behalf of a sole proprietor or a permit holder. “Engage in 
the operation of a reduction facility” means controlling or managing a reduction facility. 
“Engage in the operation of a reduction facility” does not include (1) the practice of funeral 
direction or the practice of mortuary science; (2) assistance in making decisions and filling 
out forms that are not directly related to natural organic reduction; (3) obtaining vital 
statistics, signatures, and other information necessary to complete a death certificate; 
(4) transportation of a body to the place of disposition; or (5) any other services regarding 
the disposition of a body that are not directly related to natural organic reduction. 
 
Except as otherwise provided, an individual may not engage in the operation of a reduction 
facility, attempt to engage in the operation of a reduction facility, or provide or offer to 
provide natural organic reduction unless the individual is a registered reduction operator. 
 
A registered reduction operator who engages in the operation of a reduction facility through 
a corporation, limited liability company, or partnership is subject to all the provisions that 
relate to engaging in the operation of a reduction facility. 
 
Remains of Veterans 
 
As for cremated human remains, a licensed funeral establishment or crematory in 
possession of hydrolyzed remains that have been unclaimed for 90 days or more must 
follow the notification procedures related to veterans. 
 
Likewise, a reduction facility in possession of human remains that are being processed by 
natural organic reduction must provide identifying information to a veterans service 
organization within five business days after natural organic reduction is initiated to 
determine if the soil remains are those of a veteran or eligible dependent. This requirement 
does not apply if an authorizing agent directs otherwise or a reduction facility reasonably 
concludes based on the identifying information or other evidence that a decedent does not 
qualify for disposition benefits associated with veteran status. 
 
If the unclaimed soil remains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent, the reduction 
facility may (1) transfer a portion of the soil remains not exceeding 300 cubic inches in 
volume to a veterans service organization that grants permission for the purpose of 
disposition and (2) if authorized by the cemetery owner, transfer the balance of soil remains 
to a cemetery or the owner of a woodland protected under the Forest Conservation Act 
(FCA). 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1168/ Page 4 
If a veterans service organization does not take possession of a portion of unclaimed soil 
remains that qualifies for a plot in the State veterans’ cemetery within 10 days after the 
reduction facility receives notification, the reduction facility must (1) notify the Maryland 
Department of Veterans Affairs (MDVA) of the status of the soil remains for the purpose 
of the appropriate disposition of the portion of soil remains; (2) transfer the portion of soil 
remains to MDVA for the purpose of appropriate disposition; and (3) if authorized by the 
cemetery or owner, transfer the balance of the soil remains to a cemetery or the owner of a 
woodland protected under FCA. 
 
Required Regulations 
 
With the advice of the Advisory Council on Cemetery Operations, and after consultation 
with representatives of the cemetery industry, the Director of OCO must adopt rules, 
regulations, and a code of ethics for engaging in the operation of a reduction facility. In 
conjunction with the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors, the Director of OCO 
must establish a process for regulating reduction facilities that provides for (1) registration 
of reduction facility operators and reduction facilities and (2) applications, including 
certification of ownership and identification of individuals who will perform alkaline 
hydrolysis or natural organic reduction. 
 
In addition, the Director of OCO must adopt regulations (and then the State Board of 
Morticians and Funeral Directors must adopt identical regulations) that: 
 
 
require a registered reduction operator to notify the authorizing agent in writing and 
before initiating natural organic reduction that a person who uses or disposes of soil 
remains is in violation of law; 
 
require a reduction facility to monitor and record written verification that the 
temperature during each instance of a natural organic reduction process attains a 
specified minimum internal temperature for a specified minimum period of time; 
 
establish appropriate standards for training and experience for the registration of 
reduction operators; 
 
prohibit the use of natural organic reduction in any instance in which the human 
remains are known, or reasonably suspected, to be embalmed or to have an 
infection, disease, or biological condition that renders the process of natural organic 
reduction, or the resulting soil remains, unreasonably unsafe, as specified; 
 
establish a mandatory contamination testing program for reduction facilities to 
ensure the safety of soil remains produced, including the following minimum 
program elements:  (1) collecting routine material samples from soil remains for 
specified analysis; (2) recording and retaining the results of an analysis of samples 
from the soil remains conducted by an independent third-party laboratory to identify 
the presence of heavy metals or microbial pathogens, as specified; (3) conducting 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1168/ Page 5 
an analysis for each production of soil remains to ensure that the soil remains contain 
less than 0.01 mg/kg dry weight of specific physical contaminants, as specified; 
(4) ensuring that no soil remains are released until the soil remains comply with 
each of the applicable contamination testing parameters; and (5) periodic reporting 
of testing results to appropriate State and local health authorities that have requested 
the results; and 
 
establish any other reasonable prohibition, rule, or requirement necessary to protect 
the public health and safety during the process of natural organic reduction. 
 
Current Law:  In Maryland, cremation is regulated either by OCO within the Maryland 
Department of Labor or the board within the Maryland Department of Health, based on 
ownership of the crematory. Specifically, OCO and the board each regulate facilities in 
which their registrants/permit holders or licensees hold majority ownership. Independent 
(or free-standing) crematories are subject to the jurisdiction of OCO. As part of their joint 
oversight of crematories, OCO and the board must adopt identical regulations. 
 
Accordingly, “cremation” is defined identically under the Business Regulation and Health 
Occupations articles. Specifically, “cremation” means the process of reducing human 
remains to bone fragments through intense heat and evaporation, including any mechanical 
or thermal process. However, under the Health-General Article, “cremation” means the 
disposition of a dead human body by means of incineration.   
 
Under the Business Regulation and Health Occupations articles, “crematory” means a 
building, portion of a building, or structure that houses the necessary appliances and 
facilities for cremation. Under the Health-General Article, “crematory” means a building 
in which cremations are performed.  
 
Under the Health-General and Health Occupations articles, “authorizing agent” means the 
individual who has legal authority to arrange for and make decisions regarding the final 
disposition of a dead human body, including by cremation. 
 
On taking custody of a body, a funeral establishment or crematory must maintain the body 
in a manner that provides for complete coverage of the body and prevents leakage or 
spillage except during (1) identification, embalming, or preparation of an unembalmed 
body for final disposition; (2) restoration and dressing of a body in preparation for final 
disposition; and (3) viewing during a visitation or funeral service. 
 
Office of Cemetery Oversight 
 
OCO registers and regulates the cemetery and burial goods industry in the State. 
Crematories under the jurisdiction of OCO must hold a permit for the crematory business 
if the crematory is not a sole proprietorship, and a crematory operator must also be 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1168/ Page 6 
registered with OCO. More specifically, OCO issues crematory permits to (1) a registered 
cemeterian or other permit holder who owns a greater or equal interest in a crematory 
operated in conjunction with a licensee of the board and (2) a crematory owner who does 
not hold a license, permit, or registration from either OCO or the board (i.e., a free-standing 
or independent crematory).  
 
State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors 
 
The board is responsible for the credentialing, examination, licensure, and discipline of 
morticians, funeral directors, corporations, certain crematory operators, apprentices, 
surviving spouses, mortuary transport services, transporters, courtesy card holders, and 
holders of an executor license in Maryland. The board also licenses, permits, and inspects 
funeral establishments and specified crematories. The board issues crematory permits and 
crematory operator registrations to crematories if the majority interest in the crematory is 
held by a licensee of the board. 
 
Joint Regulatory Duties 
 
In conjunction with OCO, the board must establish a process for regulating crematories 
that provides for (1) registration of crematory operators or issuance of permits for operating 
crematories and renewal; (2) applications, including certification of ownership and 
identification of individuals who will perform cremation; (3) registration or permit fees; 
(4) inspections and oversight; (5) grounds for discipline and penalties; and (6) complaints 
and hearings. The board and OCO must also adopt identical regulations, as specified, to 
ensure public health and safety.  
 
Veterans Remains 
 
If a licensed funeral establishment or a crematory is in possession of cremains that have 
been unclaimed for 90 or more days, it must provide identifying information of the 
unclaimed cremains to a veterans service organization in order for the organization to 
determine if the unclaimed cremains are those of a veteran or an eligible dependent.  
 
Within 45 days of receipt of the information, a veterans service organization must notify 
the licensed funeral establishment or crematory whether the cremains are those of a veteran 
or an eligible dependent and, if so, whether the veteran or eligible dependent is eligible for 
burial in a veterans cemetery. If the unclaimed cremains are those of a veteran or an eligible 
dependent, the licensed funeral establishment or crematory may transfer the cremains to a 
veterans service organization for the purpose of disposition of the cremains. 
 
A licensed funeral establishment or crematory that acts in good faith is not civilly liable 
for transferring the unclaimed cremains of a veteran or an eligible dependent to a veterans 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1168/ Page 7 
service organization for purposes of disposition. Likewise, a veterans service organization 
that acts in good faith is not civilly liable for receiving the unclaimed cremains of a veteran 
or an eligible dependent for purposes of disposition. 
 
A licensed funeral establishment or crematory in possession of the unclaimed cremains of 
a veteran or an eligible dependent for which a veterans service organization has not taken 
possession is required to (1) notify MDVA of the status of the cremains and (2) transfer 
the cremains to MDVA for appropriate disposition. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill requires OCO and the board to jointly establish a process for 
regulating (1) crematories that use alkaline hydrolysis; (2) reduction facilities that use 
natural organic reduction; and (3) registered reduction operators. OCO and the board must 
adopt identical implementing regulations, and OCO must adopt additional regulations, as 
specified (which presumably the board must also adopt as they relate to public health and 
safety). This analysis assumes that any independent crematories that use alkaline 
hydrolysis or any independent reduction facilities must be regulated by OCO. Otherwise, 
crematories that use alkaline hydrolysis or reduction facilities are regulated either by OCO 
(if associated with cemeteries) or the board (if associated with funeral establishments). 
 
OCO and the board currently charge the same fees for crematories:  $350 for both an initial 
and renewal crematory permit and $300 for both an initial and renewal registration as a 
crematory operator. However, it is possible that the fee structure for a reduction facility or 
reduction operator will be different from the current fees. To the extent that new reduction 
facilities regulated by OCO apply for a facility permit and/or operator registration 
specifically to use natural organic reduction, special fund revenues increase beginning as 
early as fiscal 2025. To the extent existing crematories regulated either by OCO or the 
board expand their operations to use alkaline hydrolysis, special fund revenues may 
increase – but only if an additional fee is required. 
 
Regardless, this analysis assumes that uptake of alkaline hydrolysis or natural organic 
reduction will be limited. Thus, any additional special fund fee revenues are assumed to be 
minimal, and any additional workload for OCO and the board can be handled with existing 
budgeted resources. For illustrative purposes only, OCO estimates that approximately 
14 new facilities may seek a new facility permit and approximately 28 new operators may 
seek registration between fiscal 2025 and 2029. Under such assumptions, OCO special 
fund revenues increase by approximately $20,000 over the five-year period to account for 
new facility registrations and renewals, and new reduction operator registrations and 
renewals. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business crematories may begin to offer alkaline hydrolysis 
as a means of cremation to their clients. Small business reduction facilities may be 
established to offer natural organic reduction as a means of cremation. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1168/ Page 8 
Additional Comments:  The Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) advises 
that, since alkaline hydrolysis and natural organic reduction methodologies are relatively 
new, crematories using alkaline hydrolysis and reduction facilities using natural organic 
reduction may be required to obtain an air quality permit to construct from MDE as well 
as permits from MDE’s Water and Science Administration and/or Land and Materials 
Administration to address possible contaminated soil discharge. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1060 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1028 (Senator Waldstreicher) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of 
the Environment; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Veterans Affairs; Maryland Association 
of Counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8