START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1139 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1139 
(Delegate Solomon) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Growing Family Child Care Opportunities Pilot Program – Permanent 
Establishment 
 
   
This bill repeals the termination date for the Growing Family Child Care Opportunities 
Pilot Program, as originally established in Chapters 437 and 438 of 2021, thereby 
establishing it as a permanent program within the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE). The bill also requires the Governor, for fiscal 2026, to include a 
$450,000 appropriation in the annual budget bill for the program. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $450,000 
contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file. As the bill effectuates that 
appropriation, general fund expenditures of $450,000 are incurred in FY 2025, thereby 
maintaining program funding. Annual general fund expenditures of $450,000 for the 
program continue beyond FY 2025, reflecting mandated funding in FY 2026 and assumed 
discretionary funding annually thereafter. Revenues are likely not materially affected. This 
bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
450,000 
450,000 
450,000 
450,000 
450,000 
Net Effect 
($450,000) 
($450,000) 
($450,000) 
($450,000) 
($450,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Grant funding for local governments is maintained; local grant expenditures 
continue accordingly. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1139/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Growing Family Child Care Opportunities Pilot Program was 
established under Chapters 437 and 438 to provide grants to establish and support local 
pilot programs in the State. Under the requirements of the Acts, the Governor was required 
to include $450,000 in the State budget for the program in fiscal 2023 and 2024. To the 
extent authorized under federal law, the Governor must use federal funds to satisfy the 
mandated appropriation. 
 
MSDE must partner with the Maryland Child Care Resource Network to administer the 
program. To be eligible for a grant, a county governing body or multiple county governing 
bodies must sign a memorandum of understanding with a child care resource center that 
serves the child care licensing region that contains one of the counties. The county/counties 
and the child care resource center must jointly apply for the grant and administer the local 
pilot program. Grant recipients must: 
 
 
use the grants to (1) establish and support a local pilot program and (2) target the 
use of the grant to increase the supply and ensure the sustainability of family child 
care providers in areas with above average rates of poverty and unemployment or 
areas with a lack of available child care providers; 
 
raise local matching funds, including in-kind matching resources at a 1:1 match; 
 
collaborate with existing family child care providers during the implementation of 
the program; 
 
provide multilingual outreach to recruit individuals to become registered family 
child care providers within MSDE; 
 
provide technical assistance, financial incentives, and start up assistance for 
recruited individuals as they navigate the process of becoming a registered family 
child care provider; 
 
assist newly registered and established family child care providers through technical 
assistance to achieve quality benchmarks, peer-to-peer mentoring, and financial 
incentives; and 
 
establish partnerships with local chambers of commerce, or other local or State 
organizations for family child care providers that support small businesses and 
women and minority-owned businesses, as specified. 
 
Each year, MSDE must develop and publish goals for the program and report to the 
General Assembly on the status of the program, as specified. As originally enacted, the 
provisions of Chapters 437 and 438 are set to terminate June 30, 2025. The fiscal 2025 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $450,000 for the program, contingent 
on the enactment of this bill or its cross file.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1139/ Page 3 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures of $450,000 annually to provide program 
funding continue to be incurred. This estimate (1) reflects the contingent appropriation 
included in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly, which this bill 
effectuates; (2) reflects the mandated appropriation in fiscal 2026; and (3) assumes 
discretionary funding of the same amount continues to be provided to the program after  
fiscal 2026. This fiscal and policy note accounts only for the impact on general funds; 
however, to the extent that federal funding is available and authorized under federal law to 
be used for the bill’s purposes, the general fund impact may be mitigated.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Although family child care providers are not direct recipients of 
grant funding, family child care providers in jurisdictions in which grant funding is 
received may benefit from continued support due to the authorized purposes of grant 
funding. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 882 (Senator King) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3