START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 921

Chapter 921

(House Bill 1110)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Intrastate Emergency Management Assistance Compact – City of
Frederick

FOR the purpose of authorizing the City of Frederick to participate in the Maryland
Intrastate Emergency Management Assistance Compact; and generally relating to
the Maryland Intrastate Emergency Management Assistance Compact.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 14–801(a) and 14–803(1) and (2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 14–801(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

14–801.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) “Jurisdictions” means the 23 counties within Maryland, Baltimore City, the
City of Annapolis, the City of Bowie, THE CITY OF FREDERICK, the City of Laurel, and
Ocean City.

14–803.

(1) Article 1. Purpose.

(a) (1) The purpose of this Compact is to provide for emergency
management mutual assistance between the jurisdictions entering into this Compact.

(2) This Compact also shall provide for mutual cooperation in
emergency management–related exercises, testing, or other training activities.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 921 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Article 2. Requests for Assistance.

(b) (1) The senior elected official of each jurisdiction shall designate
authorized representatives. An authorized representative of a party jurisdiction may
request assistance from another party jurisdiction by contacting an authorized
representative of that jurisdiction.

(2) The provisions of this Compact shall apply only to requests for
assistance made by and to authorized representatives.

(3) Requests may be verbal or in writing.

(4) If verbal, the request shall be confirmed in writing at the earliest
possible date, but no later than 10 calendar days following the verbal request.

(5) Written requests shall provide the following information:

(i) The functional areas for which assistance is needed,
including fire services, law enforcement, emergency medical services, transportation,
communications, public works and engineering, building inspection, planning and
information assistance, mass care, resource support, health and medical services, and
search and rescue;

(ii) The mission, capability, size, and amount of the requested
aid; and

(iii) The logistics, location, and time for staging the aid from a
responding party jurisdiction.

(6) There shall be frequent consultations between the Maryland
Department of Emergency Management and appropriate representatives of the party
jurisdictions with the unhindered exchange of information and plans generally relating to
emergency management.

(7) An authorized representative of the requesting party jurisdiction
will advise the Maryland Department of Emergency Management of verbal requests and
provide copies of written requests.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2