START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1162 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1162 
(Delegate Rogers, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
9-1-1 Specialist Recruitment and Retention Workgroup 
 
 
This bill establishes the 9-1-1 Specialist Recruitment and Retention Workgroup to identify 
and examine recruitment and retention challenges that affect 9-1-1 specialists in the State 
and make related recommendations. The workgroup must be staffed by the Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) and the Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
(MDEM). By December 1, 2024, the workgroup must submit an interim report of its 
findings and recommendations, and by December 1, 2025, the workgroup must submit a 
final report of its findings and recommendations, both to the Governor and the  
General Assembly. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates 
December 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DLS and MDEM can likely staff the workgroup with existing resources; 
however, to the extent that the workgroup requires subject-specific expertise or skills that 
exceed their capacity, general fund expenditures may increase for contractual support. 
Expense reimbursements are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing 
budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments can likely supply the data and information necessary for 
the workgroup to conduct its research using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1162/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must review the reports submitted by the Commission to 
Advance Next Generation 9-1-1 Across Maryland and identify and examine recruitment 
and retention challenges that affect 9-1-1 specialists in the State, including:   
 
 
the number of 9-1-1 specialists who retire annually; 
 
the number of 9-1-1 specialists who are hired annually; 
 
current salary ranges for 9-1-1 specialists; 
 
current offerings of specified benefits for 9-1-1 specialists; 
 
training hour requirements for 9-1-1 specialists; 
 
recruitment techniques; 
 
requirements for promotion and advancement within the emergency response field; 
 
the impact of current State and local laws on 9-1-1 specialists; and 
 
other specified work history, workers’ compensation, and perception issues, to the 
extent such information is available. 
 
The workgroup must make recommendations regarding:   
 
 
the effectiveness and viability of uniform incentives, offerings, or practices 
employed in other states to attract, support, and retain individuals in 9-1-1 specialist 
roles; 
 
the feasibility of, and any barriers to, incorporating 9-1-1 specialists into the Law 
Enforcement Officers’ Pension System; and 
 
any other issues the workgroup considers relevant to enhancing and supporting 
career 9-1-1 specialists in the State. 
 
A member of the workgroup may not be compensated as a member of the workgroup, but 
is entitled to reimbursement for expenses as provided in the State budget. 
 
Current Law:  The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through public safety 
answering points (PSAPs), which are generally owned and operated by local governments. 
9-1-1 specialists working within PSAPs answer, redirect, and take action on 9-1-1 calls 
received based on the location of the originating 9-1-1 call. State and local governments 
are preparing for “next generation” 9-1-1 technology that will allow PSAPs to access not 
only more accurate information about caller location but also other information that will 
assist emergency personnel in communicating with callers and responding more 
efficiently. Legislation has been enacted in recent years to, among other things:   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1162/ Page 3 
 
transfer the Maryland 9-1-1 Board that is responsible for administering the  
9-1-1 Trust Fund and overseeing the State’s 9-1-1 system from the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services to MDEM; 
 
expand the uses of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funding for 
9-1-1 specialist training activities; and 
 
increase funding for the State’s 9-1-1 system. 
 
The Maryland 9-1-1 Board’s other responsibilities include (1) dispersing funds to local 
governments from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund for authorized costs; (2) reviewing and approving 
or disapproving requests for reimbursement of the costs of enhancing 9-1-1 systems; 
(3) ensuring the inspection of PSAPs; (4) auditing counties to ensure that 9-1-1 Trust Funds 
are being used for authorized purposes; (5) establishing training standards for PSAP 
personnel based on national best practices and related to Next Generation 9-1-1; and 
(6) consulting with the Maryland Cybersecurity Council to establish cybersecurity 
standards for PSAPs. 
 
Additional Comments:  MDEM advises that the Next Generation 9-1-1 Commission, 
which was established June 1, 2018 and terminated June 30, 2022, explored and made 
recommendations on many 9-1-1 specialist staffing and recruitment issues. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1034 (Senator Carozza, et al.) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 16, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3