START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1157 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1157 
(Delegate Wilkins) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes the Grow Your Own Educators Grant Program to provide support to 
eligible provisional teachers and noncertified education support professionals interested in 
teaching who pledge to fulfill a service obligation. Administered by the Maryland State 
Department of Education (MSDE), the program provides grants to local school systems in 
collaboratives for certain teacher candidates’ expenses and program administration costs. 
Collaboratives (consisting of local school systems, employee organizations representing 
those employees, and approved teacher preparation programs) may apply for grants by 
submitting plans to MSDE. The Governor may include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation for the program. MSDE must report data about the program, as specified. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by almost $1.5 million in FY 2025, 
increasing to at least $5.4 million annually beginning in FY 2028 when the program is fully 
phased in for grant funding and for staff to administer the program. Higher education 
revenues and expenditures for public four-year institutions likely increase.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Higher Ed Rev. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$1.5 
$2.7 
$4.0 
$5.4 
$5.4 
Higher Ed Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($1.5) 
($2.7) 
($4.0) 
($5.4) 
($5.4)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  For local school systems that choose to establish a program, local school 
system expenditures increase for stipends and other costs to administer the program. Costs 
may be partially or fully offset by up to an estimated total of $1.2 million in grant funding 
in FY 2025 (excluding any MSDE administration costs) increasing as the program cohorts 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1157/ Page 2 
phase in and as tuition and fees increase. Local school systems that are part of a 
collaborative are required to pursue long-term funding for a program; thus, revenues and 
expenditures may further increase in the out-years. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Eligible Individuals 
 
To be eligible for the program, a teacher candidate applicant must (1) be employed as a 
noncertified education support professional or provisional teacher by a participating local 
school system on the effective date of the program and (2) meet the educational 
requirements determined by the collaborative. A “provisional teacher” means an individual 
employed by a local school system through a provisional contract as a conditional teacher. 
 
At most, one-quarter of the funds used to support teaching candidate applicants may be 
used to support teaching candidates who are provisional teachers. 
 
Plan 
 
To apply for a grant, a collaborative must develop and submit to MSDE a plan to (1) select 
at least one content area in the local school system in which there is a shortage of teachers, 
as identified by MSDE; (2) select at least one teacher preparation program at an institution 
of higher education that satisfies the training requirements for teacher candidates; and 
(3) designate an individual from a collaborative to assist teacher candidates and provide 
program guidance. 
 
Furthermore, the plan should estimate the numbers of (1) teacher applicants likely to 
complete the program who are noncertificated education support professionals; (2) teacher 
applicants likely to complete the program who are provisional teachers; and (3) mentor 
teachers necessary to support the teacher candidates. The collaborative must also provide 
evidence of a written billing agreement with an institution of higher education, detailing 
the total cost for the teacher cohort and prorated tuition costs if a candidate does not 
complete the program, and ensuring that no candidate is required to pay tuition or fees or 
for books. 
 
In addition to the plan, the collaborative must develop and submit an outreach plan to 
recruit teacher candidates and mentor teachers. This plan should prioritize candidates and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1157/ Page 3 
mentor teachers with linguistic diversity and from racial and ethnic groups historically 
underrepresented in the teaching profession. It should also estimate program expenses by 
category, as specified, and identify at least one source of long-term funding, including the 
process and timeline for obtaining it. 
 
Finally, the collaborative must include any other materials required by MSDE in its 
submission. 
 
Program Requirements 
 
MSDE must award a grant to a local school system that is part of a collaborative for 
employees of the local school system to complete a teacher preparation program at an 
institution of higher education. The grant must be for (1) tuition, books, and fees for teacher 
candidates; (2) stipends for mentor teachers; and (3) costs associated with the 
administration of the program. 
 
In awarding a grant, MSDE must take necessary steps to ensure that, at most, one-quarter 
of expenses awarded in the grant go to supporting provisional teacher participants in the 
program. MSDE, in collaboration with the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL), must, 
on request, provide technical assistance to a collaborative in obtaining State, federal, or 
other funding for the operation of the program. 
 
Teacher candidates must be paid and offered benefits that are at least equivalent to those 
received by noncertified education support professionals or provisional teachers of the 
same classification and tenure in the local school system, as outlined in the collective 
bargaining agreement. 
 
Each teacher candidate must be provided with a mentor teacher for the entirety of the 
program. The teacher candidate cannot serve as a teacher of record or substitute for any 
teacher other than their assigned mentor teacher. 
 
Local school systems and employee organizations representing teacher candidates must 
negotiate a gradual release model that allows teacher candidates to primarily focus on 
internship and practicum requirements. 
 
Teacher candidates are required to fulfill a service obligation by teaching full time in the 
State in a public school or public prekindergarten program, specifically in high-needs 
schools identified by MSDE or in grade levels or content areas with a shortage of qualified 
educators, as identified by MSDE, for a minimum of two years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1157/ Page 4 
Reporting Requirements 
 
MSDE is required to gather and publish specified information on its website. When 
reporting this data, MSDE must make reasonable efforts to anonymize it in order to protect 
the privacy of teacher candidates. 
 
Current Law:  An individual must have a certificate issued by the State Superintendent to 
be employed in the State as a county superintendent, assistant superintendent, supervisor, 
principal, or teacher. “Noncertified education support professional” is not explicitly 
defined in statute but presumably applies to any public school employee not listed above. 
The collective bargaining process for these employees is established in Title 6, Subtitle 5 
of the Education Article. A local school system, State-operated school, or specified 
nonpublic school that provides special education services may request a “conditional 
license” for an individual, if the school cannot fill a position with an individual who 
qualifies for a license. A conditional license is valid for five years and may not be renewed. 
A conditional license may only be issued to an individual who possesses a 
bachelor’s degree or higher, and an applicant who is issued a conditional license must 
pursue a pathway to professional licensure. 
 
Chapter 627 of 2023 established the Teacher Development and Retention Program as a 
six-year pilot program and made significant changes to the existing Teaching Fellows for 
Maryland Scholarship Program. Both programs provide financial support to candidates for 
teacher certification and require that participants fulfill a service obligation in a public 
school following certification. 
 
Teacher Development and Retention Program 
 
The stated purpose of the Teacher Development and Retention Program is to provide 
support to eligible individuals who ultimately pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a 
teacher employed full time in a high-needs school, grade level, or content area in the State 
in which there is a shortage of teachers, as identified by MSDE. More specifically, the 
program must provide financial support (i.e., initial stipend and internship stipend) to 
eligible individuals interested in pursuing a career in the teaching profession, beginning by 
offering eligible individuals a one-time stipend for participation in an experiential learning 
opportunity in a classroom and concluding by placing those individuals in high-needs 
schools, grade levels, or content areas. 
 
The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) in the Maryland Higher Education 
Commission must establish eligibility criteria for the program, including requirements for 
an applicant to (1) be enrolled in the first or second year at an institution of initial eligibility 
(where at least 40% of the attendees receive federal Pell Grants) in an associate or 
bachelor’s degree program and (2) before receiving an educator internship stipend 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1157/ Page 5 
established by the bill, pledge to fulfill a service obligation as a teacher employed full time 
in a high-needs school, grade level, or content area in which there is a shortage of teachers, 
as identified by MSDE, for a minimum of two years. 
 
OSFA must administer the program, including developing processes for eligible 
individuals to apply for the program and for awarding stipends to those who meet the 
eligibility criteria. OSFA must give preference to applicants who have been employed in a 
public school or a publicly funded prekindergarten program within the last five years. 
 
Teaching Fellows for Maryland Scholarship Program 
 
The Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship encompasses students who pledge to work 
as public school or public prekindergarten teachers in the State upon completion of their 
studies at (1) a high-needs school, as identified by MSDE or (2) in a grade level or content 
area in which there is a shortage of qualified educators, as identified by MSDE. 
 
Chapter 627 modified the service obligation for undergraduate recipients from one year for 
every year of award to two years for everyone, regardless of how many years an award was 
received. 
 
If a recipient is unable to perform the service obligation requirement because there are no 
available positions in a qualifying school, grade level, or content area, the recipient may 
work in any public school or public prekindergarten program in the State. If a recipient 
performs the service obligation by teaching at a school or in a grade level or content area 
previously identified as high needs that is no longer identified as such, the recipient may 
continue to teach in that school, grade level, or content area without being required to repay 
the scholarship funds. 
 
In selecting awardees for a Teaching Fellows for Maryland scholarship, OSFA must give 
preference to applicants, as specified, who have been employed in a public school or a 
publicly funded prekindergarten within the last five years. 
 
OSFA must focus on publicizing the scholarship (1) at historically Black colleges and 
universities in the State; (2) to teaching assistants and other educational support staff 
currently working in public schools and publicly funded prekindergarten programs; and 
(3) in a manner that promotes the program to students who are members of groups that are 
underrepresented in the teaching profession. OSFA must collaborate with MSDE in 
publicizing the scholarship. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1157/ Page 6 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Maryland State Department of Education 
 
General fund expenditures increase by almost $1.5 million in fiscal 2025 to meet the 
requirements of the bill, increasing to at least $5.4 million in fiscal 2028 to reflect 
four cohorts of participants. While funding is discretionary, this analysis assumes that an 
appropriation of at least this amount is necessary to cover both administrative costs for 
MSDE (discussed below) and provide for a meaningful amount of grants (which could total 
more than $5.1 million each year when the program is fully phased in and must cover the 
tuition, fees, and books for participants; stipends for mentors; and local administrative 
costs). 
 
Grants:  This estimate accounts for four cohorts, each comprising 100 eligible individuals 
over four years, attending public four-year institutions with teacher preparation programs. 
The cost of grants for the initial cohort totals more than $1.2 million. Each year, another 
cohort is added, which has a compounding effect on costs. Beginning in fiscal 2028, costs 
reflect all four cohorts and grants account for more than $5.1 million. The estimate assumes 
expeditious implementation with the first cohort funded for the 2024-2025 academic year 
(which roughly coincides with fiscal 2025). It also reflects an average cost for tuition and 
fees of approximately $10,400 for all public institutions in the State with a teacher 
preparation program, along with an estimated $1,250 for books per student, based on the 
costs projected by the University of Maryland, College Park Campus. Additionally, the 
estimate includes $500 annual stipends for mentor teachers, assuming a one-to-one 
mentorship for each future teacher. Further, the estimate assumes a 2% annual increase in 
the tuition and fees component of grants, reflecting the escalating costs of in-state tuition 
and fees for public higher education institutions. A program that includes a private 
institution of higher education may require additional funding for tuition and fees due to 
their higher costs. To the extent participants attend on a less than full-time basis, costs may 
be lower annually – but they may be spread over more years. There also may be programs 
that allow eligible individuals to attend a teacher preparation master’s degree program; 
such programs are generally two rather than four years long, but tuition and fees may be 
higher. Actual costs depend on the plans submitted and approved for funding.  
 
Administrative Costs:  MSDE advises that two full-time and one half-time education 
program specialists are required to administer the Grow Your Own Educators Grant 
Program. The Department of Legislative Services advises that the program can likely be 
administered by two full-time education program specialists at a cost of $238,273 in 
fiscal 2025. The estimate reflects hiring the staff on the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date so 
that awards can be made for the 2024-2025 academic year. It includes salaries, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. It is assumed that 
MDL can provide technical assistance on request using existing resources. 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1157/ Page 7 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$223,221 
Operating Expenses 
    15,052 
Total FY 2025 MSDE Administrative Expenditures 
$238,273 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses.  
 
Institutions of Higher Education 
 
Institutions of higher education with a teacher preparation program approved by MSDE 
may apply for a grant as part of a collaborative with a local school system and an employee 
organization. Institutions with teacher preparation programs include the University System 
of Maryland institutions, Morgan State University, and St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
as well private institutions of higher education. One of the requirements of a program is 
that participants not be charged tuition or fees (or pay for books). Accordingly, revenues 
and expenditures may increase to the extent the bill increases the number of students 
enrolled in teacher preparation programs, with tuition and fees covered by program grants.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  In the 2023-2024 school year, Maryland local school systems faced 
a significant teacher shortage, with 1,935 teacher vacancies in addition to 5,304 teaching 
positions filled by conditionally certified teachers working toward full certification. The 
U.S. Department of Education identified 40 critical shortage areas in Maryland, including 
middle school English, mathematics, science, and social studies. 
 
As a response to this shortage, it is anticipated that some local school systems establish 
collaboratives with higher education institutions and employee organizations. For those 
opting to develop such programs, expenditures may increase to cover tuition, fees, and the 
cost of books for teacher candidates and provisional teachers, stipends for mentor teachers, 
and administrative costs to the extent those costs are not covered by grant awards. Local 
school systems must continue to pay the noncertified education support professionals and 
provisional teachers and provide them benefits while they are teacher candidates. 
 
Additionally, local school systems involved in collaboratives must seek long-term funding, 
leading to potential increases in both revenues and expenditures if external funding sources 
are secured. 
  
Additional Comments:  Private institutions of higher education with teacher preparation 
programs may establish collaboratives with local school systems and employee 
organizations. Thus, their revenues and expenditures may be affected. However, the 
magnitude and direction of the impact cannot be reliably estimated and any impact is due 
to choosing to be part of a collaborative. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1157/ Page 8 
In 2022, MSDE announced the award of $47.5 million to 23 of the 24 local school system 
for Grow Your Own Staff Programs as part of the Maryland Leads program. It was 
estimated that the programs have the potential to (1) generate more than 300 new teachers 
and 1,000 new paraprofessionals; (2) support more than 400 conditionally certified 
teachers to pass licensure exams; and (3) build a sustainable talent pipeline. The grant 
period ends September 30, 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 937 (Senator Augustine) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment and Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Independent College 
and University Association; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8