START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1037

Chapter 1037

(House Bill 1269)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore County – Alcoholic Beverages – License Applications – ~~Online~~ Notice

FOR the purpose of altering a certain notice requirement before the Board of License
Commissioners for Baltimore County may approve an application for an alcoholic
beverages license; authorizing the Board ~~of~~ ~~License~~ ~~Commissioners~~ ~~for~~ ~~Baltimore~~
~~County~~ to fulfill ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ the notice requirement by posting online ~~a~~ ~~completed~~
~~application~~ notice of an application hearing for an alcoholic beverages license a
certain number of days before the application hearing date; and generally relating
to alcoholic beverages licenses in Baltimore County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 4–208 and 13–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 13–1504
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

4–208.

(a) Before a local licensing board may approve an application for a license, the
local licensing board shall publish notice of the application two times in 2 successive weeks:

(1) in two newspapers of general circulation in the jurisdiction; or

(2) if only one newspaper of general circulation exists in the jurisdiction, in
that newspaper.

(b) The notice shall state:

(1) the name of the applicant;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1037 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) the type of license for which the application is made;

(3) the location described in the application; and

(4) the date, time, and place set by the local licensing board for a hearing
on the application.

13–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore County.

13–1504.

(a) (1) BEFORE THE BOARD MAY APPROVE AN APPLICATION FOR A
LICENSE, THE BOARD SHALL PUBLISH NOTICE OF THE APPLICATION TWO TIMES IN
2 SUCCESSIVE WEEKS IN ONE NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL CIRCULATION IN
BALTIMORE COUNTY.

(2) THE BOARD MAY FULFILL THE NOTICE REQUIREMENT UNDER §
4–208 OF THIS ARTICLE PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION BY POSTING ONLINE
A COMPLETED APPLICATION NOTICE OF AN APPLICATION HEARING AT LEAST 14
DAYS BEFORE THE APPLICATION HEARING DATE.

(2) (3) In addition to the newspaper notice required under § 4–208 of
this article AND PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, OR THE ONLINE NOTICE
AUTHORIZED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, the Board shall post a
suitable notice in a conspicuous place at the location described in the application for at least
10 days before holding a hearing on the application.

(b) A notice under this section shall state the class of license for which application
is made and the date, time, and location set by the Board for an application hearing.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2