START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 409

Chapter 409

(House Bill 1206)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission in the
Department of Commerce to study and make recommendations regarding certain
trade relations between Maryland and Ireland; and generally relating to the
Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 5–2501 through 5–2504 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 25.
Maryland–Ireland Trade Commission”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Over 9% of Maryland’s population is of Irish descent; and

WHEREAS, The ties that bind Ireland to Maryland are deep and lasting; and

WHEREAS, Irish heritage has been the fortunate lot of many great Marylanders;
and

WHEREAS, Ireland and Maryland are attempting to reinvent their economies for
success in the twenty–first century; and

WHEREAS, Marylanders have both historic and practical reasons to desire the
building of firmer commercial links with Ireland; now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

SUBTITLE 25. MARYLAND–IRELAND TRADE COMMISSION.

5–2501.

IN THIS SUBTITLE, “COMMISSION” MEANS THE MARYLAND–IRELAND TRADE
COMMISSION.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 409 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

5–2502.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND–IRELAND TRADE COMMISSION IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO STUDY AND PROMOTE TRADE
BETWEEN MARYLAND AND IRELAND.

5–2503.

(A) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE SECRETARY OF STATE, OR THE SECRETARY OF STATE’S
DESIGNEE;

(3) TWO MEMBERS OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY
THE PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE, WHO HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT
PROMOTE IRISH AFFAIRS, OR CURRENT OR PAST INVOLVEMENT IN ORGANIZATIONS
THAT PROMOTE IRISH AFFAIRS, OR HAVE AN INTEREST IN THE WELL–BEING OF
TRADE RELATIONS BETWEEN MARYLAND AND IRELAND;

(4) TWO MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY
THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE, WHO HAVE KNOWLEDGE OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT
PROMOTE IRISH AFFAIRS, OR CURRENT OR PAST INVOLVEMENT IN ORGANIZATIONS
THAT PROMOTE IRISH AFFAIRS, OR HAVE AN INTEREST IN THE WELL–BEING OF
TRADE RELATIONS BETWEEN MARYLAND AND IRELAND; AND

(5) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR,
WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE:

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A PUBLIC INSTITUTION OF
HIGHER EDUCATION;

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE OR ITS SUCCESSOR ORGANIZATION; AND

(III) TWO REPRESENTATIVES OF THE IRISH–AMERICAN
COMMUNITY, WHO MAY NOT BE OF THE SAME POLITICAL PARTY.

(B) THE CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION SHALL BE ELECTED
FROM AMONG THE MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 409

(C) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE BOARD;
BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(D) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF THE APPOINTED MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS
REQUIRED BY THE TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS ON OCTOBER 1, 2024.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(4) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
~~ONLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERM~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUCCESSOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~APPOINTED~~ ~~AND~~
~~QUALIFIES.~~

(5) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE AN APPOINTED MEMBER FOR
INCOMPETENCE, MISCONDUCT, OR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE
POSITION.

5–2504.

(A) THE COMMISSION SHALL STUDY AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS
REGARDING:

(1) ADVANCING BILATERAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT BETWEEN
MARYLAND AND IRELAND;

(2) INITIATING JOINT ACTION ON POLICY ISSUES OF MUTUAL
INTEREST TO MARYLAND AND IRELAND;

(3) PROMOTING BUSINESS AND ACADEMIC EXCHANGES BETWEEN
MARYLAND AND IRELAND;

(4) ENCOURAGING MUTUAL ECONOMIC SUPPORT BETWEEN
MARYLAND AND IRELAND;

(5) ENCOURAGING MUTUAL INVESTMENT IN THE INFRASTRUCTURE
OF MARYLAND AND IRELAND; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 409 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) OTHER ISSUES AS DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(B) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE COMMISSION SHALL REPORT ITS FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF
THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That:~~

~~(a)~~ ~~All~~ ~~initial~~ ~~appointments~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland–Ireland~~ ~~Trade~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~
~~made~~ ~~not~~ ~~later~~ ~~than~~ ~~February~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~The~~ ~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~initial~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland–Ireland~~ ~~Trade~~
~~Commission~~ ~~shall~~ ~~expire~~ ~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2025;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2026.~~

SECTION ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of September
30, 2026, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4