START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1035

Chapter 1035

(House Bill 1235)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – License Extensions

FOR the purpose of extending for a certain amount of time the expiration dates of certain
alcoholic beverages licenses in Baltimore City that are issued for certain areas for
certain transfer and renewal purposes under certain circumstances; and generally
relating to alcoholic beverages in Baltimore City.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) Notwithstanding § 12–1705 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article,
a Class B–D–7 license issued for a premises in the 5517 block of Harford Road shall be
considered unexpired until the end of July 1, 2025, for the purpose of being transferred to
another owner at the same location, if the applicant enters into a memorandum of
understanding with the Hamilton Community Association.

(b) (1) Notwithstanding § 12–2202 of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Article, a Class B–D–7 license issued for a premises in the 2200 block of East Fayette Street
shall be considered unexpired until the end of July 1, 2025, for the purposes of being
renewed to the current license year and transferred to a different applicant at the same
location, if the applicant enters into a memorandum of understanding with the Cleaning,
Active, Restoring, Efforts (C.A.R.E.) Community Association.

(2) The memorandum of understanding shall:

(i) establish a community input process for the transfer of the
license;

(ii) limit the license to the sale of beer and wine only during the
first 12 months of operation immediately following the transfer;

(iii) include public safety measures relating to:

1. parking;

2. lighting;

3. music;

4. noise;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1035 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

5. cameras; and

6. trash; and

(iv) prohibit the license from being transferred to a new location.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of July
31, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2