START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1244 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1244 
(Delegate Smith, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission - Academic Program Approval and 
Institutional Mission Statements - Requirements 
 
 
This bill establishes a new process for academic program approval and institutional mission 
statements based on identifying State and regional workforce needs. To that end, the bill 
requires a comprehensive analysis of statewide workforce needs by designated agencies, 
integrates these needs into the State Plan for Higher Education, and establishes new review 
processes for academic programs to ensure alignment with workforce demands. The bill 
also incentivizes collaboration between institutions for program development and enhances 
the evaluation of mission statements to maintain distinctiveness among public 
higher education institutions. In addition, the Maryland Higher Education Commission 
(MHEC) must review existing programs, as specified, and establish a council and 
procedures guide related to the review process. Further, the bill establishes separate 
processes for the approval of graduate programs and requires MHEC to establish a separate 
process for online programs. Specified institutions have a 90-day lead to propose an 
emerging workforce need program at the graduate level. Finally, the bill establishes the 
Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by at least $264,000 in FY 2025 for staff 
and one-time data set-up costs. Public four-year institutions of higher education and 
Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) revenues and expenditures may be affected 
by new program approval processes (not shown). To the extent the new fund is capitalized, 
general fund expenditures may be necessary, special fund revenues and expenditures 
increase, and any such costs for the institutions may be partially offset (not shown). 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
264,000 
195,900 
204,600 
213,600 
222,900 
Net Effect 
($264,000) 
($195,900) 
($204,600) 
($213,600) 
($222,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1244/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local community college revenues and expenditures may be affected by the 
new program approval process; however, the direction or magnitude cannot be determined. 
Any costs may be partially offset by special funds. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the bill (1) requires the collection of State and regional 
workforce needs data; (2) sets new requirements for the State Plan for Higher Education, 
and requires the 2022 plan to be updated; (3) requires MHEC to establish a Program 
Review Process Advisory Council; (4) requires MHEC to establish regulations; 
(5) establishes requirements related to review hearings and requires MHEC to write a 
procedures guide; (6) requires MHEC to conduct an annual review of academic programs 
that were approved, as specified, to determine whether an historically Black college or 
university (HBCU) that objected to the program was harmed; (7) requires each institution 
to submit a letter of intent to MHEC that identifies each new graduate level program that 
an institution intends to propose for approval; (8) establishes the Proposed Programs 
Collaborative Grant Fund; (9) requires establishment of a new, separate process for 
approval for online-only programs offered to out-of-state students; (10) requires 
institutional mission statements to undergo more robust review and approval; and 
(11) requires MHEC to conduct a review of the academic program review process. 
 
State and Regional Workforce Needs 
 
The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) and MHEC must each have a full-time staff 
member who (1) is responsible for defining, identifying, and compiling data on State and 
regional workforce needs and (2) works collaboratively with one another and the 
Department of Commerce to produce uniform and consistent baseline data, including 
common sources and measurements, about workforce needs to inform State policies 
relating to postsecondary education. Similarly, Commerce must (1) define, identify, and 
compile data on State and regional workforce needs and (2) work collaboratively with 
MDL and MHEC to produce uniform and consistent baseline data, including common 
sources and measurements, about workforce needs to inform State policies relating to 
postsecondary education. 
 
State Plan for Higher Education 
 
The bill clarifies, in developing the State Plan for Higher Education, that MHEC must 
incorporate the goal and priorities for higher education for all public institutions of higher 
education. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1244/ Page 3 
In addition to current requirements, the State Plan for Higher Education developed by 
MHEC must identify current and emerging State and regional workforce needs and any 
specific academic programs institutions could develop to fulfill, or support, identified 
current State and regional workforce needs and any emerging workforce need programs, 
as specified. In identifying State and regional workforce needs for the State Plan for Higher 
Education, MHEC must use uniform and consistent baseline data, as specified; consult with 
other agencies; use data from resources and literature relating to specific occupations; and 
provide all institutions of higher education in the State with access to this baseline data. 
MHEC must update the workforce needs identified in the most recent version of the State 
Plan for Higher Education each year as an appendix to the plan and post the update on its 
website. Beginning with the quadrennial review of the State Plan for Higher Education due 
by July 1, 2026, MHEC must submit the proposed plan to the Legislative Policy Committee 
(LPC) for review and comment before adoption by MHEC. 
 
More immediately, by January 1, 2025, MHEC must update the State Plan for 
Higher Education last revised in 2022 to include updated information on State and regional 
workforce needs, emerging workforce needs, and any specific academic programs 
institutions could develop to fulfill, or support, identified needs. MHEC must submit the 
update to LPC for review and comment before adoption. During the process of updating 
the State plan, MHEC must provide postsecondary education stakeholders with an 
opportunity to provide input on State and regional workforce needs relevant to the purposes 
and objective of the plan. 
 
Program Review Process Advisory Council 
 
MHEC must establish a Program Review Process Advisory Council. The council must 
meet the current requirements for councils, including meeting periodically and making 
reports and recommendations to MHEC. 
 
Duplicative Programs Regulations 
 
The regulations adopted by MHEC establishing standards for determining whether two or 
more programs are unreasonably or unnecessarily duplicative must (1) clearly identify all 
specific criteria and factors used by MHEC to determine whether two or more programs 
are unreasonably or unnecessarily duplicative; (2) prioritize meeting State and regional 
workforce needs and preserving existing programs that are able to meet these workforce 
needs; and (3) prioritize collaboration between institutions of higher education. 
 
Likewise, MHEC must adopt regulations on procedures for conducting an analysis of the 
objections to a proposed graduate program that:   
 
 
clearly identify all the specific criteria and factors used by MHEC; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1244/ Page 4 
 
specific to an objection of unreasonable program duplication which would cause 
demonstrable harm to another institution, use a set of baseline data and common 
sources that prioritize three elements:  (1) meeting State and regional workforce 
needs; (2) preserving existing programs that are able to meet State and regional 
workforce needs; and (3) collaboration between institutions of higher education. 
 
An objection for a graduate program must be based on one of the following reasons:  
(1) inconsistency with the institution’s official mission; (2) not meeting a State or regional 
need in line with the State’s higher education plan; (3) unreasonable program duplication 
which would cause harm to the State or students attending higher education institutions in 
the State; or (4) unnecessarily duplicating existing offerings in a way that breaches State 
and federal equal educational opportunity laws. 
 
Furthermore, MHEC, in consultation with the Attorney General, must adopt regulations 
for standards for conducting an analysis of an objection based on unnecessary graduate 
program duplication in violation of the State’s equal educational obligations under State 
and federal law. 
 
Review Hearings and Procedures Guide 
 
The bill establishes requirements for a review hearing of the Secretary of Higher 
Education’s determination of an institution’s objection to a graduate program approval, 
including that it be conducted in open session. By January 1, 2025, MHEC must develop 
and publish on its website an administrative procedures guide for MHEC’s program review 
process. The guide must be updated at least once a year. 
 
Review of Approved Academic Programs Subject to an Objection 
 
By January 1, 2025, and each January 1 thereafter, MHEC must review each academic 
program that has been recently approved and each academic program that has been 
approved in the four immediately preceding school years that was subject to an objection 
of an HBCU to determine whether the HBCU, the State, or students attending institutions 
of higher education in the State suffered harm resulting from approval of the program. 
 
By September 1, 2025, and each September 1 thereafter, MHEC must report its findings to 
the Senate Education, Energy, and the Environment Committee and the House 
Appropriations Committee. 
 
Letters of Intent for Graduate Level Program Approval 
 
Beginning January 1, 2025, MHEC must require each public senior higher education 
institution to submit a letter of intent to MHEC that identifies each new graduate level 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1244/ Page 5 
program that an institution intends to propose for approval. MHEC must require each 
institution to submit a letter of intent every six months with all new graduate programs the 
institution intends to propose within the upcoming six-month to two-year time period. 
MHEC must use this letter to (1) facilitate collaboration between institutions and 
(2) provide feedback to an institution prior to submission of the new program for approval, 
as specified. MHEC may not use a letter to establish any preference or priority for approval 
of a program proposal. MHEC must establish requirements for submitting a letter. Except 
under specified conditions, MHEC may approve a program proposal only if the institution 
has included the program in a letter of intent. MHEC must circulate each letter of intent 
submitted by an institution among each institution but may not post an institution’s letter 
of intent publicly.  
 
Graduate Level Emerging Workforce Need Programs 
 
An “emerging workforce need program” means a graduate level program identified by 
MHEC (in the State Plan for Higher Education or each annual update to the workforce 
needs as an appendix to the plan) that (1) no institution of higher education in the State 
offers; (2) addresses a job or industry need that is innovative, unique, and rare; and 
(3) could leverage federal, State, or private resources on a long-term basis with immediate 
development by an institution of higher education. “Emerging workforce need program” 
does not mean a specific academic program identified by MHEC to fulfill or support an 
identified current State and regional workforce need. 
 
The bill establishes requirements related to approval of an emerging workforce need 
program, which apply after adoption of the required updated State plan due 
January 1, 2025. Generally, MHEC may approve a program proposal (as relates to a new 
program, a substantial modification to an existing program, or an online program) for an 
academic program for an emerging workforce need program only for Morgan State 
University (MSU), Bowie State University (BSU), the University of Maryland Eastern 
Shore (UMES), Coppin State University (CSU), and the University of Maryland, College 
Park Campus (UMCP). Further, within 90 days after the quadrennial review of the State 
plan and each annual update to it, each of those institutions must submit a notice of intent 
to submit a proposal in the upcoming year for an emerging workforce need program. 
MHEC must share the notice of intent to all segments of higher education, facilitate 
collaboration between institutions, provide feedback to the institution before it submits the 
new program for approval, and identify State resources to assist the institution in 
developing the program. 
 
However, another institution may have a proposal approved under two specified 
circumstances. First, if none of the five specified institutions submits a notice of intent as 
required within the 90-day period, any institution of higher education in the State may 
immediately submit a proposal for an academic program for approval by MHEC. Second, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1244/ Page 6 
if one of the five specified institutions chooses to collaborate with any other institution of 
higher education in the State to implement an emerging workforce need program within 
the one-year period after its identification in the quadrennial State plan or an annual update 
to it, MHEC may approve a proposal for an academic program for the collaborating 
institution.  
 
MHEC must adopt implementing regulations. 
 
Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund  
 
The bill establishes a Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund to provide financial 
assistance to incentivize institutions of higher education to collaborate with other 
institutions of higher education, at the discretion of each institution, to establish and 
implement a new graduate program. 
 
MHEC must administer the fund, develop an application process to apply for a grant from 
the fund, and award grants to institutions as intended by the fund. 
 
It is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to the State Finance and Procurement 
Article. 
 
The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, interest earnings, 
and any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
The fund may be used only for expenses incurred by an institution for collaborating or 
attempting to collaborate with other institutions to establish and implement a new graduate 
program identified in a letter of intent, including specified expenses. 
 
Money expended from the fund for expenses incurred by institutions for collaborating or 
attempting to collaborate to establish and implement a new graduate program is 
supplemental to and is not intended to take the place of funding that otherwise would be 
appropriated for the new program. 
 
Online Program Approval 
 
MHEC must develop and implement a program review process for new proposed programs 
that (1) are offered only online and to a majority of out-of-state students and (2) enable the 
institutions of higher education in Maryland to compete with out-of-state competitors in 
the online marketplace. The process developed and implemented must allow MHEC or an 
institution of higher education in the State to file with MHEC an objection to 
implementation of the proposed program, if the objection is based on any of the following:  
(1) inconsistency with the institution’s official mission; (2) not meeting a need in line with 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1244/ Page 7 
the State’s higher education plan; (3) unreasonable program duplication of a fully online 
program, which would cause harm to the State or students attending higher education 
institutions in the State; or (4) unnecessary duplication by a fully online program of existing 
offerings in a way that breaches State and federal equal educational opportunity laws. 
MHEC must include the program review process in the administrative procedures guide. 
 
Mission Statement 
 
In addition to current requirements, MHEC must develop detailed criteria for the robust 
review of mission statements of public institutions of higher education, including ensuring 
the mission of each institution is reflective of the institution’s statutory distinction and 
clearly defined and distinct from other public institutions. 
 
MHEC may reject the mission statement, after conducting a review, but must do so within 
90 days of receipt; otherwise, the mission statement is deemed to be approved (unless 
MHEC finds the mission statement to be inconsistent with the State plan). 
 
After approving or rejecting a mission statement of a public institution of higher education, 
MHEC must submit a report to specified committees that includes an analysis explaining 
(1) the role of the public institution of higher education within the system of 
higher education in the State to ensure the mission statement is clearly defined and distinct 
from other public institutions of higher education and (2) why the mission statement was 
approved or rejected. MHEC is encouraged to use that report to ensure the State is 
supporting each public institution of higher education in meeting the needs described in 
the mission statements. 
 
Academic Program Review Evaluation  
 
MHEC must examine the approval process for conducting academic program reviews (as 
modified under the bill), including all statutory and regulatory requirements regarding 
administrative procedures, timelines, and deadlines, to determine whether the process, in 
whole or in part, needs updating or revision to meet the needs of the institutions of 
higher education and students. By December 1, 2024, MHEC must report its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly. 
 
MHEC, in collaboration with all institutions of higher education, must evaluate whether 
the existing standard that triggers the academic program review process for substantial 
modification to an existing program in statute and regulations, as specified, is the 
appropriate standard. If, after the evaluation, MHEC determines that a new standard for 
establishing a substantial modification to an existing program is appropriate, MHEC must, 
on or before January 1, 2025, adopt regulations establishing the new standard. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1244/ Page 8 
Current Law:   
 
Consultant Study of Policies and Practices 
 
Chapters 41 and 42 of 2021 required the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) to 
contract with a consultant to study the capacity and capability of MHEC to carry out its 
current policies and practices and any new policies or practices established for the purpose 
of (1) evaluating, streamlining, improving, and making recommendations on such policies 
and practices with respect to academic program review; (2) enhancing the economic 
competitiveness of the State by ensuring the responsiveness of institutions of 
higher education to market demand; and (3) effectively supporting the State’s workforce 
development requirements. A final report was due by September 1, 2022. 
 
Department of Commerce 
 
Among other duties, Commerce must facilitate regular meetings among its regional 
experts, financial incentive team, and tourism development team to determine the success 
in meeting overall economic development strategic goals and in addressing the economic 
development needs of each region. Commerce must also work with community colleges to 
enhance their role in providing workforce training services, including industry-specific 
education and training in response to the needs of the State. 
 
Processes for Implementing New Academic Programs 
 
There are two processes for implementing new academic programs at institutions of 
higher education:  one for new programs that can be implemented with existing resources; 
and another for new programs that will require additional resources. The processes are 
overseen by MHEC, and MHEC’s determinations about program approval are not subject 
to judicial review or administrative appeal. 
 
Institutions of higher education seeking to implement new programs with new resources 
must submit proposals for the new programs to MHEC, and MHEC must approve or 
disapprove the programs or, in the case of private nonprofit and for-profit institutions of 
higher education, recommend that the programs be implemented or not implemented. If 
MHEC fails to act within 60 days of the date of submission of a completed proposal, the 
proposal is automatically deemed approved. 
 
When a public or private nonprofit institution of higher education determines that it can 
implement a new program with existing resources, the president of the institution must 
submit the proposal to the institution’s governing board and to MHEC, and MHEC must 
distribute the proposal to other institutions. MHEC or another institution may file an 
objection to the proposal based on (1) inconsistency with the mission of the institution 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1244/ Page 9 
proposing the program; (2) a lack of need for the program; (3) unreasonable program 
duplication that could cause harm to another institution; or (4) violation of the State’s equal 
educational opportunity obligations (known as unnecessary program duplication). Based 
on those factors, MHEC must determine if an institution’s objection is justified. If MHEC 
determines that an objection is justified, it must negotiate with the institution’s governing 
board and president to modify the proposal. If the objection cannot be resolved within 
30 days of receipt of an objection, MHEC must make a final determination about the 
approval of the proposed program for a public institution of higher education or a 
final recommendation on implementation for a private nonprofit institution of 
higher education. 
 
Maryland Higher Education Commission – Program Evaluation Unit 
 
Chapters 41 and 42 required MHEC to establish a program evaluation unit, to evaluate new 
programs and substantial modifications, with at least 10 staff members. The unit 
established must assist MHEC in reviewing and evaluating proposals for new academic 
programs and substantial modifications of existing academic programs in accordance with 
law. The Governor must include in the annual operating budget an amount sufficient to 
employ the 10 staff members. 
 
State Plan for Postsecondary Education 
 
MHEC is charged with producing a statewide plan every four years that clearly outlines 
the priorities and major goals for the State’s postsecondary system. The 2022 Maryland 
State Plan for Higher Education fulfills this charge. 
 
Mission Statements 
 
The president of each institution of higher education must develop a mission statement, 
which is then submitted to the governing board for review and potential revision every 
four years, following the quadrennial review of the State Plan for Higher Education. The 
governing board has the authority to adopt the mission statement with or without 
amendments and must submit it to MHEC for further consideration. Regional 
higher education centers follow a similar process, developing their mission statements, 
submitting them to the governing body, and ultimately to MHEC for approval. 
Additionally, the Chancellor of the University System of Maryland (USM) reviews mission 
statements for constituent institutions before they are considered by the Board of Regents 
to ensure consistency with the system’s plan and efficient resource utilization. 
 
MHEC must review a mission statement to determine whether it is consistent with the 
State Plan for Higher Education. The mission statement is deemed approved within 30 days 
of receipt unless MHEC finds the statement is not consistent with the State plan. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1244/ Page 10 
State Expenditures:   
 
State Agencies 
 
MHEC advises that many requirements of the bill can be met using existing resources; 
however, coordination among MHEC, MDL, and Commerce requires additional staff for  
two agencies. Specifically, MHEC advises that an additional analyst and director are 
required; however, given the 10-person program evaluation unit required by current law, 
DLS advises that one analyst is likely sufficient. Likewise, MDL advises additional staff 
is required as current staff is fully subscribed with other duties and largely funded with 
federal monies that would preclude them from absorbing the duties under the bill. 
Commerce advises that, as it already has staff whose responsibilities could encompass the 
requirements under the bill, no additional staff is required.  
 
Furthermore, in identifying State and regional workforce needs, MHEC must consult, as 
necessary, with the Maryland Longitudinal Data System (MLDS) Center, among other 
entities. The MLDS Center advises that, to provide better information, it must incorporate 
additional data on workforce needs and labor market projections into its system to create 
comprehensive workforce needs projections. The MLDS Center estimates one-time 
implementation costs of $100,000 to $200,000 in fiscal 2025, with further analysis to be 
conducted using existing resources. 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $164,039 in fiscal 2025 for MHEC 
and MDL to each hire an analyst to conduct the required research of State and regional 
workforce needs and meet the bill’s requirement for each of them to have one full-time 
staff member dedicated to such duties. This estimate accounts for a 90-day start-up delay. 
Additionally, MLDS costs increase by at least $100,000 in fiscal 2025 for one-time set-up 
costs. The estimate reflects the costs of hiring two researchers, one each for MHEC and 
MDL, to identify State and regional workforce needs and coordinate with the appropriate 
agencies. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$149,527 
MLDS One-time Costs 
100,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
    14,512 
General Fund Expenditures in FY 2025 
$264,039 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover, 
elimination of one-time costs, as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1244/ Page 11 
Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund 
 
The bill establishes the Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund to incentivize 
institutions of higher education to collaborate with other institutions of higher education, 
at the discretion of each institution, to establish and implement a new graduate program. 
MHEC can likely administer the fund using existing resources. The fund may be used only 
for expenses incurred by an institution for collaborating or attempting to collaborate with 
other institutions to establish and implement a new graduate program, including those 
specified. Capitalization of the fund – both source and amount – is not specified in the bill; 
absent another source of funding, a general fund appropriation is likely needed for this 
purpose. To the extent funds are provided, general fund expenditures and corresponding 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase. The amount of funds required is unknown 
as it depends on the potential collaborations. However, expenditures related to 
collaboration could exceed $250,000 annually if all costs were covered by the fund. 
 
Public Institutions of Higher Education 
 
Public four-year institutions of higher education (USM constituent institutions, MSU, and 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland (SMCM)), BCCC, and local community college revenues 
and expenditures may be affected by the changes to the program approval processes. While 
the direction and magnitude of any impact cannot be reliably estimated, it is assumed that 
a collaborative program approval process based on State and regional needs ultimately 
benefits all institutions of higher education. 
 
Allowing MSU, BSU, CSU, UMES, UMCP to have a 90-day lead to submit a proposal for 
an academic program for an emerging workforce need program at the graduate level may 
affect institutional revenues and expenditures; however, the impact on the specified 
institutions as well as other institutions cannot be reliably estimated. Nevertheless, it is 
assumed that the intent is to increase revenues and enrollment for the selected institutions. 
For reference, under the current process, between January 1, 2023, and December 1, 2023,  
MHEC received 143 new program approval submissions. Ten program approval 
submissions received an objection. Seven objections were resolved without a hearing by 
the commission. Three program approval reviews, after an objection, received a hearing. 
 
Any additional costs associated with collaborating with other institutions may be partially 
offset by funds from the Proposed Programs Collaborative Grant Fund established by the 
bill. However, it is unknown whether and to what extent special funds will be available or 
provided for these purposes. 
 
Public four-year institutions of higher education can submit a letter of intent for graduate 
programs every six months using existing resources. However, UMCP advises that an 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1244/ Page 12 
additional staff member is required; MSU and SMCM advise that the bill’s requirements 
can be met using existing resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill reflects many of the draft recommendations made by the 
Program Approval Process Workgroup that met four times in 2023. 
 
This analysis reflects the conference committee amendments adopted by both the House 
and Senate; however, according to Maryland Matters, those amendments do not accurately 
reflect intended provisions related to graduate level emerging workforce needs programs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1022 (Senators King and Watson) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Longitudinal Data System 
Center; Office of the Attorney General; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Baltimore City Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland 
Matters; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 7, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 7, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 12