START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1231 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1231 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Fisheries - Oyster Management 
 
 
This bill repeals a prohibition against the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) taking 
any action to reduce or alter the boundaries of specified oyster sanctuaries until the 
department has developed a specified updated fisheries management plan for the scientific 
management of the oyster stock (see Current Law, below). The bill takes effect  
July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not directly affect State finances.     
  
Local Effect:  None.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 5 and 9 of 2020 (as amended by Chapters 597 and 598 of 2020) 
prohibit DNR from taking any action to reduce or alter the boundaries of the oyster 
sanctuaries established in “Oyster Sanctuaries of the Chesapeake Bay and its Tidal 
Tributaries (September 2010)” until the department has developed an updated fisheries 
management plan for the scientific management of the oyster stock based on management 
strategies and measurements recommended by the Oyster Advisory Commission (OAC) 
and determined by the department in consultation with the University of Maryland Center 
for Environmental Science (UMCES).   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1231/ Page 2 
Chapters 5 and 9 (amended by Chapters 597 and 598) required DNR and OAC, in 
coordination with UMCES, to develop a package of consensus recommendations for 
enhancing and implementing the fishery management plan for oysters. The consensus 
recommendations were required to: 
 
 
be developed through a facilitated consensus solutions process, based on a 
75% majority agreement level for each recommendation; 
 
recommend management actions or combinations of management actions to achieve 
the targets identified in the oyster stock assessment with the goal of increasing 
oyster abundance; and 
 
be informed by a collaboratively developed, science-based modeling tool to 
quantify the long-term impacts of identified management actions and possible 
combinations of management actions on (1) oyster abundance; (2) oyster habitat; 
(3) oyster harvest; (4) oyster harvest revenue; and (5) nitrogen removal. 
 
DNR was required to submit a final report, including an implementation schedule for the 
consensus recommendations, by December 1, 2021. 
 
(The final report was submitted December 1, 2021. DNR adopted Amendment 1 to the 
2019 Maryland Chesapeake Bay Oyster Management Plan on December 18, 2023, and is 
in the process of promulgating regulations that will incorporate the amendment by 
reference in DNR regulations.)  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 922 (Senators Mautz and Bailey) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Queen Anne’s County; University System of Maryland; 
Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2