START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1230 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1230 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Tianeptine Consumer Protection Act 
 
 
This emergency bill generally prohibits a “retailer” from distributing, selling, exposing for 
sale, or advertising for sale a “tianeptine product.” A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor 
and subject to a fine of up to $5,000 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days. In addition to 
any penalty under the bill, a retailer is also liable for any civil damages sustained by an 
individual resulting from the violation. The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must 
adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH can adopt regulations with existing budgeted resources. The 
civil liability and criminal penalty provisions of the bill are not anticipated to have a 
material impact on State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Local health departments can handle enforcement with existing budgeted 
resources. The civil liability and criminal penalty provisions of the bill are not anticipated 
to have a material impact on local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Tianeptine product” means a product that is marketed for human 
consumption containing any amount of tianeptine sodium or tianeptine sulfate. 
 
“Retailer” means a person that (1) sells, prepares, or maintains tianeptine products or 
(2) advertises, represents, or holds itself out as selling, preparing, or maintaining tianeptine 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1230/ Page 2 
products (including a manufacturer, wholesaler, store, restaurant, hotel, catering facility, 
camp, bakery, delicatessen, supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, gas station, or 
food/drink company). 
 
Current Law:  The State does not currently regulate tianeptine. 
 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved tianeptine for any 
medical use and considers tianeptine to be an unsafe food additive. 
 
As of January 2024, nine states either restrict or ban tianeptine. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business retailers are prohibited from distributing, selling, 
exposing for sale, or advertising for sale a tianeptine product. Violators are subject to civil 
liability and criminal penalty provisions, as specified. 
 
Additional Comments:  Tianeptine is an antidepressant drug that is marketed as a 
supplement to treat anxiety, depression, pain, and opioid use disorder. FDA has issued a 
consumer warning that tianeptine is an unsafe food additive that may result in addiction to 
the substance. Tianeptine is used as a prescription drug in some countries, but it is not 
approved as a drug in the United States. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland 
Department of Health; U.S. Food and Drug Administration; The New York Times; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 8, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 8, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2