START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 495

Chapter 495

(House Bill 1212)

AN ACT concerning

State Retirement ~~and~~ ~~Pension~~ ~~System~~ Agency – Director of Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion and Governance Program

FOR the purpose of establishing that the Executive Director of the State Retirement
Agency shall employ a Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion of the State
Retirement ~~and~~ ~~Pension~~ ~~System~~ Agency; requiring the Director of Diversity, Equity,
and Inclusion to identify and minimize certain barriers to ensure access and
opportunities to underrepresented groups and to perform other related duties;
establishing a governance program within the Investment Division of the State
Retirement Agency; requiring the Executive Director to ~~show~~ ~~good~~ ~~cause~~ ~~and~~ ~~obtain~~
~~the~~ ~~prior~~ ~~written~~ ~~consent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Trustees~~ ~~to~~ terminate the Director of
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion under certain circumstances; requiring the Chief
Investment Officer to employ a certain individual to assist in the implementation of
the governance program; specifying the responsibilities of the individual employed
to assist in the implementation of the governance program; requiring the ~~Chief~~
~~Investment~~ ~~Officer~~ Executive Director to ~~show~~ ~~good~~ ~~cause~~ ~~and~~ ~~obtain~~ ~~the~~ ~~prior~~
~~written~~ ~~consent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Trustees~~ ~~to~~ terminate the individual employed to
assist in the implementation of the governance program under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to the establishment of a Director of Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion of the State Retirement ~~and~~ ~~Pension~~ ~~System~~ Agency and a
governance program within the Investment Division of the State Retirement Agency.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–118 and 21–122(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 21–118.2 and 21–122(h)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

21–118.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 495 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) (1) The Board of Trustees shall appoint the Executive Director of the State
Retirement Agency.

(2) The Executive Director serves at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees.

(b) The Executive Director shall:

(1) be in charge of the State Retirement Agency;

(2) compile annually a comprehensive budget for submission to the Board
of Trustees; and

(3) have the duties and functions that the Board of Trustees may delegate.

(c) (1) (i) The Executive Director shall employ a staff to carry out the
administrative duties of the several systems.

(ii) Except as provided in § 21–315 of this title, the compensation of
the Executive Director and staff shall be as provided in the State budget.

(2) Except for employees described in paragraph (3) of this subsection, the
employees are skilled service or professional service employees subject to the provisions of
this article that govern skilled service or professional service employees.

(3) An employee is in the executive service, management service, or is a
special appointment in the State Personnel Management System if:

(i) the employee holds a position that the Executive Director, with
the approval of the Board of Trustees, designates as a professional or technical position
that involves specialized skill, education, and knowledge; and

(ii) the employee’s labor is predominantly intellectual rather than
manual or physical.

(d) The Executive Director and the Chief Investment Officer and staff of the
Investment Division of the State Retirement Agency shall comply with the policies that the
Board of Trustees prescribes about conflicts of interest and personal investments.

(e) (1) A document that must be executed by or for the Board of Trustees shall
be signed:

(i) by the Executive Director of the State Retirement Agency; or

(ii) in the absence or disability of the Executive Director, by another
employee whom the Executive Director, with the approval of the Chairman of the Board of
Trustees, designates in writing.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 495

(2) If a countersignature is required, with the approval of the Chairman of
the Board of Trustees, the Executive Director shall designate those employees of the State
Retirement Agency who may sign.

21–118.2.

(A) (1) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL EMPLOY A DIRECTOR OF
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION OF THE STATE RETIREMENT AND PENSION
~~SYSTEM~~ AGENCY.

(2) THE DIRECTOR OF DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION SHALL
REPORT DIRECTLY TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR.

(B) THE DIRECTOR OF DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION SHALL:

(1) IDENTIFY AND MINIMIZE BARRIERS TO OPEN AND EQUITABLE
PROCESSES BY ENSURING THE STATE RETIREMENT AGENCY PROVIDES ACCESS
AND OPPORTUNITIES TO UNDERREPRESENTED GROUPS;

(2) ENGAGE WITH THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES, STAFF, AND EXTERNAL
ENTITIES TO PROMOTE AND SUPPORT DIVERSITY OF PARTICIPATION AND
LEADERSHIP;

(3) PROVIDE ASSISTANCE AS NECESSARY TO THE INVESTMENT
DIVISION ESTABLISHED UNDER § 21–122 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(4) PROVIDE ADVICE AND REPORTS TO THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES ON
TOPICS INCLUDING DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION; AND

(5) HAVE THE DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS THAT THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OR THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES MAY DELEGATE.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY NOT TERMINATE THE DIRECTOR OF
DIVERSITY, EQUITY, AND INCLUSION WITHOUT SHOWING GOOD CAUSE AND
OBTAINING THE PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES ON THE
RECOMMENDATION OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND ON RECEIVING AN
AFFIRMATIVE VOTE FROM A MAJORITY OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES, THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL TERMINATE THE DIRECTOR OF DIVERSITY, EQUITY,
AND INCLUSION.

21–122.

(a) (1) There is an Investment Division in the State Retirement Agency.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 495 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) (1) THERE IS A GOVERNANCE PROGRAM WITHIN THE INVESTMENT
DIVISION OF THE STATE RETIREMENT AGENCY ESTABLISHED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE POLICIES OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, THE CHIEF
INVESTMENT OFFICER SHALL EMPLOY AN INDIVIDUAL TO ASSIST IN THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE GOVERNANCE PROGRAM.

(II) THE CHIEF INVESTMENT OFFICER MAY NOT TERMINATE AN
INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH WITHOUT
~~SHOWING~~ ~~GOOD~~ ~~CAUSE~~ ~~AND~~ ~~OBTAINING~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRIOR~~ ~~WRITTEN~~ ~~CONSENT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~
BOARD OF TRUSTEES ON THE RECOMMENDATION OF THE CHIEF INVESTMENT
OFFICER AND ON RECEIVING AN AFFIRMATIVE VOTE FROM A MAJORITY OF THE
BOARD OF TRUSTEES, THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL TERMINATE AN
INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH.

(3) THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (2) (2)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE CONSISTENT WITH THE
FIDUCIARY RESPONSIBILITIES AND SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) DEVELOPING APPROPRIATE STANDARDS, POLICIES, AND
PROCESSES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE GOVERNANCE
PROGRAM;

(II) MONITORING, EVALUATING, AND QUANTIFYING THE RISKS
AND EFFECTS OF MATERIAL ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND GOVERNANCE FACTORS
ON THE INVESTMENT OF THE ASSETS OF THE SEVERAL SYSTEMS;

(III) WORKING ACROSS ASSET CLASSES TO INTEGRATE
CONSIDERATION OF MATERIAL ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND GOVERNANCE
FACTORS INTO INVESTMENT DUE DILIGENCE AND RECOMMENDATIONS;

(IV) PROVIDING RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE CHIEF
INVESTMENT OFFICER BASED ON RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS OF MATERIAL
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND GOVERNANCE FACTORS, INCLUDING DIVERSITY,
EQUITY, AND INCLUSION;

(V) ASSISTING THE INVESTMENT DIVISION IN IDENTIFYING
AND RECOMMENDING INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES TO THE CHIEF INVESTMENT
OFFICER;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 495

(VI) EVALUATING WHETHER INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL
INVESTMENT MANAGERS REPRESENT A DIVERSE SET OF BACKGROUNDS;

(VII) WORKING WITH INVESTMENT MANAGERS, DATA
PROVIDERS, INDEX PROVIDERS, OR CONSULTANTS TO IDENTIFY, ANALYZE, DEFINE,
AND PRIORITIZE SPECIFIC METRICS TO ALIGN WITH AN INCLUSIVE ENVIRONMENT;

(VIII) SUPPORTING THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES WITH THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE STATE’S MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE POLICIES BY
THE INVESTMENT DIVISION, IN ACCORDANCE WITH TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE
STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE AND § 21–116(D) OF THIS SUBTITLE;
AND

(IX) PROVIDING ADVICE AND REPORTS TO THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES ON GOVERNANCE TOPICS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5