START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 239

Chapter 239

(House Bill 1281)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Tourism Zones – Designation and Benefits

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the
governing body of a county or municipality to designate, by law, an area within that
political subdivision as a tourism zone under certain circumstances; providing that
the designation of an area as a tourism zone may not preclude the area from also
being designated as a certain arts and entertainment district; authorizing a county
or municipality to exempt from the admissions and amusement tax gross receipts
from certain admissions or amusement charges levied in a tourism zone; authorizing
the Mayor and City Council of Baltimore City or the governing body of a county or
municipality to grant, by law, a property tax credit against the county or municipal
property tax imposed on certain real property and certain personal property located
within a tourism zone; and generally relating to the designation of tourism zones
within counties and municipalities.

BY adding to
Article – Local Government
Section 18–401 through 18–403 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 4. Tourism
Zones”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Tax – General
Section 4–104(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–268 and 9–269
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

SUBTITLE 4. TOURISM ZONES.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 239 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

18–401.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE” MEANS A FOR–PROFIT OR
NONPROFIT ENTITY THAT CONDUCTS BUSINESS WITHIN A TOURISM ZONE, SUBJECT
TO THE LIMITATIONS SPECIFIED BY THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION WITHIN WHICH
THE TOURISM ZONE IS LOCATED.

(C) “TOURISM ZONE” MEANS A DEVELOPED ZONE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
USES THAT IS DESIGNATED BY A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION FOR THE DEVELOPMENT
OF TRAVEL AND TOURISM AND LOCATED WITHIN THAT POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.

18–402.

(A) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPALITY MAY DESIGNATE, BY LAW, AN
AREA WITHIN THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION AS A TOURISM ZONE.

(B) IN DESIGNATING A TOURISM ZONE UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION MAY PROVIDE, BY LAW, FOR:

(1) THE DURATION OF THE DESIGNATION; AND

(2) ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA TO QUALIFY AS A QUALIFYING TOURISM
ENTERPRISE.

(C) THE DESIGNATION OF AN AREA AS A TOURISM ZONE DOES NOT
PRECLUDE THE AREA FROM ALSO BEING DESIGNATED AS AN ARTS AND
ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT UNDER TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 7 OF THE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

18–403.

(A) IN A TOURISM ZONE:

(1) THE EXEMPTION FROM THE ADMISSIONS AND AMUSEMENT TAX
UNDER § 4–104(G) OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE APPLIES TO QUALIFYING
TOURISM ENTERPRISES; AND

(2) THE PROPERTY TAX CREDITS UNDER §§ 9–268 AND 9–269 OF THE
TAX – PROPERTY ARTICLE APPLY.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 239

(B) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1 PRECEDING THE EFFECTIVE DATE OF ITS
ESTABLISHMENT, THE POLITICAL JURISDICTION SHALL NOTIFY THE COMPTROLLER
THAT A TOURISM DISTRICT IS ESTABLISHED.

(C) A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION THAT ESTABLISHES A TOURISM ZONE SHALL
NOTIFY THE COMPTROLLER OF:

(1) ANY QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISES TO WHICH THE
EXEMPTION FROM THE ADMISSIONS AND AMUSEMENT TAX UNDER § 4–104(G) OF
THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE APPLIES;

(2) THE DATE ON WHICH THE QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE
QUALIFIED FOR THE EXEMPTION; AND

(3) THE DATE, IF ANY, ON WHICH THE EXEMPTION FOR THE
QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE EXPIRES.

Article – Tax – General

4–104.

(G) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE” AND
“TOURISM ZONE” HAVE THE MEANINGS STATED IN § 18–401 OF THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

(2) (I) A SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, A
COUNTY OR A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY EXEMPT FROM THE ADMISSIONS AND
AMUSEMENT TAX GROSS RECEIPTS FROM ANY ADMISSIONS OR AMUSEMENT CHARGE
LEVIED BY A QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE IN A TOURISM ZONE.

(II) THE EXEMPTION AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY TO THE STATE ADMISSIONS AND AMUSEMENT
TAX IMPOSED UNDER § 4–102(D) AND (E) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

9–268.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE” AND “TOURISM
ZONE” HAVE THE MEANINGS STATED IN § 18–401 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 239 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY GRANT, BY LAW,
A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON A BUILDING THAT:

(1) IS LOCATED IN A TOURISM ZONE; AND

(2) IS OWNED BY A QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE.

(C) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY PROVIDE, BY
LAW, FOR:

(1) THE AMOUNT AND DURATION OF THE TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS
SECTION;

(2) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE TAX CREDIT UNDER
THIS SECTION;

(3) REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE APPLICATION AND
UNIFORM PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR THE TAX CREDIT; AND

(4) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE TAX
CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION.

9–269.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “QUALIFYING TOURISM ENTERPRISE” AND “TOURISM
ZONE” HAVE THE MEANINGS STATED IN § 18–401 OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

(B) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY GRANT, BY LAW,
A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT AGAINST THE COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON PERSONAL PROPERTY OF A QUALIFYING TOURISM
ENTERPRISE THAT IS LOCATED WITHIN A TOURISM ZONE.

(C) THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF BALTIMORE CITY OR THE
GOVERNING BODY OF A COUNTY OR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION MAY PROVIDE, BY
LAW, FOR:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 239

(1) THE AMOUNT AND DURATION OF THE TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS
SECTION;

(2) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR THE TAX CREDIT UNDER
THIS SECTION;

(3) REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR THE APPLICATION AND
UNIFORM PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR THE TAX CREDIT; AND

(4) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE TAX
CREDIT UNDER THIS SECTION.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall be
applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5