START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 868

Chapter 868

(House Bill 1259)

AN ACT concerning

Health Insurance – Breast and Lung Cancer Screening – Coverage
Requirements

FOR the purpose of including image–guided breast biopsy in the definition of
“supplemental breast examination” for the purpose of certain provisions of law
requiring certain insurers, health service plans, and health maintenance
organizations to provide coverage for supplemental breast examinations; clarifying
that certain coverage requirements for lung cancer screening apply to follow–up
diagnostic imaging; prohibiting certain insurers, health service plans, and health
maintenance organizations from requiring prior authorization for required coverage
for lung cancer screening or follow–up diagnostic imaging; and generally relating to
health insurance and breast and lung cancer screening.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–814.1 and 15–860
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Insurance

15–814.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Diagnostic breast examination” means a medically necessary
and appropriate examination of the breast that is used to evaluate an abnormality that is:

1. seen or suspected from a prior screening examination for
breast cancer; or

2. detected by another means of prior examination.

(ii) “Diagnostic breast examination” includes an examination using
diagnostic mammography, breast magnetic resonance imaging, or breast ultrasound.

(3) (i) “Supplemental breast examination” means a medically
necessary examination of the breast that is used to screen for breast cancer when:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 868 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. there is no abnormality seen or suspected from a prior
examination; and

2. there is a personal or family medical history or additional
factors that may increase an individual’s risk of breast cancer.

(ii) “Supplemental breast examination” includes an examination
using breast magnetic resonance imaging [or], breast ultrasound, OR IMAGE–GUIDED
BREAST BIOPSY.

(b) This section applies to:

(1) insurers and nonprofit health service plans that provide coverage for
diagnostic breast examinations or supplemental breast examinations under individual,
group, or blanket health insurance policies or contracts that are issued or delivered in the
State; and

(2) health maintenance organizations that provide coverage for diagnostic
breast examinations or supplemental breast examinations under individual or group
contracts that are issued or delivered in the State.

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, an entity subject
to this section may not impose a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible requirement on
coverage for diagnostic breast examinations or supplemental breast examinations.

(2) If an insured or enrollee is covered under a high–deductible health plan,
as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 223, an entity subject to this section may subject diagnostic breast
examinations or supplemental breast examinations to the deductible requirement of the
high–deductible health plan.

15–860.

(a) This section applies to:

(1) insurers and nonprofit health service plans that provide hospital,
medical, or surgical benefits to individuals or groups on an expense–incurred basis under
health insurance policies or contracts that are issued or delivered in the State; and

(2) health maintenance organizations that provide hospital, medical, or
surgical benefits to individuals or groups under contracts that are issued or delivered in
the State.

(b) (1) An entity subject to this section shall provide coverage for
recommended LUNG CANCER SCREENING OR follow–up diagnostic imaging to assist in
the diagnosis of lung cancer for individuals for which lung cancer screening OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 868

FOLLOW–UP DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING is recommended by the U.S. Preventative Services
Task Force.

(2) The coverage required under paragraph (1) of this subsection:

(I) shall include diagnostic ultrasound, magnetic resonance
imaging, computed tomography, and image–guided biopsy; AND

(II) MAY NOT REQUIRE BE SUBJECT TO A PRIOR
AUTHORIZATION REQUIREMENT.

(c) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, an entity subject
to this section may not impose a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible requirement on
coverage for lung cancer screening [and diagnosis] OR FOLLOW–UP DIAGNOSTIC
IMAGING that is greater than the copay, coinsurance, or deductible requirement for breast
cancer screening [and] OR diagnosis.

(2) If an insured or enrollee is covered under a high–deductible health plan,
as defined in 26 U.S.C. § 223, an entity subject to this section may subject LUNG CANCER
SCREENING OR follow–up diagnostic lung imaging to the deductible requirement of the
high–deductible health plan.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall apply to all
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State on or
after January 1, 2025.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
January 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3