START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1293 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1293 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Public Education Campaign on Prostate, 
Lung, and Breast Cancer Prevention 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to develop and implement a 
three-year public education campaign on prostate, lung, and breast cancer prevention that 
targets communities disproportionately impacted by those cancers. The campaign must 
(1) provide educational information, as specified; (2) promote cancer screenings; and 
(3) provide information on legislation that reduces cost barriers to prevention services. 
MDH must set measurable goals for the public education campaign and include 
information on the status of meeting those goals, as part of the annual reports that must be 
submitted to the General Assembly on Cigarette Restitution Fund (CRF) activities, by 
December 1, 2027, and annually through December 1, 2029. For fiscal 2026 through 2030, 
the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an appropriation to MDH from CRF 
for the public education campaign. The total amount appropriated from CRF for the public 
education campaign over that period is capped at $750,000. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2025, and terminates June 30, 2031. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect overall CRF expenditures; however, the 
bill likely shifts up to $750,000 in total CRF expenditures over a five-year funding period 
(FY 2026 through 2030) from existing programs funded by CRF to the public education 
campaign, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This bill establishes a 
mandated distribution for FY 2026 through 2030. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1293/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In developing the public education campaign, MDH must work with 
health care providers, hospitals, and health care associations that focus on prostate, lung, 
and breast cancer. 
 
In implementing the public education campaign, MDH must (1) use communications tools 
and messaging; (2) post all materials on its website in a conspicuous manner and in an 
accessible format; and (3) develop partnerships with health agencies, nonprofit 
organizations, and private entities that work with communities disproportionately impacted 
by prostate, lung, and breast cancer. 
 
MDH must develop the public education campaign by December 1, 2026, and implement 
the campaign by January 1, 2027. 
 
The bill also establishes the public education campaign as a required use of CRF monies. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Cancer Prevention, Education, Screening, and Treatment Program 
 
MDH’s Cancer Prevention, Education, Screening, and Treatment Program provides and 
administers grants to local health departments to reduce cancer mortality and cancer 
disparities in Maryland. Funds may be used to provide prevention, early detection, and/or 
treatment services for seven-targeted cancers:  lung and bronchus; colorectal; breast, 
cervical; prostate; skin (melanoma); and oral cancers. 
 
Breast Cancer Program  
 
MDH’s Breast Cancer Program provides (1) at least biennial screening mammograms and 
clinical breast examinations to low-income, uninsured and low-income, underinsured 
women ages 40 to 49; (2) annual screening mammograms and clinical breast examinations 
to low-income, underinsured and low-income, uninsured women ages 50 and older; and 
(3) diagnosis and treatment for people identified by the program as being in need.  
 
An individual is eligible for the program if the individual has a family income up to 250% 
of the federal poverty level and does not have access to health insurance coverage that 
covers screening mammograms and clinical breast examinations for women ages 40 and 
older. 
 
The program’s breast cancer screening services are mainly provided through the Maryland 
Breast and Cervical Cancer Screening Program (BCCP). BCCP provides low-income, 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1293/ Page 3 
uninsured and underinsured women access to timely breast and cervical cancer screening 
and diagnostic services.  
 
Mandated Health Insurance Benefits  
 
Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance benefits that 
specified carriers must provide to their enrollees. Carriers must provide specified coverage 
for prostate, lung, and breast cancer screenings. 
 
Breast Cancer:  A carrier must cover breast cancer screenings in accordance with the latest 
screening guidelines issued by the American Cancer Society. Currently, the guidelines 
specify that (1) women ages 40 to 44 may elect to get annual breast cancer screenings with 
mammograms and (2) starting at age 45, women should have mammograms every year. A 
carrier must also provide coverage for digital tomosynthesis if an enrollee’s treating 
physician determines it is medically appropriate and necessary. A deductible may not be 
imposed for covered digital tomosynthesis or mammograms. A carrier may generally not 
impose a copayment, coinsurance, or deductible for a diagnostic breast examination or a 
supplemental breast examination. 
 
Lung Cancer:  A carrier must provide coverage for recommended follow-up diagnostic 
imaging to assist in the diagnosis of lung cancer for individuals for which lung cancer 
screening is recommended by the U.S. Preventative Services Task Force. Coverage must 
include diagnostic ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and 
image-guided biopsy. A carrier may generally not impose a copayment, coinsurance, or 
deductible requirement on coverage for lung cancer screening and diagnosis that is greater 
than the copayment, coinsurance, or deductible requirement for breast cancer screening 
and diagnosis.  
 
Prostate Cancer:  Carriers must provide coverage for a medically recognized diagnostic 
examination that must include a digital rectal exam and a prostate-specific antigen blood 
test (1) for men between 40 and 75 years of age; (2) when used to guide patient 
management in monitoring the response to prostate cancer treatment; (3) when used for 
staging in determining the need for a bone scan in patients with prostate cancer; or (4) when 
used for male patients who are at high risk for prostate cancer.  
 
Cigarette Restitution Fund 
 
Chapters 172 and 173 of 1999 established CRF, which is supported by payments made 
under the Master Settlement Agreement (MSA). Through the MSA, settling tobacco 
manufacturers pay the litigating parties – 46 states, 5 territories, and the District of 
Columbia – substantial annual payments in perpetuity. The distribution of MSA funds 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1293/ Page 4 
among the states is determined by formula; as of April 2022, Maryland has received over 
$3.3 billion since 1999.  
 
The use of CRF funds is restricted by statute. The Governor must include appropriations 
from CRF in the annual budget bill equivalent to the lesser of $100.0 million or 90% of the 
funds estimated to be available to CRF in the fiscal year for which the appropriations are 
made. At least 30% of the appropriations must be made to Medicaid. At least 50% of the 
appropriations must be dedicated to the Tobacco Use Prevention and Cessation Program; 
the Cancer Prevention, Education, Screening, and Treatment Program; specified activities 
of the Southern Maryland Agricultural Development Commission; and other programs that 
serve specified purposes, including, among others, reduction of the use of tobacco products 
by individuals younger than age 21, prevention, treatment, and research concerning 
specified diseases, tobacco product use, and tobacco control, including operating costs and 
related capital projects; and any other public purpose. 
 
Under § 7-317(j) of the State Finance and Procurement Article, the Governor must report 
annually to the General Assembly by December 1 on total funds expended from CRF, by 
program and subdivision, in the prior fiscal year and the specific outcomes of public 
benefits resulting from that expenditure. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $136.7 million in total 
CRF expenditures. Of those expenditures, $116.4 million are health related, including 
$39.9 million for Medicaid; $27.2 million for cancer; $16.8 million for substance abuse; 
$13.2 million for breast and cervical cancer; $11.3 million for tobacco enforcement, 
prevention, and cessation; and $8.0 million for the Maryland Community Health Resources 
Commission. The projected fund balance for CRF at the end of fiscal 2025 is approximately 
$21,000. 
 
For fiscal 2026 through 2030, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation to MDH from CRF for the public education campaign. While the bill does 
not include a specific annual funding amount, the total appropriated for this purpose from 
fiscal 2026 through 2030 is capped at $750,000. Assuming that appropriations total the 
maximum permissible amount under the bill, approximately $150,000 may be appropriated 
annually over the five-year period during which funding is required, though funding needs 
may vary over those five years. For example, the Department of Legislative Services notes 
that, since the bill does not require MDH to implement the campaign until January 1, 2027, 
costs may be lower in fiscal 2026 and 2027. 
 
Also, given the minimal fund balance estimated to remain in CRF at the end of fiscal 2025, 
this analysis assumes that total spending from CRF does not increase; instead, the required 
funding must be reallocated from other programs funded from CRF to finance the public 
education campaign. At this time, MDH cannot advise on which programs may be affected. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1293/ Page 5 
However, less funding from CRF is available for other, nonmandated, purposes in 
fiscal 2026 through 2030 due to the requirement to provide funding for the public education 
campaign in each of those years. 
 
Further, to the extent that such nonmandated CRF monies have been applied to Medicaid, 
which is an entitlement program, up to $750,000 in general fund expenditures are needed 
over the period fiscal 2026 through 2030 to backfill for the special funds that no longer go 
to Medicaid. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 938 (Senators Augustine and A. Washington) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5