START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 296

Chapter 296

(House Bill 1227)

AN ACT concerning

Condominiums – Mandatory Insurance Coverage – Detached Units

FOR the purpose of altering the types of elements and units for which a council of unit
owners is required to maintain certain property insurance; requiring the council of
unit owners to notify owners of detached units within a condominium of certain
property insurance coverage obligations; limiting instances when an owner of a
detached unit within a condominium is required to carry homeowners insurance on
the entirety of the unit; authorizing a council of unit owners to carry homeowners
insurance on the entirety of all units located within a certain condominium; and
generally relating to mandatory insurance coverage for condominiums.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11–114
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

11–114.

(a) Commencing not later than the time of the first conveyance of a unit to a
person other than the developer, the council of unit owners shall maintain, to the extent
reasonably available:

(1) Property insurance against risks of direct physical loss commonly
insured against in amounts determined by the council of unit owners, but not less than any
amounts specified in the declaration or bylaws:

(i) For attached [or] UNITS, multifamily dwelling units, OR
DETACHED UNITS LOCATED WITHIN A CONDOMINIUM NOT COMPOSED ENTIRELY OF
SIMILAR DETACHED UNITS, on the common elements and units, exclusive of
improvements and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the developer;
and

(ii) For detached units LOCATED WITHIN A CONDOMINIUM
COMPOSED ENTIRELY OF SIMILAR DETACHED UNITS, on the common elements; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 296 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) Comprehensive general liability insurance, including medical
payments insurance, in an amount determined by the council of unit owners, but not less
than any amount specified in the declaration or bylaws, covering occurrences commonly
insured against for death, bodily injury, and property damage arising out of or in connection
with the use, ownership, or maintenance of the common elements.

(b) (1) (I) The council of unit owners shall give notice to all unit owners of
the termination of any insurance policy within 10 days of termination.

(II) The declaration or bylaws may require the council of unit owners
to carry any other insurance, and the council of unit owners in any event may carry any
other insurance it deems appropriate to protect the council of unit owners or the unit
owners.

(2) (I) THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS SHALL GIVE AN ANNUAL
NOTICE, IN WRITING, OF ANY OBLIGATION OF AN OWNER OF A RESIDENTIAL,
DETACHED UNIT TO OBTAIN PROPERTY INSURANCE COVERAGE ON THE UNIT.

(II) IF THERE IS A CHANGE IN ANY OBLIGATION UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS SHALL
PROMPTLY PROVIDE THE UNIT OWNER WITH AN UPDATED NOTICE.

(c) Insurance policies carried pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall
provide that:

(1) Subject to the applicable coverage specified under subsection (a)(1) of
this section, each unit owner is an insured person under the policy with respect to liability
arising out of the unit owner’s ownership of an undivided interest in the common elements
or membership in the council of unit owners for property and casualty losses to the common
elements and the units, exclusive of improvements and betterments installed in the units
by unit owners other than the developer;

(2) The insurer waives its right to subrogation under the policy against any
unit owner of the condominium or members of his household;

(3) An act or omission by any unit owner, unless acting within the scope of
his authority on behalf of the council of unit owners, does not void the policy and is not a
condition to recovery under the policy; and

(4) If, at the time of a loss under the policy, there is other insurance in the
name of a unit owner covering the same property covered by the policy, the policy is primary
insurance not contributing with the other insurance.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 296

(d) (1) Subject to the applicable coverage specified under subsection (a)(1) of
this section, any loss covered by the property policy shall be adjusted with the council of
unit owners, but the insurance proceeds for that loss shall be payable to any insurance
trustee designated for that purpose, or otherwise to the council of unit owners, and not to
any mortgagee.

(2) The insurance trustee or the council of unit owners shall hold any
insurance proceeds in trust for unit owners and lien holders as their interests may appear.

(3) (i) Subject to the provisions of subsection (g) of this section, the
proceeds shall be disbursed first for the repair or restoration of the damaged common
elements and, for condominiums with attached [or] UNITS, multifamily units, OR
DETACHED UNITS LOCATED WITHIN A CONDOMINIUM NOT COMPOSED ENTIRELY OF
SIMILAR DETACHED UNITS that must maintain a property insurance policy on the units,
the damaged units.

(ii) Unit owners and lien holders are not entitled to receive payment
of any portion of the proceeds unless:

1. There is a surplus of proceeds after the common elements
and, for condominiums with attached [or] UNITS, multifamily units, OR DETACHED UNITS
LOCATED WITHIN A CONDOMINIUM NOT COMPOSED ENTIRELY OF SIMILAR
DETACHED UNITS that must maintain a property insurance policy on the units, the units
have been completely repaired or restored; or

2. The condominium is terminated.

(e) (1) An insurance policy issued to the council of unit owners does not
prevent a unit owner from obtaining insurance for his own benefit.

(2) An UNLESS A COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS EXERCISES THE
AUTHORITY UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN owner of a residential,
detached unit, unit LOCATED WITHIN A CONDOMINIUM COMPOSED ENTIRELY OF
SIMILAR DETACHED UNITS, shall carry homeowners insurance coverage on the entirety
of the unit.

(3) A COUNCIL OF UNIT OWNERS MAY CARRY HOMEOWNERS
INSURANCE ON THE ENTIRETY OF ALL DETACHED UNITS LOCATED WITHIN A
CONDOMINIUM COMPOSED ENTIRELY OF SIMILAR DETACHED UNITS.

(f) (1) An insurer that has issued an insurance policy under this section shall
issue certificates or memoranda of insurance to the council of unit owners and, upon
request, to any unit owner, mortgagee, or beneficiary under a deed of trust.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 296 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) An insurer may cancel an insurance policy issued under this section in
accordance with § 27–603 of the Insurance Article.

(g) (1) Subject to the applicable coverage specified under subsection (a)(1) of
this section, any portion of the common elements and the units, exclusive of improvements
and betterments installed in the units by unit owners other than the developer, damaged
or destroyed shall be repaired or replaced promptly by the council of unit owners unless:

(i) The condominium is terminated;

(ii) Repair or replacement would be illegal under any State or local
health or safety statute or ordinance; or

(iii) 80 percent of the unit owners, including every owner of a unit or
assigned limited common element which will not be rebuilt, vote not to rebuild.

(2) (i) 1. The cost of repair or replacement in excess of insurance
proceeds and reserves is a common expense.

2. A property insurance deductible is not a cost of repair or
replacement in excess of insurance proceeds.

(ii) If the cause of any damage to or destruction of any portion of the
condominium originates from the common elements or an event outside of the condominium
units and common elements, the council of unit owners’ property insurance deductible is a
common expense.

(iii) 1. If the cause of any damage to or destruction of any portion
of the condominium originates from a unit, the owner of the unit where the cause of the
damage or destruction originated is responsible for the council of unit owners’ property
insurance deductible not to exceed $10,000.

2. The council of unit owners shall inform each unit owner
annually in writing of:

A. The unit owner’s responsibility for the council of unit
owners’ property insurance deductible; and

B. The amount of the deductible.

3. The council of unit owners’ property insurance deductible
amount exceeding the $10,000 responsibility of the unit owner is a common expense.

(iv) In the same manner as provided under § 11–110 of this title, the
council of unit owners may make an annual assessment against the unit owner responsible
under subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 296

(3) If the damaged or destroyed portion of the condominium is not repaired
or replaced:

(i) The insurance proceeds attributable to the damaged common
elements shall be used to restore the damaged area to a condition compatible with the
remainder of the condominium;

(ii) The insurance proceeds attributable to units and limited
common elements which are not rebuilt shall be distributed to the owners of those units
and the owners of the units to which those limited common elements were assigned; and

(iii) The remainder of the proceeds shall be distributed to all the unit
owners in proportion to their percentage interest in the common elements.

(4) (i) If the unit owners vote not to rebuild any unit, that unit’s entire
common element interest, votes in the council of unit owners, and common expense liability
are automatically reallocated upon the vote as if the unit had been condemned under §
11–112 of this title, and the council of unit owners promptly shall prepare, execute, and
record an amendment to the declaration reflecting the reallocations.

(ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, § 11–123 of
this title governs the distribution of insurance proceeds if the condominium is terminated.

(h) The council of unit owners shall maintain and make available for inspection a
copy of all insurance policies maintained by the council of unit owners.

(i) The provisions of this section do not apply to a condominium all of whose units
are intended for nonresidential use.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5