START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1259 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1259 
(Delegate Alston, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Breast and Lung Cancer Screening - Coverage Requirements 
 
   
This bill expands the current prohibition on cost sharing for coverage of supplemental 
breast examinations to include image-guided breast biopsy. The current mandated health 
insurance benefit for coverage of recommended follow-up diagnostic imaging to assist in 
the diagnosis of lung cancer is clarified to include lung cancer screening. Such coverage 
may not be subject to a prior authorization requirement. The bill takes effect 
January 1, 2025, and applies to all policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, 
delivered, or renewed in the State on or after that date. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal increase in special fund revenues for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration in FY 2025 from the $125 rate and form filing fee; review of filings can be 
handled with existing budgeted resources. No impact on the State Employee and Retiree 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program as it currently complies with the bill’s requirements. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in expenditures for local governments that 
purchase fully insured medical plans to the extent the bill increases the cost of health 
insurance. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that certain carriers must provide to their enrollees.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1259/ Page 2 
“Supplemental breast examination” means a medically necessary examination of the breast 
that is used to screen for breast cancer when (1) there is no abnormality seen or suspected 
from a prior examination and (2) there is a personal or family medical history or other 
factors that may increase an individual’s risk of breast cancer. A supplemental breast 
examination includes the usage of breast magnetic resonance imaging or breast ultrasound.  
 
Chapters 298 and 299 of 2023 prohibit carriers that provide coverage for a diagnostic breast 
examination or a supplemental breast examination from imposing a copayment, 
coinsurance, or deductible requirement for such examinations, except as specified. If an 
insured or enrollee is covered under a high-deductible health plan (HDHP), a carrier may 
subject diagnostic breast examinations or supplemental breast examinations to the HDHP’s 
deductible requirement. Chapters 298 and 299 also required the Maryland Health Care 
Commission (MHCC) to study and report on the financial impact of eliminating health 
insurance cost sharing for diagnostic image-guided biopsies for breast cancer. 
 
Chapters 353 and 354 of 2023 require carriers to provide coverage for recommended 
follow-up diagnostic imaging to assist in the diagnosis of lung cancer for individuals for 
which lung cancer screening is recommended by the U.S. Preventative Services Task 
Force. The coverage must include diagnostic ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, 
computed tomography, and image-guided biopsy. A carrier may not impose a copayment, 
coinsurance, or deductible requirement on coverage for lung cancer screening and 
diagnosis that is greater than the copayment, coinsurance, or deductible requirement for 
breast cancer screening and diagnosis. However, if an insured or enrollee is covered under 
an HDHP, a carrier may subject follow-up diagnostic lung imaging to the deductible 
requirement of the HDHP. 
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires nongrandfathered health 
plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services in the 
following categories: (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care.  
 
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1259/ Page 3 
Additional Comments:  In January 2024, MHCC submitted its report on the impact of 
eliminating cost sharing for diagnostic image-guided biopsies for breast cancer. The report 
found that the financial impact on claims costs is estimated to be $0.33 per member per 
month or 0.06% of total costs, which includes the impact of additional screenings, the 
elimination of cost sharing, and medical savings due to early detection. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3