START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1205 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1205 
(Allegany County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Allegany County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class BWLT Beer, Wine, and Liquor 
Tasting Permit 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class BWLT beer, wine, and liquor (on-premises) tasting permit in 
Allegany County and authorizes the Allegany County Board of License Commissioners to 
issue a permit to the holder of a beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) license. A permit authorizes 
the permit holder to allow the on-premises consumption, for tasting, of beer, wine, and 
liquor. When hosting a tasting event, a permit holder must notify the board at least 
seven days prior to holding the event. The annual fee for a Class BWLT permit is $150; 
however, a first-time permit holder must also pay a one-time issuing fee of $150. The board 
must adopt regulations to implement the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Allegany County revenues increase, beginning in FY 2025, to the extent 
that Class BWLT permits are issued under the bill. Allegany County can monitor permits 
and adopt the required regulations with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact for small 
businesses that obtain Class BWLT permits. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The board is authorized to issue the following BWL licenses in 
Allegany County: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1205/ Page 2 
 
Class A BWL ($650 annual license fee) – A license holder may sell beer, wine, and 
liquor at retail in a sealed package or container, for off-premises consumption; 
 
Class B BWL ($800 annual license fee) – A license may be issued to the owner of 
a hotel, if the hotel meets specified conditions, for on-premises consumption; a 
license may also be issued for use by a restaurant in a hotel or motel, if specified 
conditions are met; 
 
Class B-D BWL ($700 annual license fee) – A license may be issued to a restaurant 
that always serves food when alcoholic beverages are being served or consumed, 
has annual gross sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages that exceed its annual 
gross sales of alcoholic beverages, and meets other specified requirements; 
 
Class C BWL ($500 annual license fee) – A license holder may sell beer, wine, and 
liquor at retail at a club, for on- or off-premises consumption; 
 
Class D BWL ($700 annual license fee) – A license holder may sell beer, wine, and 
liquor at retail, for on- or off-premises consumption; and 
 
Class L BWL ($250 annual license fee) – A license may be issued to the holder of 
a manufacturer’s license; the license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor, for 
on-premises consumption, that is produced by the holder or another holder of a 
manufacturer’s license and provide samples at no cost. 
 
Local Revenues:  Allegany County estimates that four to six BWL licensees will apply for 
the permit. The annual fee for a Class BWLT permit is $150, and there is a one-time issuing 
fee of $150. Accordingly, Allegany County revenues increase by at least $1,200 in 
fiscal 2025 and at least $600 annually thereafter. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1133 (Senator McKay) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Allegany County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2