START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

Chapter 476

(House Bill 1256)

AN ACT concerning

Electricity – Tariffs, Distributed Energy Resources, and Electric Distribution
System Support Services
(Distributed Renewable Integration and Vehicle Electrification (DRIVE) Act)

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Service~~ ~~Commission,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~
~~to~~ ~~adopt~~ ~~a~~ ~~transition~~ ~~plan~~ ~~requiring~~ ~~each~~ ~~electric~~ ~~company~~ ~~to~~ ~~transition~~ ~~customers~~ ~~to~~
~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~time–of–use~~ ~~tariff~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ requiring a certain electric
company to file certain time–of–use tariffs with the Public Service Commission on or
before a certain date; requiring a certain electric company to attempt to achieve a
certain enrollment target for certain tariffs by a certain date; authorizing the
Commission to require the automatic enrollment of certain customers in a
time–of–use tariff, on an opt–out basis; requiring the Commission to adopt certain
regulations on or before a certain date regarding the interconnection of certain
systems to the electric distribution system; ~~prohibiting~~ ~~an~~ ~~electric~~ ~~company~~ ~~from~~
~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~customer~~ ~~to~~ ~~enter~~ ~~into~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~contract~~ ~~or~~ ~~apply~~ ~~for~~
~~interconnection~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~electric~~ ~~distribution~~ ~~system;~~ requiring a certain electric
company to require a customer to apply for interconnection with the electric
distribution system under certain circumstances; requiring the Commission to
develop a program for ~~each~~ a certain electric company to establish a pilot program
or temporary tariff to compensate certain persons for electric distribution system
support services in a certain manner; requiring each electric company to submit the
pilot program or temporary tariff to the Commission for approval on or before a
certain date; authorizing a certain electric company to propose and the Commission
to approve certain performance mechanisms for a certain purpose under certain
circumstances; requiring the Commission to approve a certain pilot program or tariff
~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date;~~ authorizing the Commission to approve or require ~~an~~ a certain
electric company to offer certain incentives or rebates under certain circumstances;
requiring the Commission to consider establishing a certain limit on the amount of
certain incentives or rebates; authorizing ~~an~~ a certain electric company to recover
certain costs; ~~prohibiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~dispatch~~ ~~of~~ ~~energy~~ ~~from~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~energy~~ ~~storage~~ ~~device~~
~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~electric~~ ~~distribution~~ ~~system~~ ~~under~~ ~~a~~ ~~pilot~~ ~~program~~ ~~or~~ ~~temporary~~ ~~tariff~~ ~~from~~
~~being~~ ~~considered~~ ~~duplicative~~ ~~of~~ ~~any~~ ~~value~~ ~~realized~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~customer~~ ~~through~~ ~~net~~
~~energy~~ ~~metering;~~ and generally relating to the generation and provision of electricity
in the State.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 1–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 476 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 1–101(p–1); and 7–1001 through ~~7–1008~~ 7–1007 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 10. Electric Distribution System Support Services”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

1–101.

(a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

(P–1) “INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY” MEANS AN ELECTRIC
COMPANY THAT IS NOT A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR AN ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE.

SUBTITLE 10. ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES.

7–1001.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION” MEANS REPLACING DIRECT FOSSIL
FUEL USE WITH ELECTRICITY.

(C) “BIDIRECTIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE” MEANS AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE
THAT IS CAPABLE OF BOTH RECEIVING AND DISCHARGING ELECTRICITY.

(D) “DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCE” MEANS AN ENERGY RESOURCE
LOCATED ON A CUSTOMER’S PREMISES THAT:

(1) PRODUCES OR STORES ELECTRICITY; OR

(2) MODIFIES THE TIMING OR AMOUNT OF THE CUSTOMER’S
ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION.

(E) (1) “ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES” MEANS
THE DISPATCH AND CONTROL OF A DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCE TO PROVIDE

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

SERVICES THAT CONTRIBUTE TO THE EFFICIENT AND RELIABLE OPERATION OF THE
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM BY:

(I) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY; OR

(II) AN AGGREGATOR ACTING:

1. AT THE DIRECTION OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY; OR

2. UNDER A PROGRAM OR TARIFF APPROVED BY THE
~~COMMISSION.~~

(II) AN AGGREGATOR ACTING AT THE DIRECTION OF AN
ELECTRIC COMPANY.

(2) “ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES”
INCLUDES:

(I) LOCAL OR SYSTEM PEAK DEMAND REDUCTION;

(II) DEMAND RESPONSE;

(III) THE AVOIDANCE OR DEFERRAL OF A TRANSMISSION OR
DISTRIBUTION UPGRADE OR CAPACITY EXPANSION; AND

(IV) FACILITATING HOSTING CAPACITY TO ACCOMMODATE
ADDITIONAL DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES.

(F) “ELIGIBLE CUSTOMER–GENERATOR” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
7–306 OF THIS TITLE.

(G) “NET ENERGY METERING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–306 OF
THIS TITLE.

(H) “NET EXCESS GENERATION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–306 OF
THIS TITLE.

(I) (1) “RENEWABLE ON–SITE GENERATING SYSTEM” MEANS AN ENERGY
SYSTEM LOCATED ON A CUSTOMER’S PREMISES THAT:

(I) GENERATES OR STORES ELECTRICITY FROM A TIER 1
RENEWABLE SOURCE OR A TIER 2 RENEWABLE SOURCE THAT DOES NOT RELEASE
GREENHOUSE GASES;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 476 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) IS CAPABLE OF PROVIDING ELECTRICITY TO:

1. A HOME, BUSINESS, OR OTHER STRUCTURE SERVICED
BY AN ELECTRIC COMPANY; AND

2. THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM;

(III) IS PAIRED WITH AN ENERGY STORAGE DEVICE THAT IS
CONFIGURED TO CHARGE FROM:

1. THE RENEWABLE SOURCE; AND

2. THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM UNLESS, FOR
THE PURPOSE OF ELIGIBILITY FOR NET ENERGY METERING, THE DEVICE IS
REQUIRED TO BE CHARGED ONLY FROM THE RENEWABLE SOURCE; AND

(IV) IS INTERCONNECTED AND OPERATES IN PARALLEL WITH AN
ELECTRIC COMPANY’S TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES.

(2) “RENEWABLE ON–SITE GENERATING SYSTEM” INCLUDES MAY
INCLUDE BIDIRECTIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE SERVICE EQUIPMENT LOCATED ON A
CUSTOMER’S PREMISES.

(J) “TIER 1 RENEWABLE SOURCE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–701 OF
THIS TITLE.

(K) “TIER 2 RENEWABLE SOURCE” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 7–701 OF
THIS TITLE.

7–1002.

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY FINDS AND DECLARES THAT:

(1) WELL–DESIGNED TIME–OF–USE PRICING OF ELECTRICITY CAN
HELP MITIGATE THE IMPACTS OF ELECTRIFICATION ON THE ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS DURING PEAK
HOURS, AND ENCOURAGE CUSTOMER ADOPTION OF BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION
MEASURES THROUGH OFF–PEAK COST SAVINGS;

(2) WIDESPREAD BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION WILL INCREASE
DEMAND ON THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM AND POTENTIALLY REQUIRE
SIGNIFICANT SYSTEM UPGRADES IF CONSUMERS ADOPTING BENEFICIAL
ELECTRIFICATION MEASURES DO NOT ENGAGE IN A FORM OF LOAD MANAGEMENT

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

TO MITIGATE THE NEED FOR SYSTEM UPGRADES AND REDUCE THE GREENHOUSE
GAS INTENSITIES ASSOCIATED WITH GENERATION EMISSIONS DURING PEAK HOURS;

(3) PAIRING THE ADOPTION OF RENEWABLE ON–SITE GENERATING
SYSTEMS WITH BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION MEASURES MAY:

(I) FURTHER REDUCE THE STATE’S GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS;

(II) PROVIDE ON–SITE RESILIENCE TO CONSUMERS; AND

(III) FACILITATE LOAD FLEXIBILITY TO MITIGATE IMPACTS ON
THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FROM LOAD GROWTH DUE TO BENEFICIAL
ELECTRIFICATION; AND

(4) IT IS REASONABLE TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL INCENTIVES AND
PROTECTIONS TO LOW– AND MODERATE–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS:

(I) TO ENSURE ACCESS TO THE BENEFITS OF ELECTRIFICATION
AND ON–SITE ENERGY SYSTEMS; AND

(II) TO PROTECT THOSE HOUSEHOLDS FROM NEGATIVE BILL
IMPACTS DURING A TRANSITION TO TIME–OF–USE RATES.

~~7–1003.~~

(A) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTIONS (D) AND (E) OF THIS SECTION, ON OR
BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2025, THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT A TRANSITION PLAN
TO REQUIRE EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY TO TRANSITION EACH CUSTOMER, ON OR
BEFORE SEPTEMBER 1, 2028, TO A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF.

(B) THE TRANSITION PLAN REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION SHALL INCLUDE PROVISIONS TO EASE THE TRANSITION TO A TIME–OF–USE
TARIFF FOR CUSTOMERS IN LOW– AND MODERATE–INCOME HOUSEHOLDS.

(C) THE TRANSITION TO A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF SHALL:

(1) ESTABLISH A SUFFICIENT PRICE REDUCTION FOR OFF–PEAK
~~HOURS~~ ~~COMPARED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~PEAK~~ ~~HOURS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ENCOURAGE~~ ~~CUSTOMERS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ADJUST~~ ~~THEIR~~
ELECTRICITY USAGE TO OFF–PEAK HOURS; AND

(2) ADEQUATELY EDUCATE AND ENCOURAGE CUSTOMERS TO ADJUST
THEIR ELECTRICITY USAGE TO BENEFIT FROM LOWER RATES DURING OFF–PEAK
~~HOURS.~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 476 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) (1) EACH ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL PROVIDE TO ITS CUSTOMERS
NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY TO OPT OUT OF A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF UNDER THIS
~~SECTION.~~

(2) A CUSTOMER IS CONSIDERED TO HAVE GIVEN PERMISSION TO THE
ELECTRIC COMPANY TO TRANSITION THE CUSTOMER TO THE TIME–OF–USE TARIFF:

(I) ON RECEIPT BY THE ELECTRIC COMPANY OF A RETURNED
NOTICE EXPLICITLY GRANTING PERMISSION; OR

(II) IF THE ELECTRIC COMPANY HAS NOT RECEIVED A
RETURNED NOTICE WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER THE NOTICE IS GIVEN.

(3) A CUSTOMER WHO HAS REFUSED PERMISSION TO TRANSITION TO
A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF MAY LATER REQUEST TO TRANSITION TO THE TIME–OF–USE
~~TARIFF.~~

(E) FOR GOOD CAUSE SHOWN, THE COMMISSION MAY DELAY FOR A
~~REASONABLE~~ ~~PERIOD~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TIME~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEADLINE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ELECTRIC~~ ~~COMPANY~~ ~~TO~~
TRANSITION THEIR CUSTOMERS TO A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF.

7–1003.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025, EACH INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANY SHALL FILE WITH THE COMMISSION ONE OR MORE TIME–OF–USE TARIFFS
FOR APPROPRIATE CUSTOMER CLASSES, TO BE MADE AVAILABLE TO CUSTOMERS ON
AN OPT–IN BASIS.

(2) EACH TIME–OF–USE TARIFF SHALL ESTABLISH A SUFFICIENT
PRICE DISCOUNT FOR OFF–PEAK HOURS COMPARED TO PEAK HOURS, AS
DETERMINED BY THE MARKET OR AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY’S
COST OF SERVICE, TO ENCOURAGE CUSTOMERS TO ADJUST ELECTRICITY USE TO
OFF–PEAK HOURS.

(B) (1) (I) AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL
PROPOSE WITH EACH TARIFF OR TARIFFS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION A REASONABLE ENROLLMENT TARGET TO TRY TO ACHIEVE BY
JANUARY 1, 2028.

(II) THE INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL
ATTEMPT TO ACHIEVE THE ENROLLMENT TARGET THROUGH A COMBINATION OF

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

MARKETING, CUSTOMER EDUCATION, AND OTHER MEANS TO COMMUNICATE THE
BENEFITS AND RISKS OF TIME–OF–USE RATES.

(2) (I) THE COMMISSION MAY REQUIRE AN INVESTOR–OWNED
ELECTRIC COMPANY TO AUTOMATICALLY ENROLL IN A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF
CUSTOMERS THAT RECEIVE AN INCENTIVE FROM THE INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANY AS PART OF A BENEFICIAL ELECTRIFICATION PROGRAM.

(II) THE COMMISSION SHALL REQUIRE AN INVESTOR–OWNED
ELECTRIC COMPANY TO PROVIDE TO CUSTOMERS THAT ARE AUTOMATICALLY
ENROLLED IN A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF
THIS PARAGRAPH NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY TO OPT OUT OF THE TIME–OF–USE
TARIFF.

(C) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2026, EACH INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANY SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COMMISSION EVALUATING:

(1) THE POTENTIAL TO AVOID OR DEFER ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM CAPITAL PROJECTS THROUGH THE USE OF TIME–OF–USE RATES,
DEMAND–RESPONSE AND DEMAND–SIDE PROGRAMS, AND RENEWABLE ON–SITE
GENERATING SYSTEMS; AND

(2) THE MERITS AND FEASIBILITY OF TRANSITIONING ALL
CUSTOMERS TO A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF ON AN OPT–OUT BASIS.

(D) IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE,
ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31, 2027, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) THE IMPACTS OF OPT–IN TIME–OF–USE TARIFFS ON THE
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM;

(2) THE TIMELINE, FEASIBILITY, AND MERITS OF TRANSITIONING ALL
CUSTOMERS TO A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF ON AN OPT–OUT BASIS; AND

(3) WHETHER A FULL TRANSITION TO TIME–OF–USE RATES IS
JUSTIFIED.

(E) AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY RECOVER ALL
REASONABLE AND PRUDENT COSTS, INCLUDING MARKETING COSTS, TO ACHIEVE ITS
PROPOSED ENROLLMENT TARGETS AND EXECUTE ITS RESPONSIBILITIES IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 476 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) FOR GOOD CAUSE SHOWN, THE COMMISSION MAY DELAY FOR A
REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME THE DEADLINE FOR AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANY TO COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

(G) (1) A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
MAY FILE WITH THE COMMISSION ONE OR MORE TIME–OF–USE TARIFFS IN THE
SAME MANNER AS AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY UNDER THIS SECTION.

(2) IF A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE
ELECTS TO FILE WITH THE COMMISSION A TIME–OF–USE TARIFF UNDER THIS
SECTION, THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION THAT APPLY TO AN INVESTOR–OWNED
ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL ALSO APPLY TO THE MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR
ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE.

7–1004.

(A) ON OR BEFORE APRIL MAY 1, 2025, THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS TO:

(1) ESTABLISH EXPEDITED PROCESSES FOR INTERCONNECTING THE
FOLLOWING SYSTEMS TO THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:

(1) (I) BIDIRECTIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE SYSTEMS CAPABLE OF
PROVIDING ELECTRICITY TO THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM; AND

(2) (II) BIDIRECTIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE SYSTEMS THAT DO NOT
PROVIDE ELECTRICITY TO THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM BUT DO PROVIDE
ELECTRICITY TO A HOME, BUSINESS, OR OTHER STRUCTURE SERVICED BY AN
ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY; AND

(2) PROVIDE INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANIES WITH
ADEQUATE TIME TO ENSURE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM RELIABILITY IN
ADVANCE OF THE INTERCONNECTIONS DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION.

(B) AN ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY:

(1) MAY REQUIRE A CUSTOMER TO PROVIDE NOTICE TO THE
ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY IF THE CUSTOMER INSTALLS A
BIDIRECTIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE SYSTEM DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)
(A)(1)(II) OF THIS SECTION; BUT AND

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

(2) MAY NOT REQUIRE THE CUSTOMER TO ENTER INTO A NET ENERGY
~~METERING~~ ~~CONTRACT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~OTHERWISE~~ ~~APPLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~INTERCONNECTION~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.

(2) SHALL REQUIRE A CUSTOMER TO APPLY FOR INTERCONNECTION
IF THE CUSTOMER CONFIGURES A BIDIRECTIONAL ELECTRIC VEHICLE SYSTEM TO
PROVIDE ELECTRICITY TO THE ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.

(C) A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR AN ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE MAY
COMPLY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IN THE
SAME MANNER AS AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY.

7–1005.

(A) (1) THE COMMISSION SHALL DEVELOP A PROGRAM FOR EACH
ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY TO ESTABLISH A PILOT PROGRAM
OR TEMPORARY TARIFF TO COMPENSATE OWNERS AND AGGREGATORS OF
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES FOR ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT
SERVICES ON A PAY–FOR–PERFORMANCE BASIS THROUGH AN INCENTIVE
MECHANISM DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(2) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2025, THE COMMISSION SHALL
~~ADOPT~~ ~~REGULATIONS~~ ~~ESTABLISHING~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ACHIEVE~~
ELECTRIC SYSTEM BENEFITS USING DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES.

(B) (1) (I) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025, EACH ELECTRIC
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL SUBMIT TO THE COMMISSION FOR
APPROVAL A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF FOR ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES THAT PROVIDES REASONABLE
COMPENSATION ON A PAY–FOR–PERFORMANCE BASIS TO RENEWABLE ON–SITE
~~GENERATING~~ ~~SYSTEMS~~ THROUGH A MECHANISM DETERMINED BY THE
COMMISSION.

(2) (II) THE PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF SUBMITTED
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH SHALL PROVIDE THAT ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT
SERVICES TO ON–SITE ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES BE USED FOR SYSTEM PEAK
REDUCTION ACCORDING TO A SCHEDULE AT A FREQUENCY OF AT LEAST 30 EVENTS
PER YEAR.

(C) ANY PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF SUBMITTED UNDER THIS
~~SECTION~~ ~~SHALL~~ ~~ESTABLISH~~ ~~A~~ ~~STRUCTURE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~PERFORMANCE~~ ~~PAYMENTS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~
~~DESIGNED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~COVER~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~DISTRIBUTED~~ ~~ENERGY~~ ~~RESOURCES~~ ~~TO~~ ~~AN~~ ~~OWNER~~

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 476 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~OR~~ ~~AGGREGATOR~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~ELECTRIC~~ ~~DISTRIBUTION~~ ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~SUPPORT~~
~~SERVICES.~~

(2) (I) A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR AN ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE MAY ESTABLISH A PILOT PROGRAM, TEMPORARY TARIFF, OR
PERFORMANCE MECHANISM UNDER THIS SECTION.

(II) IF A MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY OR ELECTRIC
COOPERATIVE ESTABLISHES A PILOT PROGRAM, TEMPORARY TARIFF, OR
PERFORMANCE MECHANISM UNDER THIS SECTION, THE PROVISIONS OF THIS
SECTION AND §§ 7–1006 AND 7–1007 OF THIS SUBTITLE THAT APPLY TO AN
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY SHALL ALSO APPLY TO THE MUNICIPAL
ELECTRIC UTILITY OR ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE.

(C) (1) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE, AN
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY PROPOSE AND SUBMIT TO THE
COMMISSION A PERFORMANCE MECHANISM TO COVER THE COST OF USING
DISTRIBUTED ENERGY RESOURCES OR AN AGGREGATOR OF DISTRIBUTED ENERGY
RESOURCES UNDER THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY APPROVE A PERFORMANCE MECHANISM
SUBMITTED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION IF THE COMMISSION
DETERMINES THAT THE PERFORMANCE MECHANISM IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST.

(D) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, THE THE COMMISSION SHALL
APPROVE, DENY, OR APPROVE WITH AMENDMENTS A PILOT PROGRAM OR
TEMPORARY TARIFF SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SECTION FOR EACH ~~ELECTRIC~~
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY IN AN EXPEDITED MANNER.

(2) THE COMMISSION SHALL IF THE COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT
TRANSITIONING A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF TO A PERMANENT
PROGRAM OR TARIFF IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST, THE COMMISSION MAY
ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR AN ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY
TO TRANSITION A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF TO A PERMANENT
PROGRAM OR TARIFF FOR ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES.

(3) EACH IF THE COMMISSION DETERMINES THE TRANSITION TO A
PERMANENT PROGRAM OR TARIFF IS IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST, EACH CUSTOMER
PARTICIPATING IN A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF APPROVED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL MAY BE TRANSITIONED TO A
PERMANENT PROGRAM OR TARIFF FOR ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT
SERVICES WHEN THE PROGRAM OR TARIFF IS APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION.

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

(E) (1) THE COMMISSION MAY ALLOW THE ENERGY GENERATED BY A
RENEWABLE ON–SITE GENERATING SYSTEM THAT PROVIDES ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICE UNDER A PILOT PROGRAM OR
TEMPORARY TARIFF APPROVED UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(1) OF THIS SECTION TO
COUNT TOWARDS THE ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY’S
GREENHOUSE EMISSIONS REDUCTION GOALS UNDER § 7–211 OF THIS TITLE.

(2) (I) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE
CUMULATIVE ENERGY STORAGE CAPACITY OF ANY ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES
INSTALLED ON A CUSTOMER’S PROPERTY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBTITLE
SHALL COUNT TOWARDS THE TARGETS ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–216.1 OF THIS
TITLE.

(II) SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT
INCLUDE THE ENERGY STORAGE CAPACITY OF:

1. ELECTRIC VEHICLES THAT ARE PART OF A
RENEWABLE ON–SITE GENERATING SYSTEM; OR

2. MOBILE ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES.

(F) THE CUMULATIVE NAMEPLATE CAPACITY OF RENEWABLE ON–SITE
GENERATING SYSTEMS PARTICIPATING IN A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY
TARIFF APPROVED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT EXCEED 2% OF THE
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY’S HIGHEST RECORDED COINCIDENT PEAK
DEMAND.

7–1006.

(A) (1) THE COMMISSION MAY APPROVE OR REQUIRE AN
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY TO OFFER UPFRONT INCENTIVES OR
REBATES TO CUSTOMERS TO ACQUIRE AND INSTALL RENEWABLE ON–SITE
GENERATING SYSTEMS IF THE CUSTOMER:

(I) ENROLLS IN A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF
ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–1005 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

(II) ALLOWS THE SYSTEM TO BE USED FOR ELECTRIC
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM SUPPORT SERVICES FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LESS THAN 5
YEARS.

(2) THE COMMISSION MAY:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 476 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) AUTHORIZE OR REQUIRE AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANY TO PROVIDE AN ADDITIONAL INCENTIVE OR REBATE FOR LOW– OR
MODERATE–INCOME CUSTOMERS WHO APPLY FOR AN INCENTIVE OR REBATE
UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(II) REQUIRE AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY TO
PRIORITIZE THE OFFER OF INCENTIVES OR REBATES UNDER THIS SECTION TO
LOW– OR MODERATE–INCOME CUSTOMERS.

(B) IN DETERMINING WHETHER TO REQUIRE AN INVESTOR–OWNED
ELECTRIC COMPANY TO OFFER AN INCENTIVE OR REBATE UNDER THIS SECTION,
THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER:

(1) THE BENEFIT OF REDUCING THE OPERATION OF PEAK
GENERATING FACILITIES IN OVERBURDENED AND UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES;

(2) THE BENEFIT OF RESILIENCY AND SERVICE OUTAGE AVOIDANCE
FOR CUSTOMERS WITH ON–SITE GENERATING SYSTEMS; AND

(3) THE POTENTIAL FOR ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC
COMPANIES TO REDUCE EXPENSES RELATING TO ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
INFRASTRUCTURE BY LEVERAGING CUSTOMERS’ ON–SITE GENERATING SYSTEMS.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER ESTABLISHING A LIMIT ON THE
AMOUNT OF INCENTIVES OR REBATES ISSUED IN A MANNER THAT ACHIEVES
DEPLOYMENT GOALS WHILE MITIGATING POTENTIAL CUSTOMER IMPACTS.

(D) THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSULT WITH THE MARYLAND ENERGY
ADMINISTRATION, WHEN APPROVING OR REQUIRING AN INCENTIVE OR REBATE
UNDER THIS SECTION, TO ENSURE THAT THE INCENTIVE OR REBATE IS DESIGNED
TO SUPPLEMENT, TO THE GREATEST EXTENT POSSIBLE, OTHER AVAILABLE STATE
AND FEDERAL INCENTIVES FOR CUSTOMER ADOPTION OF RENEWABLE ON–SITE
GENERATING SYSTEMS.

7–1007.

(A) AN ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY RECOVER
ALL REASONABLE COSTS INCURRED IN:

(1) PARTICIPATING IN A PILOT PROGRAM OR TEMPORARY TARIFF
AND ADMINISTERING A PROGRAM UNDER § 7–1005 OF THIS SUBTITLE; AND

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 476

(2) OFFERING AN UPFRONT INCENTIVE OR REBATE UNDER § 7–1006
OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) TO THE EXTENT FEASIBLE, THE COSTS LISTED IN SUBSECTION (A) OF
THIS SECTION SHALL BE RECOVERED BY THE ELECTRIC INVESTOR–OWNED
ELECTRIC COMPANY WITHIN THE CALENDAR YEAR IN WHICH THOSE COSTS WERE
INCURRED.

(C) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY PROVISION OF THIS SUBTITLE, AN ELECTRIC
INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY PURSUE AND USE A PERFORMANCE
INCENTIVE MECHANISM TO COVER THE COST OF USING DISTRIBUTED ENERGY
RESOURCES OR AN AGGREGATOR OF DISTRIBUTED RESOURCES UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE.

~~7–1008.~~

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO AN ELIGIBLE CUSTOMER–GENERATOR
THAT IS:

(1) PARTICIPATING IN AN ELECTRIC COMPANY’S NET ENERGY
METERING PROGRAM; AND

(2) USING AN ENERGY STORAGE DEVICE THAT:

(I) IS CHARGED ONLY FROM THE ELIGIBLE
CUSTOMER–GENERATOR’S GENERATING FACILITY THAT CREATES NET EXCESS
GENERATION; OR

(II) ACCRUES NET EXCESS GENERATION ONLY FOR ENERGY
CREATED BY AN ON–SITE ENERGY GENERATING SYSTEM.

(B) THE DISPATCH OF ENERGY FROM AN ENERGY STORAGE DEVICE TO THE
~~ELECTRIC~~ ~~DISTRIBUTION~~ ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~A~~ ~~PILOT~~ ~~PROGRAM~~ ~~OR~~ ~~TEMPORARY~~
TARIFF ESTABLISHED UNDER § 7–1005 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY NOT BE CONSIDERED
DUPLICATIVE OF ANY VALUE REALIZED BY THE ELIGIBLE CUSTOMER–GENERATOR
THROUGH NET ENERGY METERING.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13