START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1227 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1227 
(Delegates Holmes and Arentz) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Condominiums - Mandatory Insurance Coverage - Detached Units 
 
 
This bill generally alters statutory provisions that govern insurance coverage for 
condominiums. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, no later than the first conveyance of a 
condominium unit to a person other than the developer, the council of unit owners must 
maintain, to the extent reasonably available:   
 
 
property insurance in amounts determined by the council of unit owners, but no less 
than any amount specified in the declaration or bylaws (1) for attached or 
multifamily dwelling units, on the common elements and units, exclusive of 
improvements and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the 
developer and (2) for detached units, on the common elements only; and 
 
comprehensive general liability insurance, as specified. 
 
Under the bill, the property insurance required to be maintained is (1) for attached units, 
multifamily dwelling units, or detached units located within a condominium not composed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1227/ Page 2 
entirely of similar detached units, on the common elements and units, exclusive of 
improvements and betterments installed in units by unit owners other than the developer 
and (2) for detached units located within a condominium composed entirely of similar 
detached units, on the common elements only. 
 
The bill also requires a council of unit owners to provide annual written notice regarding 
any obligation of a unit owner of a residential, detached unit to maintain property insurance 
coverage on the unit. Additionally, in the event of any modification to this obligation, the 
council of unit owners must promptly provide an updated notice. 
 
Under current law, on a loss covered by the property policy, subject to additional provisions 
in statute, the proceeds from the insurance policy must be disbursed first for the repair or 
restoration of the damaged common elements and, for condominiums with attached or 
multifamily units that must maintain a property insurance policy on the units, the damaged 
units. The bill adds detached units located within a condominium not composed entirely of 
similar detached units to this provision and makes a similar conforming change. 
 
Under current law, an owner of a residential, detached unit must carry homeowners 
insurance coverage on the entirety of the unit. The bill limits the requirement to when the 
detached unit is located within a condominium composed entirely of similar detached units. 
However, the bill also creates an exception to the requirement for owner-carried 
homeowners insurance coverage on detached units if the council of unit owners obtains 
homeowners insurance on the entirety of all detached units located within a condominium 
composed entirely of similar detached units; the bill also grants the council of unit owners 
authority to carry such insurance.   
 
For more information on condominiums, a type of common ownership community, see the  
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1015 (Senator Charles) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Insurance Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1227/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1227/ Page 4 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1227/ Page 5 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 

END OF PAGE 5