START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1211 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1211 
(Delegate Adams, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Employees' and Teachers' Retirement and Pension Systems - Reemployment of 
Retirees 
 
 
This bill exempts a retiree of the Teachers’ Pension System (TPS) who is reemployed and 
meets specified criteria from the mandatory offset to his or her retirement benefit. The bill 
also repeals an obsolete exemption to retirement benefit offsets. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024; uncodified provisions related to a TPS retiree apply retroactively to 
January 1, 2021, and terminate December 31, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in a limited number of circumstances, it has 
no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on 
revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  No direct effect. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The uncodified provisions of the bill apply to a TPS retiree who: 
 
 
is employed under a joint employer agreement between a local board of education 
and the Maryland Association of Boards of Education (MABE); and 
 
whose salary is fully funded by MABE. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1211/ Page 2 
To establish an individual’s eligibility for the exemption, the local board of education must 
provide specified documentation to the State Retirement Agency demonstrating that the 
individual’s salary is fully funded by MABE. 
 
Current Law:  In general, a retiree who receives a retirement benefit from the State 
Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) may be reemployed, except that the retiree may 
not be reemployed by the State or any participating SRPS employer within 45 days of 
retiring. In most cases, a retiree who is rehired by the same employer for whom the retiree 
worked at the time of retirement is subject to an earnings cap. The purpose of the cap, 
which is the member’s average final compensation (AFC) at the time of retirement, is to 
ensure that a retiree does not earn more in retirement than the retiree earned as an active 
member with the same employer. If the sum of a retiree’s earnings and initial retirement 
allowance exceeds the earnings cap, the retiree is subject to a dollar-for-dollar offset of the 
retirement benefit for any amount that exceeds the cap. For a member who retires directly 
from State service, the State is regarded as a single employer, so reemployment with any 
State agency activates the benefit reduction. 
 
Broad Exemptions from Earnings Limitation 
 
Statute includes several broad exemptions from the offset, including for retirees who:   
 
 
have been retired for at least five years; 
 
retired with an AFC less than $25,000 and are reemployed on a permanent, 
temporary, or contractual basis; or 
 
are serving in any specified elected position. 
 
Exemption for Teachers’ Retirement System/Teachers’ Pension System Retirees 
 
In addition to other specified exemptions for Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS) and 
TPS retirees, each local school superintendent and the Maryland School for the Deaf may 
also hire a total of five TRS/TPS retirees to work in any position at any public school and 
be exempt from any retirement benefit reduction.  
 
Obsolete Exemption 
 
Chapter 469 of 2018, as amended by Chapter 561 of 2020, specified that a retiree of the 
Employees’ Retirement System, TRS, Employees’ Pension System, or TPS who is 
reemployed by the State is exempt from a benefit reduction if (1) compensation for the 
retiree’s new job does not include any State funds and (2) the position is fully funded by a 
grant from a non-State source, as specified. The bill repeals this exemption, which no 
longer applies to any retirees. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1211/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 366 (Senators Mautz and Bailey) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; State Retirement 
Agency; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3