START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1206 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1206 
(Delegate Kerr, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission - Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes a Maryland-Ireland Trade Commission within the Department of 
Commerce to study and promote trade between Maryland and Ireland. The commission 
must study and make recommendations regarding (1) advancing bilateral trade and 
investment between Maryland and Ireland; (2) initiating joint action on policy issues of 
mutual interest to Maryland and Ireland; (3) promoting business and academic exchanges 
between Maryland and Ireland; (4) encouraging mutual economic support between 
Maryland and Ireland; (5) encouraging mutual investment in the infrastructure of Maryland 
and Ireland; and (6) other issues as determined by the commission. The commission must 
report its findings to the General Assembly and the Governor by December 1, 2025. The 
bill terminates September 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Commerce can support the commission with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill provides for the membership of, and appointment of members to, 
the commission. A member of the commission may not receive compensation as a member 
of the commission but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1206/ Page 2 
Current Law:   
 
Office of International Trade 
 
Commerce’s Office of International Trade promotes the development of international 
business activities and opportunities in the State. The office is generally charged with 
encouraging businesses in the State to increase international trade activities, with special 
emphasis on exports; encouraging and facilitating participation by businesses in the State 
in barter, counter trade, and joint venture transactions; and coordinating with other federal, 
State, and local units and private organizations. 
 
Governor’s Subcabinet for International Affairs 
 
Executive Order 01.01.2001.20, as amended by Executive Order 01.01.2005.24, 
established the Governor’s Subcabinet for International Affairs, to advise the Governor on 
matters of international affairs, coordinate State international activity, and oversee the 
protocol functions of the State. The subcabinet consists of the Secretary of State (who 
serves as chair), the Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of 
Transportation, the Secretary of Higher Education, the Secretary of the Environment, and 
the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Maryland Sister States Program 
 
The Maryland Sister States Program, established in 1980, operates in partnership with the 
Sister States of Maryland, a private, nonprofit corporation, to oversee and promote 
international exchanges. According to the Secretary of State’s Office – the lead agency 
responsible for the maintenance and development of the program – the program includes 
20 relationships in 17 countries, including County Cork, Ireland, as of 2013. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1206/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3