START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1281 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1281 
(Delegate Hartman, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Economic Development - Tourism Zones - Designation and Benefits 
 
 
This bill authorizes Baltimore City, counties, and municipalities in the State to 
(1) designate specified tourism zones; (2) exempt the gross receipts from any admissions 
or amusement charge levied by a qualifying tourism enterprise in a tourism zone from 
admissions and amusement taxes; and (3) grant property tax credits against county and 
municipal real and personal property taxes to qualifying tourism enterprises located in a 
tourism zone. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024; the real and personal property tax 
credits apply to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City, county, and municipal property tax and admissions and 
amusement tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2025, to the extent tourism zones 
are designated and property tax credits and admissions and amusement tax exemptions are 
granted. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. Small businesses located in a designated tourism 
zone will benefit from reduced admissions and amusement taxes and real and personal 
property taxes. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes Baltimore City, counties, and municipalities to 
designate, by law, an area within the jurisdiction as a tourism zone. Baltimore City, 
counties, and municipalities may provide, by law, for (1) the duration of the designation 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1281/ Page 2 
and (2) eligibility criteria to qualify as a qualifying tourism enterprise. The designation of 
an area as a tourism zone does not preclude the area from also being designated as a 
specified arts and entertainment district. 
 
By July 1 preceding the effective date of its establishment, the local jurisdiction must notify 
the Comptroller that a tourism district is established. A local jurisdiction that establishes a 
tourism zone must notify the Comptroller of (1) any qualifying tourism enterprises to which 
the exemption from the admissions and amusement tax applies; (2) the date on which the 
qualifying tourism enterprise qualified for the exemption; and (3) the date, if any, on which 
the exemption for the qualifying tourism enterprise expires.  
 
Admissions and Amusement Tax Exemption 
 
Baltimore City, a county, or a municipality are authorized to exempt the gross receipts from 
any admissions or amusement charge levied by a qualifying tourism enterprise in a tourism 
zone from the admissions and amusement tax. The exemption does not apply to the State 
admissions and amusement tax. 
 
Real and Personal Property Tax Credits 
 
Baltimore City, a county, or a municipality may grant, by law, a property tax credit against 
the county or municipal property tax imposed on a building that is (1) located in a tourism 
zone and (2) owned by a qualifying tourism enterprise. 
 
Baltimore City, a county, or a municipality may grant, by law, a property tax credit against 
the county or municipal property tax imposed on personal property of a qualifying tourism 
enterprise that is located within a tourism zone. 
 
Baltimore City, a county, or a municipality may provide, by law, for (1) the amount and 
duration of the property tax credits; (2) additional eligibility criteria for the property tax 
credits; (3) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform processing of 
requests for the property tax credits; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the 
property tax credits. 
 
Definitions 
 
A qualifying tourism enterprise is defined as a for-profit or nonprofit entity that conducts 
business within a tourism zone, subject to the limitations specified by the local jurisdiction 
within which the tourism zone is located. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1281/ Page 3 
A tourism zone is defined as a developed zone of public and private uses that is designated 
by a local jurisdiction for the development of travel and tourism and located within that 
jurisdiction. 
 
Current Law:  An arts and entertainment district is a developed district of public and 
private uses that (1) is distinguished by physical and cultural resources that play a vital role 
in community development and contribute to the public through interpretive, educational, 
and recreational uses and (2) ranges in size from a portion of a political subdivision to a 
regional district with a special coherence. Upon application from an eligible local 
government, the Secretary of Commerce may designate an area as an arts and entertainment 
district only if the area is a contiguous geographic area that is wholly within a priority 
funding area or a qualified opportunity zone. 
  
A “qualifying residing artist” means an individual who (1) owns or rents residential real 
property in the State; (2) conducts a business in any arts and entertainment district; and 
(3) derives income from the sale or performance within any arts and entertainment district 
of an artistic work that the individual wrote, composed, executed, either alone or with 
others, in any arts and entertainment district.    
 
Several tax benefits are available in arts and entertainment districts: 
 
 
qualifying residing artists may claim a subtraction modification on State and local 
income taxes for the income derived within any district from the publication, 
production, or sale of artistic work created, written, composed, or executed by the 
qualifying artist; 
 
a county or municipality may grant, by law, a property tax credit for up to 10 years 
against the property tax imposed on a manufacturing, commercial, or industrial 
building that is located in an arts and entertainment district and is wholly or partially 
renovated to be capable for use by a qualifying artist or an arts and entertainment 
enterprise; and 
 
a county or municipality may exempt from the admissions and amusement tax gross 
receipts from any admissions or amusement charge levied by an arts and 
entertainment enterprise or qualified residing artist in an arts and entertainment 
district.    
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Baltimore City, county, and municipal property tax and admissions 
and amusement tax revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2025, to the extent tourism 
zones are designated and the property tax credits and admissions and amusement tax 
exemptions are granted. The amount of the revenue decrease will depend on (1) the value 
of real and personal property subject to each credit; (2) the gross receipts of businesses 
located in a tourism zone; and (3) local property tax and admissions and amusement tax 
rates. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1281/ Page 4 
Baltimore City advises that, to the extent the property tax credits and admissions and 
amusement tax exemption are granted, city revenues may decrease by approximately 
$6.4 million annually. The estimate is based on the value of commercial property located 
in the neighborhoods of the Inner Harbor, Harbor East, Harbor Point, Key Highway, 
Downtown, Downtown West, and Baltimore Peninsula as well as gross receipts from 
various sporting events, concerts, horse racing, and boat tours in the Inner Harbor. 
 
Additional information on local tax rates and revenues can be found in the County Revenue 
Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the Department of 
Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 14 (Senator Jackson) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; cities of Baltimore and Havre de Grace; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of 
Commerce; Comptroller’s Office; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4