START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1034

Chapter 1034

(House Bill 1205)

AN ACT concerning

Allegany County – Alcoholic Beverages – Class BWLT Beer, Wine, and Liquor
Tasting Permit

FOR the purpose of establishing a Class BWLT beer, wine, and liquor tasting permit to be
issued by the Board of License Commissioners for Allegany County; and generally
relating to alcoholic beverages in Allegany County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 9–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 9–1305
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

9–102.

This title applies only in Allegany County.

9–1305.

(A) THERE IS A CLASS BWLT BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR TASTING PERMIT.

(B) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE PERMIT TO A HOLDER OF A BEER, WINE,
AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

(C) THE PERMIT AUTHORIZES THE HOLDER TO ALLOW THE ON–PREMISES
CONSUMPTION, FOR TASTING, OF BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR.

(D) THE PERMIT HOLDER SHALL NOTIFY THE BOARD AT LEAST 7 DAYS
BEFORE A TASTING EVENT IS TO BE HELD.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1034 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) (1) THE ANNUAL FEE FOR A CLASS BWLT BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR
TASTING PERMIT IS $150.

(2) THE ANNUAL FEE IS IN ADDITION TO:

(I) A ONE–TIME ISSUING FEE OF $150 FOR A NEW CLASS BWLT
BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR TASTING PERMIT; AND

(II) THE ANNUAL FEE FOR THE UNDERLYING BEER, WINE, AND
LIQUOR LICENSE.

(F) THE BOARD SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2