START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1213 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1213 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Baltimore County - Sheriff - Salary 
 
   
This bill establishes the salary of the Baltimore County Sheriff as follows:  (1) $90,000 for 
calendar years 2024 and 2025; (2) $138,000 for calendar 2026; (3) $143,000 for  
calendar 2027; (4) $150,000 for calendar 2028; and (5) $157,500 for calendar 2029. In 
subsequent years – subject to constitutional requirements – the salary is that established by 
the Baltimore County Council in its annual budget. Pursuant to constitutional requirements, 
the salary increases take effect at the beginning of the next term of office.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances.     
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County expenditures increase by $48,800 in FY 2027 and by at 
least $90,400 annually thereafter through FY 2030.     
  
Small Business Effect:  None.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  As of calendar 2010, the annual salary of the Baltimore County Sheriff is 
$90,000. 
 
Article III, § 35 of the Maryland Constitution prohibits the salary or compensation of any 
public official from being increased or diminished during the individual’s term of office, 
except those whose full term is fixed by law in excess of four years. According to a letter 
from the counsel to the General Assembly, dated January 17, 1978, salary increases that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1213/ Page 2 
are to be implemented over a period of time are permissible if implemented before the 
beginning of the term. 
   
Local Expenditures:  Baltimore County expenditures increase by $48,800 in fiscal 2027 
and by at least $90,400 annually thereafter, through fiscal 2030. Pursuant to constitutional 
requirements, the salary is not altered until the next term of office. The estimate includes 
fringe benefits (as provided by the county) and accounts for the first increase taking effect 
in December 2026, when the next term of office begins. Although the bill does not set a 
salary beyond calendar 2029, instead establishing that the salary is that provided by the 
Baltimore County Council in its annual budget, due to constitutional requirements the 
calendar 2029 salary remains in effect until the following term of office commences in 
December 2030. The fiscal impact beyond fiscal 2030 depends on subsequent actions taken 
by the Baltimore County Council, which cannot be reliably estimated in advance.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 934 (Senator Brooks, et al.) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2