START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 249

Chapter 249

(House Bill 1230)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Tianeptine Consumer Protection Act

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~retailer~~ ~~that~~ ~~prepares,~~ ~~distributes,~~ ~~sells,~~ ~~or~~ ~~exposes~~ ~~for~~ ~~sale~~
~~a~~ ~~food~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~represented~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~a~~ ~~tianeptine~~ ~~product~~ ~~to~~ ~~disclose~~ ~~the~~ ~~factual~~ ~~basis~~ ~~on~~
~~which~~ ~~the~~ ~~representation~~ ~~is~~ ~~made;~~ ~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~retailer~~ ~~from~~ ~~preparing,~~ ~~distributing,~~
~~selling,~~ ~~or~~ ~~exposing~~ ~~for~~ ~~sale~~ ~~tianeptine~~ ~~products~~ ~~that~~ ~~do~~ ~~not~~ ~~include~~ ~~certain~~
~~information;~~ prohibiting a retailer from distributing, selling, ~~or~~ exposing for sale, or
advertising for sale a tianeptine product to an individual ~~under~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~age;~~
~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~retailer~~ ~~from~~ ~~directly~~ ~~or~~ ~~indirectly~~ ~~advertising~~ ~~tianeptine~~ ~~products~~ ~~to~~
~~minors;~~ and generally relating to tianeptine and tianeptine retailers.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 21–2D–01 through ~~21–2D–04~~ 21–2D–03 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 2D. Tianeptine Consumer Protection Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 2D. TIANEPTINE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT.

21–2D–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) (1) “RETAILER” MEANS A PERSON THAT:

(I) SELLS, PREPARES, OR MAINTAINS TIANEPTINE PRODUCTS;
OR

(II) ADVERTISES, REPRESENTS, OR HOLDS ITSELF OUT AS
SELLING, PREPARING, OR MAINTAINING TIANEPTINE PRODUCTS.

(2) “RETAILER” INCLUDES A MANUFACTURER, WHOLESALER, STORE,
RESTAURANT, HOTEL, CATERING FACILITY, CAMP, BAKERY, DELICATESSEN,
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 249 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SUPERMARKET, GROCERY STORE, CONVENIENCE STORE, GAS STATION, OR FOOD OR
DRINK COMPANY.

(C) “TIANEPTINE PRODUCT” MEANS A FOOD PRODUCT OR DIETARY
~~INGREDIENT~~ PRODUCT THAT IS MARKETED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION
CONTAINING ANY AMOUNT OF TIANEPTINE SODIUM OR TIANEPTINE SULFATE.

21–2D–02.

(A) (1) A RETAILER THAT PREPARES, DISTRIBUTES, SELLS, OR EXPOSES
~~FOR~~ ~~SALE~~ ~~A~~ ~~FOOD~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REPRESENTED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~A~~ ~~TIANEPTINE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~SHALL~~
~~DISCLOSE~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~LABEL~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FACTUAL~~ ~~BASIS~~ ~~ON~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~THE~~
REPRESENTATION IS MADE.

(2) A RETAILER MAY NOT PREPARE, DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE
~~FOR~~ ~~SALE~~ ~~A~~ ~~FOOD~~ ~~REPRESENTED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~A~~ ~~TIANEPTINE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~DOES~~ ~~NOT~~
~~CONFORM~~ ~~TO~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DISCLOSURE~~ ~~REQUIREMENT~~ ~~ESTABLISHED~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~PARAGRAPH~~
(1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) A RETAILER MAY NOT PREPARE, DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE FOR
~~SALE~~ ~~A~~ ~~TIANEPTINE~~ ~~PRODUCT~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~DOES~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~INCLUDE~~ ~~ON~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~PACKAGE~~ ~~OR~~ ~~LABEL~~
~~THE~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~OF~~ ~~TIANEPTINE~~ ~~SODIUM~~ ~~AND~~ ~~TIANEPTINE~~ ~~SULFATE~~ ~~CONTAINED~~ ~~IN~~
THE PRODUCT.

(C) (A) A RETAILER MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE FOR SALE,
OR ADVERTISE FOR SALE A TIANEPTINE PRODUCT TO AN INDIVIDUAL ~~UNDER~~ ~~THE~~
AGE OF 21 YEARS.

(D) IN A PROSECUTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION, IT IS A DEFENSE
~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~DEFENDANT~~ ~~RELIED~~ ~~IN~~ ~~GOOD~~ ~~FAITH~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REPRESENTATIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~
MANUFACTURER, PROCESSOR, PACKER, OR DISTRIBUTOR OF FOOD REPRESENTED
TO BE A TIANEPTINE PRODUCT.

(E) A RETAILER THAT VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION IS
SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING:

(1) $500 FOR A FIRST VIOLATION; OR

(2) $1,000 FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION.

(F) (B) A RETAILER THAT VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A)(2), (B), OR (C) (A)
OF THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 249

TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $500 $5,000, IMPRISONMENT FOR NOT MORE THAN 90
DAYS, OR BOTH.

(G) (C) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER PENALTIES UNDER THIS SECTION, A
RETAILER WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS LIABLE FOR CIVIL DAMAGES SUSTAINED
BY THE INDIVIDUAL RESULTING FROM THE VIOLATION.

21–2D–03.

(A) A RETAILER MAY NOT DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ADVERTISE OR
MARKET TIANEPTINE PRODUCTS TO MINORS.

(B) IT IS A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR A
RETAILER TO USE ANY OF THE FOLLOWING IN THE ADVERTISING, PROMOTION,
PACKAGING, OR LABELING OF A TIANEPTINE PRODUCT:

~~(1)~~ ~~A~~ ~~CARTOON;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUPERHERO;~~

(3) A VIDEO GAME REFERENCE;

(4) AN IMAGE OF A FOOD PRODUCT PRIMARILY INTENDED FOR
~~MINORS;~~

(5) A TRADEMARK THAT IMITATES OR MIMICS THE TRADEMARK OF A
PRODUCT THAT HAS BEEN ADVERTISED OR MARKETED PRIMARILY TO MINORS;

(6) A SYMBOL OR CELEBRITY THAT IS PRIMARILY ASSOCIATED WITH
MINORS OR MEDIA PRIMARILY DIRECTED TO MINORS; AND

(7) AN IMAGE OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO APPEARS TO BE UNDER THE
AGE OF 27 YEARS.

(C) IT IS A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION FOR A
RETAILER TO ADVERTISE OR PROMOTE A TIANEPTINE PRODUCT:

(1) IN A NEWSPAPER, MAGAZINE, PERIODICAL, OR OTHER
PUBLICATION FOR WHICH INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS CONSTITUTE
15% OR MORE OF THE TOTAL AUDIENCE, AS MEASURED BY COMPETENT AND
RELIABLE SURVEY EVIDENCE;

(2) AT A CONCERT, STADIUM, SPORTING EVENT, OR OTHER PUBLIC
EVENT FOR WHICH INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS CONSTITUTE 15% OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 249 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

MORE OF THE TOTAL AUDIENCE, AS MEASURED BY COMPETENT AND RELIABLE
SURVEY EVIDENCE; OR

(3) ON AN OUTDOOR BILLBOARD OR SIGNBOARD THAT IS WITHIN 500
FEET OF A SCHOOL.

~~21–2D–04.~~

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~
~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ is an emergency measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation of the
public health or safety, has been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by three–fifths of
all the members elected to each of the two Houses of the General Assembly, and shall take
effect from the date it is enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4