START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 748

Chapter 748

(House Bill 1229)

AN ACT concerning

Public Health – Kratom Consumer Protection Act

FOR the purpose of requiring a retailer that prepares, distributes, sells, or exposes for sale
~~a~~ ~~food~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~ ~~represented~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ a kratom product to disclose the factual basis on
which the representation is made; establishing prohibitions related to the
preparation, distribution, and sale of kratom products; requiring the Maryland
Department of Health, in collaboration with the Maryland Hospital Association, to
report to the General Assembly, on or before a certain date, on the number of adverse
health events observed in individuals after the use of opioid–like substances,
including kratom and tianeptine; and generally relating to kratom.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 21–2D–01 through 21–2D–04 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 2D.
Kratom Consumer Protection Act”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

SUBTITLE 2D. KRATOM CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT.

21–2D–01.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “KRATOM PRODUCT” MEANS A FOOD PRODUCT OR DIETARY
~~INGREDIENT~~ PRODUCT MARKETED FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION CONTAINING ANY
PART OF THE LEAF OF THE PLANT MITRAGYNA SPECIOSA.

(C) (1) “RETAILER” MEANS A PERSON THAT:

(I) SELLS, PREPARES, OR MAINTAINS KRATOM PRODUCTS; OR

(II) ADVERTISES, REPRESENTS, OR HOLDS ITSELF OUT AS
SELLING, PREPARING, OR MAINTAINING KRATOM PRODUCTS.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 748 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) “RETAILER” INCLUDES A MANUFACTURER, WHOLESALER, STORE,
RESTAURANT, HOTEL, CATERING FACILITY, CAMP, BAKERY, DELICATESSEN,
SUPERMARKET, GROCERY STORE, CONVENIENCE STORE, GAS STATION, OR FOOD OR
DRINK COMPANY.

21–2D–02.

(A) (1) A RETAILER THAT PREPARES, DISTRIBUTES, SELLS, OR EXPOSES
FOR SALE ~~A~~ ~~FOOD~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REPRESENTED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ A KRATOM PRODUCT SHALL
DISCLOSE ON THE PRODUCT LABEL THE FACTUAL BASIS ON WHICH THE
REPRESENTATION IS MADE.

(2) A RETAILER MAY NOT PREPARE, DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE
FOR SALE A FOOD REPRESENTED TO BE A KRATOM PRODUCT THAT DOES:

(I) DOES NOT COMPLY WITH THE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENT
ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; OR

(II) HAS NOT BEEN RECOGNIZED AS A DIETARY INGREDIENT OR
APPROVED DRUG BY THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION.

(B) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A RETAILER
MAY NOT PREPARE, DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE FOR SALE ANY OF THE
FOLLOWING:

(I) A KRATOM PRODUCT THAT IS ADULTERATED WITH A
DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE OTHER THAN KRATOM;

(II) A KRATOM PRODUCT THAT IS CONTAMINATED WITH A
DANGEROUS SUBSTANCE OTHER THAN KRATOM;

(III) A KRATOM PRODUCT CONTAINING A LEVEL OF
7–HYDROXYMITRAGYNINE IN THE ALKALOID FRACTION THAT IS GREATER THAN 2%
OF THE ALKALOID COMPOSITION OF THE PRODUCT;

(IV) A KRATOM PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALKALOID,
INCLUDING SYNTHETIC MITRAGYNINE, SYNTHETIC 7–HYDROXYMITRAGYNINE, OR
ANY OTHER SYNTHETICALLY DERIVED COMPOUND OF THE KRATOM PLANT; OR

(V) A PRODUCT CONTAINING KRATOM THAT DOES NOT
INCLUDE ON ITS PACKAGE OR LABEL THE AMOUNT OF MITRAGYNINE AND
7–HYDROXYMITRAGYNINE CONTAINED IN THE PRODUCT.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 748

(2) (I) FOR THE PURPOSE OF PARAGRAPH (1)(I) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A KRATOM PRODUCT IS ADULTERATED WITH A DANGEROUS
SUBSTANCE OTHER THAN KRATOM IF:

1. THE KRATOM PRODUCT IS MIXED OR PACKED WITH A
SUBSTANCE OTHER THAN KRATOM; AND

2. THAT SUBSTANCE AFFECTS THE QUALITY OR
STRENGTH OF THE KRATOM PRODUCT TO A DEGREE AS TO RENDER THE KRATOM
PRODUCT INJURIOUS TO A CONSUMER.

(II) FOR THE PURPOSE OF PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, A KRATOM PRODUCT IS CONTAMINATED WITH A DANGEROUS
SUBSTANCE OTHER THAN KRATOM IF THE KRATOM PRODUCT CONTAINS A
POISONOUS OR OTHERWISE DELETERIOUS INGREDIENT OTHER THAN KRATOM,
INCLUDING A DRUG THAT IS DESIGNATED AS A CONTROLLED DANGEROUS
SUBSTANCE UNDER TITLE 5 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE.

(C) A RETAILER MAY NOT DISTRIBUTE, SELL, OR EXPOSE FOR SALE A
KRATOM PRODUCT TO AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS.

(D) IN A PROSECUTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION, IT IS A DEFENSE
THAT THE DEFENDANT RELIED IN GOOD FAITH ON THE REPRESENTATIONS OF A
MANUFACTURER, PROCESSOR, PACKER, OR DISTRIBUTOR OF FOOD REPRESENTED
TO BE A KRATOM PRODUCT.

(E) A RETAILER THAT VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION IS
SUBJECT TO A CIVIL PENALTY NOT EXCEEDING:

(1) $500 $1,000 FOR A FIRST VIOLATION; AND

(2) $1,000 $2,000 FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT VIOLATION.

(F) A RETAILER THAT VIOLATES SUBSECTION (A)(2), (B), OR (C) OF THIS
SECTION IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE
NOT EXCEEDING $500 $5,000, IMPRISONMENT FOR NOT MORE THAN 90 DAYS, OR
BOTH.

(G) IN ADDITION TO ANY OTHER PENALTIES SPECIFIED IN THIS SECTION, A
RETAILER WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS LIABLE FOR ANY CIVIL DAMAGES
SUSTAINED BY THE INDIVIDUAL RESULTING FROM THE VIOLATION.

21–2D–03.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 748 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) A RETAILER MAY NOT DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ADVERTISE A
THERAPEUTIC BENEFIT OF KRATOM.

(A) (B) A RETAILER MAY NOT DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ADVERTISE OR
MARKET KRATOM PRODUCTS TO MINORS.

(B) (C) IT IS A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) (B) OF THIS SECTION FOR A
RETAILER TO USE ANY OF THE FOLLOWING IN THE ADVERTISING, PROMOTION,
PACKAGING, OR LABELING OF A KRATOM PRODUCT:

(1) A CARTOON;

(2) A SUPERHERO;

(3) A VIDEO GAME REFERENCE;

(4) AN IMAGE OF A FOOD PRODUCT PRIMARILY INTENDED FOR
MINORS;

(5) A TRADEMARK THAT IMITATES OR MIMICS THE TRADEMARK OF A
PRODUCT THAT HAS BEEN ADVERTISED OR MARKETED PRIMARILY TO MINORS;

(6) A SYMBOL OR CELEBRITY THAT IS PRIMARILY ASSOCIATED WITH
MINORS OR MEDIA PRIMARILY DIRECTED TO MINORS; AND

(7) AN IMAGE OF AN INDIVIDUAL WHO APPEARS TO BE UNDER THE
AGE OF 27 YEARS.

(C) (D) IT IS A VIOLATION OF SUBSECTION (A) (B) OF THIS SECTION FOR A
RETAILER TO ADVERTISE OR PROMOTE A KRATOM PRODUCT:

(1) IN A NEWSPAPER, A MAGAZINE, A PERIODICAL, OR ANY OTHER
PUBLICATION FOR WHICH INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS CONSTITUTE
15% OR MORE OF THE TOTAL AUDIENCE, AS MEASURED BY COMPETENT AND
RELIABLE SURVEY EVIDENCE;

(2) AT A CONCERT, A STADIUM, A SPORTING EVENT, OR ANY OTHER
PUBLIC EVENT FOR WHICH INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS CONSTITUTE
15% OR MORE OF THE TOTAL AUDIENCE, AS MEASURED BY COMPETENT AND
RELIABLE SURVEY EVIDENCE; OR

(3) ON AN OUTDOOR BILLBOARD OR SIGN BOARD THAT IS WITHIN 500
FEET OF A SCHOOL.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 748

21–2D–04.

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 31,
2025, the Maryland Department of Health, in collaboration with the Maryland Hospital
Association, shall report to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, on the number of adverse health events observed in individuals after
the use of opioid–like substances, including kratom and tianeptine.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5