START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 449

Chapter 449

(House Bill 1203)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Program ~~–~~
~~Established~~ and Tax Increment Financing

FOR the purpose of establishing the Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Program in
the Maryland Economic Development Corporation to make loans for targeted
investments in certain real estate and infrastructure projects located in certain
areas; establishing the Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund as a special,
nonlapsing fund; authorizing the Corporation, with certain approval of a governing
body of a political subdivision, to pledge certain revenues generated within a certain
area, for certain purposes; and generally relating to the Strategic Infrastructure
Revolving Loan Program and tax increment financing.

BY adding to
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–134 and 12–210(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–134.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE REVOLVING
LOAN FUND.

(3) “PRIORITY FUNDING AREA” MEANS AN AREA IDENTIFIED UNDER
§ 5–7B–02 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(4) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE
REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM.

(5) “SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY” MEANS AN AREA DESIGNATED
UNDER § 6–205 OF THE HOUSING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ARTICLE.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 449 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) “TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED
IN § 7–101 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

(B) (1) THERE IS A STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE REVOLVING LOAN
PROGRAM IN THE MARYLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO MAKE LOANS FOR
TARGETED INVESTMENTS IN REAL ESTATE AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS TO
SUPPORT TRANSFORMATIVE PLACE–MAKING, ENHANCE TRANSIT–ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT, ENHANCE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT, AND ACHIEVE INCLUSIVE
AND EQUITABLE ECONOMIC GROWTH OBJECTIVES, WITH A FOCUS ON BRINGING
UNDERUTILIZED ASSETS INTO PERFORMANCE AND GENERATING REVENUE.

(C) (1) THERE IS A STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE REVOLVING LOAN
FUND IN THE CORPORATION.

(2) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE LOANS FOR THE COST
OF INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS THAT MEET THE PURPOSES OF THE PROGRAM.

(3) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(4) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE
FUND;

(II) PREMIUMS, FEES, INTEREST PAYMENTS, AND PRINCIPAL
PAYMENTS ON LOANS MADE UNDER THIS SECTION; AND

(III) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(6) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR LOANS MADE UNDER THE
PROGRAM.

(7) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 449

(8) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(D) (1) AN APPLICANT FOR A LOAN UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL SUBMIT
TO THE CORPORATION AN APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE CORPORATION
REQUIRES.

(2) THE APPLICATION SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) A DETAILED STRATEGIC PLAN FOR THE TARGETED
INVESTMENT;

(II) THE AMOUNT OF MONEY REQUIRED FOR THE ACTIVITIES
DESCRIBED IN THE STRATEGIC PLAN;

(III) THE MONEY AVAILABLE TO THE APPLICANT WITHOUT
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE PROGRAM;

(IV) THE AMOUNT OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE REQUESTED FROM
THE PROGRAM;

(V) INFORMATION RELATING TO THE FINANCIAL STATUS OF
THE APPLICANT, INCLUDING, IF APPLICABLE:

1. A CURRENT BALANCE SHEET;

2. A PROFIT AND LOSS STATEMENT; AND

3. CREDIT REFERENCES; AND

(VI) ANY OTHER RELEVANT INFORMATION THAT THE
CORPORATION REQUESTS.

(3) AN APPLICANT IS ELIGIBLE FOR A LOAN UNDER THE PROGRAM
FOR PROJECTS LOCATED IN A SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY, PRIORITY FUNDING AREA,
OR TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT AREA.

(4) THE CORPORATION SHALL ESTABLISH AN ADVISORY LOAN
COMMITTEE TO REVIEW LOAN APPLICATIONS AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
THE CORPORATION ON APPROVAL.

(5) IN MAKING LOANS, THE CORPORATION SHALL PRIORITIZE
PROJECTS THAT:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 449 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) ACTIVATE UNDERUTILIZED PROPERTY OWNED BY THE
GOVERNMENT AND INSTITUTIONS;

(II) OFFER SIGNIFICANT DEVELOPMENT OR REDEVELOPMENT
VALUE;

(III) LEVERAGE PRIVATE INVESTMENT; AND

(IV) HAVE THE POTENTIAL FOR SIGNIFICANT JOB GROWTH OR
RETENTION.

(6) LOANS MAY BE USED:

(I) TO ACQUIRE PROPERTY, INCLUDING VACANT SITES;

(II) FOR DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT OF A PROJECT; AND

(III) FOR REHABILITATION, CONSTRUCTION, AND DEMOLITION.

(E) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE THE
CORPORATION MAY SET THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR LOANS MADE UNDER THE
PROGRAM, INCLUDING THE LENGTH OF THE LOAN TERM AND RENEWALS,
APPROPRIATE FEES, AND LOAN AMOUNT PER APPLICANT.

(2) THE LOANS SHALL:

(I) HAVE A TERM OF UP TO 5 YEARS;

(II) HAVE A FEE OF UP TO 1.5% OF THE PRINCIPAL AMOUNT,
PLUS REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES; AND

(III) BE NOT MORE THAN $20,000,000 PER APPLICANT.

(F) (1) THE CORPORATION SHALL PREPARE THE LOAN DOCUMENTS.

(2) THE LOAN DOCUMENTS SHALL INCLUDE:

(I) THE INTEREST RATE ON THE LOAN;

(II) THE AMOUNT OF THE LOAN;

(III) REPAYMENT PROVISIONS FOR THE LOAN; AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 449

(IV) ANY OTHER PROVISION THAT THE CORPORATION
DETERMINES IS NECESSARY, INCLUDING A PROVISION ON TAKING LIENS AND
SECURITY INTERESTS IN REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY.

(G) (1) IF A RECIPIENT OF A LOAN UNDER THIS SECTION VIOLATES ANY
PROVISION OF THE LOAN DOCUMENTS OR CEASES TO MEET THE REQUIREMENTS OF
THIS SECTION, THE CORPORATION MAY, ON REASONABLE NOTICE TO THE LOAN
RECIPIENT:

(I) WITHHOLD FURTHER ADVANCES OF LOAN PROCEEDS UNTIL
THE LOAN RECIPIENT COMPLIES WITH THE AGREEMENT OR REQUIREMENTS; OR

(II) EXERCISE ANY OTHER REMEDY PROVIDED IN THE LOAN
DOCUMENTS.

(2) (I) IF A LOAN MADE UNDER THIS SECTION IS IN DEFAULT, THE
CORPORATION MAY FORECLOSE ON A MORTGAGE OR DEED OF TRUST HELD AS
SECURITY FOR THE LOAN IN THE MANNER PROVIDED UNDER THE MARYLAND
RULES FOR FORECLOSURES IN PRIVATE TRANSACTIONS.

(II) THE CORPORATION MAY TAKE TITLE IN THE
CORPORATION’S NAME TO ANY PROPERTY FORECLOSED AND CONVEY TITLE TO A
BONA FIDE PURCHASER.

(H) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

12–210.

(D) (1) WITH THE APPROVAL BY RESOLUTION OF THE GOVERNING BODY
OF A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION, THE MARYLAND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION MAY PLEDGE ALTERNATIVE REVENUES GENERATED WITHIN OR
OTHERWISE DIRECTLY ATTRIBUTABLE TO A PROJECT LOCATED IN AN APPROVED
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT, A TRANSIT–ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT, A RISE ZONE, A
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY, OR A STATE HOSPITAL REDEVELOPMENT.

(2) THE REVENUES PLEDGED IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (1)
OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE PAID, AS PROVIDED IN THE RESOLUTION, INTO THE
SPECIAL FUND FOR THE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT, TRANSIT–ORIENTED
DEVELOPMENT, RISE ZONE, SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY, OR STATE HOSPITAL
REDEVELOPMENT TO:

(I) SECURE THE PAYMENT OF DEBT SERVICE ON BONDS OR
MEDCO OBLIGATIONS;
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 449 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) SUPPORT THE STRATEGIC INFRASTRUCTURE REVOLVING
LOAN FUND ESTABLISHED UNDER § 10–134 OF THIS DIVISION; OR

(III) BE APPLIED TO THE OTHER PURPOSES STATED IN § 12–209
OF THIS SUBTITLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6