START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1296 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1296 
(Delegates Wilson and Crosby) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Electricity - Offshore Wind Projects - Alterations 
 
 
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC), on June 1, 2024, to open a revised 
Round 2 offshore wind project proceeding that is limited to evaluating revised project 
schedules, sizes, or pricing for a previously approved Round 2 project. The bill also allows 
any Round 1 offshore wind project to seek PSC approval to amend its previously approved 
Round 1 project order to increase the maximum amount of offshore wind renewable energy 
credits (ORECs) and modify its project schedule. Both processes are subject to existing 
ratepayer protections, although the Round 1 process requires consideration of changes in 
economic conditions since the Round 1 project awards. An existing requirement for the 
Department of General Services (DGS) to issue a procurement for offshore wind energy is 
modified to, among other changes, (1) remove the 5.0 million megawatt-hour annual limit 
and (2) require a second procurement. PSC must also, with the assistance of specified State 
entities, develop a plan for achieving a total of 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind energy 
capacity by 2031 and submit a report on the plan to the General Assembly by 
January 1, 2025. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  PSC can likely handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources; if not, special fund expenditures (and corresponding revenues) increase 
minimally due to additional consultant costs in FY 2024 and/or 2025. General/special fund 
expenditures for the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) may increase by up to 
$350,000 in FY 2025 for consultant costs. General fund expenditures for DGS increase by 
$400,000 in total in FY 2025 and 2026. The net effect on State expenditures due to 
modifying the existing DGS offshore wind energy procurement process is unknown, but 
potentially significant, as discussed below. The effect on electricity rates is discussed in 
the Additional Comments section below. 
  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1296/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
The effect on electricity rates is discussed in the Additional Comments Section below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Revised Round 2 Offshore Wind Project Proceeding 
 
On June 1, 2024, PSC must open a revised Round 2 offshore wind project proceeding that 
is limited to evaluating revised project schedules, sizes, or pricing, including OREC 
pricing, for a previously approved Round 2 offshore wind project. 
 
Any previously approved Round 2 offshore wind project may submit a revised plan for the 
project by filing an application with PSC. The application for a revised Round 2 offshore 
wind project must be limited to addressing revised project schedules, sizes, or pricing, 
including OREC pricing. 
 
On receipt of an application for approval of a revised Round 2 offshore wind project, PSC 
must conduct an expedited review of the application. Unless extended by mutual consent 
of the parties, PSC must approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application within 
90 days after the application is filed and found by PSC to be administratively complete. 
 
Generally, an application for a revised Round 2 offshore wind project must be subject to 
all criteria in current law for Round 2 offshore wind projects. However, an application for 
a revised Round 2 offshore wind project is not subject to the requirement to provide 
$6.0 million to the Maryland Offshore Wind Business Development Fund upon PSC 
approval. 
 
If, in a revised Round 2 offshore wind project proceeding, PSC reviews multiple reasonable 
proposals meeting the requirements for Round 2 offshore wind projects, PSC must issue 
orders approving the revised Round 2 offshore wind projects necessary to facilitate as much 
energy capacity as is consistent with the Round 2 offshore wind project ratepayer 
protections under current law, including at least 800 megawatts of capacity from revised 
Round 2 offshore wind projects, if practicable. PSC must do so even if the revised Round 2 
offshore wind project applications may result in lower total energy capacity awarded than 
was previously awarded to the revised Round 2 offshore wind project in its previously 
approved application. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1296/ Page 3 
PSC may not approve an application for a revised Round 2 offshore wind project unless 
the application includes commitments for in-state expenditures and investments in a local 
supply chain that PSC determines are reasonably related to the size and requirements of 
the project. 
 
The Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) must have access to all confidential 
information produced by any party relating to a revised Round 2 offshore wind project, 
subject to a confidentiality agreement. 
 
Round 1 Offshore Wind Project Order Amendment 
 
In order to maximize the amount of renewable energy generated by a Round 1 offshore 
wind project, any Round 1 offshore wind project may seek approval from PSC to amend 
its previously approved Round 1 offshore wind project order to (1) increase the maximum 
amount of ORECs sold under the previous order, consistent with the Round 1 offshore 
wind project ratepayer protections under current law, and (2) modify its project schedule. 
 
PSC may approve a request for an increased amount of ORECs sold under a previously 
approved Round 1 offshore wind project order on a showing that:   
 
 
the unit pricing of the additional ORECs does not exceed the pricing under the 
previously approved Round 1 offshore wind project order; and 
 
the Round 1 offshore wind project is in compliance with the ratepayer protection 
provisions required for Round 1 offshore wind projects, taking into consideration 
changes in economic conditions since the original Round 1 offshore wind project 
awards. 
 
Offshore Wind Procurement by Department of General Services 
 
An existing requirement for DGS to issue a procurement for offshore wind energy is 
modified to (1) remove the 5.0 million megawatt-hour annual limit; (2) establish a process 
for a second procurement; (3) require the issuance of draft procurements; and (4) require 
the State to incorporate specified contract terms to facilitate low-cost project development 
and traditional project financing terms. Other requirements are unchanged. 
 
More specifically, the State must issue a draft solicitation for procurement of offshore wind 
energy for public comment and review by June 1, 2024, prior to the existing requirement 
to issue the procurement by July 31, 2024. As under current law, the State may enter into 
a contract or contracts for the procurement by September 1, 2025, although the State may 
modify that date if an unforeseen circumstance adversely affects the procurement 
submission process. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1296/ Page 4 
The State must then issue a second procurement for offshore wind energy by  
December 31, 2025 (with a draft issued for public comment and review by  
September 1, 2025). The State may enter into a contract or contracts for the 
second procurement by March 31, 2027, although the State may, again, modify that date. 
 
The State must incorporate contract terms to facilitate low-cost project development and 
traditional project financing terms, including (1) terms that waive the automatic 
termination clause required under § 13-217 of the State Finance and Procurement Article; 
(2) terms that establish remedies to reimburse costs incurred by the contractor directly 
attributable to the failure of the State to appropriate funds for the contract; and (3) any other 
appropriate mechanisms to ensure that offshore wind energy projects that meet the terms 
of the contract will have certainty of payment through the duration of the contract. 
 
Plan for Achieving 8,500 Megawatts of Offshore Wind Capacity 
 
PSC, with the assistance of MEA, DGS, and other interested State units, must develop a 
plan for achieving a total of 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind energy capacity by 2031. 
The plan must include a schedule of offshore wind energy procurements and proposed 
amounts of offshore wind energy for procurement through 2031. It may include 
recommendations on multijurisdictional offshore wind energy procurements and any 
additional offshore wind energy procurement recommendations. PSC must submit a report 
on the plan to the General Assembly by January 1, 2025. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Round 1 and Round 2 Offshore Wind Energy Projects 
 
Pursuant to Chapter 3 of 2013, under the State Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
(RPS), State electricity sales must include an amount derived from offshore wind energy 
beginning in 2017. The amount is set by PSC each year, based on the projected annual 
creation of ORECs by qualified offshore wind projects, and may not exceed 2.5% of total 
retail sales. Chapter 757 of 2019 bifurcated the application and approval process for 
offshore wind into “Round 1” (the process established by Chapter 3) and a “Round 2” 
process to allow for new applications with different specifications. PSC may also provide 
for additional application periods. 
 
Ratepayer impacts in Round 1 were limited to $1.50 per month (in 2012 dollars) for 
residential customers and 1.5% for nonresidential customers over the duration of the OREC 
pricing schedule. Ratepayer impacts in Round 2 were limited to $0.88 per month (in 
2018 dollars) for residential customers and 0.9% for nonresidential customers over the 
duration of the OREC pricing schedule. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1296/ Page 5 
Offshore Wind Energy Procurement by the Department of General Services 
 
Chapter 95 of 2023 established a State goal of reaching 8,500 megawatts of offshore wind 
energy by 2031. The Act also:   
 
 
required PSC to take specified actions related to regional transmission system 
upgrades for offshore wind; 
 
required DGS to issue a competitive sealed procurement solicitation and authorized 
the department to enter into at least one contract for a power purchasing agreement 
(PPA) to procure up to 5.0 million megawatt-hours annually of offshore wind 
energy and associated renewable energy credits (RECs) from one or more qualified 
offshore wind projects; and 
 
authorized Round 1 and Round 2 developers to apply to PSC for a full or partial 
exemption from the requirement to pass along 80% of certain federal benefits to 
ratepayers.  
 
DGS must issue the offshore wind energy procurement by July 31, 2024. The State may 
enter into a contract or contracts for the procurement by September 1, 2025, although the 
State may modify that date if an unforeseen circumstance adversely affects the 
procurement submission process. Each PPA must have a minimum term of 20 years. 
 
The State must use the energy procured under Chapter 95 to meet the State’s energy needs 
and retire the associated RECs to meet its obligations under the State’s RPS and the Climate 
Solutions Now Act. After those requirements have been met, the State must offer for sale 
any energy or RECs remaining on the competitive wholesale power market operated by 
PJM, through bilateral sales to credit-worthy counterparties, or into REC markets. 
 
Termination Provisions on Multi-year Procurement Contracts 
 
In general, State procurement contracts are subject to annual appropriations. Contracts that 
span multiple years must include clauses allowing for the termination of the contract in the 
event that funds are not appropriated to pay for the contract in a given year. The clause 
must discharge both parties from future performance but not from existing obligations. 
Under these circumstances, the contract terminates either on the last day of the fiscal year 
for which money is appropriated or the date provided in the contract’s termination clause, 
whichever is earlier. Units that terminate multi-year contracts under these conditions must 
reimburse the contractor for the reasonable value of any nonrecurring costs that were not 
amortized in the price of supplies or services delivered under the contract. 
 
However, the Board of Public Works (BPW), on the recommendation of the Secretary of 
General Services, may waive the requirement for a mandatory termination clause for a 
multi-year State contract to procure Tier 1 or Tier 2 renewable energy for the State. In 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1296/ Page 6 
determining whether to grant a waiver, BPW must consider the effects of its decision on 
the ability of the energy vendor to obtain financing for the renewable energy generation 
project. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  PSC can likely handle the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted 
resources; if not, special fund expenditures increase minimally for additional consultant 
costs in fiscal 2024 and/or 2025 – and special fund revenues increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies.  
 
General/special fund expenditures for DNR increase by up to $350,000 in fiscal 2025 for 
additional consultant costs to the extent that DNR chooses to participate in the offshore 
wind capacity plan development. Costs for DNR may be less, depending on the scope of 
the plan and other resources available from participating agencies. MEA can assist PSC 
with existing budgeted resources. 
 
General fund expenditures for DGS increase by approximately $400,000 in total in  
fiscal 2025 and 2026 for consultant costs associated with a second procurement 
requirement and to assist PSC with developing the offshore wind capacity plan. While DGS 
advises that it requires an additional administrative staff to assist in the development of the 
plan and to coordinate the various potential procurement contracts, the fiscal and policy 
note for Chapter 95 already accounted for two additional DGS staff for the original 
procurement, which have not been hired. As such, this analysis does not include additional 
staff costs. 
 
The net effect on State expenditures (all funds) for electricity due to modifying the existing 
DGS offshore wind energy procurement process is unknown, but potentially significant. 
The bill removes the overall annual limit on energy that may be procured, although the 
current 5.0 million megawatt-hour annual limit is more than three times the State 
government’s annual energy usage, so any energy and RECs procured under the bill in 
excess of the current limit are assumed to be resold by DGS. The bill also requires a 
second procurement, increasing the likelihood of the State ultimately entering into one or 
more PPAs for offshore wind energy. Still, the possibility remains that DGS does not enter 
into a PPA, even under the bill. Nevertheless, the size of the potential PPAs and their 
minimum 20-year duration means that State finances may be significantly affected. The 
effect, if any, likely occurs no earlier than fiscal 2026.  
 
Additional Comments:  A PSC fact sheet contains relevant information on Round 1 and 
Round 2 project approvals, costs, and timelines under the implementation of the two Acts. 
However, one of the two developers, Orsted, announced in January 2024 that it has 
withdrawn from PSC orders approving its Skipjack 1 and 2 projects. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1296/ Page 7 
PSC advises that there are three potential ratepayer impact scenarios based off recent events 
(the Skipjack/Orsted withdrawal) and the bill, two resulting in a decrease in ratepayer 
impact and one resulting in no change. 
 
 
Scenario 1:  If no changes are made to the ORECs awards, then the ratepayer 
impacts will decrease from what was anticipated from the original Round 1 and 
Round 2 OREC awards. 
 
Scenario 2:  If a revised application is approved and it requires the same ratepayer 
impact cap as what was vacated by Skipjack/Orsted, then ratepayer impacts will 
remain at the same level as what was anticipated with the original Round 1 and 
Round 2 OREC awards. 
 
Scenario 3:  If a revised application is approved and it requires less ratepayer impact 
cap space than the original Round 1 and Round 2 OREC awards, then ratepayer 
impacts will decrease from what was anticipated from the original Round 1 and 
Round 2 OREC awards. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also notes that PSC is authorized to open additional 
application periods under current law, subject to all existing requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1161 (Senators Feldman and Hester) - Education, Energy, and 
the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; 
Maryland Energy Administration; Office of People’s Counsel; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1296/ Page 8 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 20, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8