START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1266 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1266 
(Delegate Stein) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Clean Water Commerce Account - Contracts for the Purchase of Environmental 
Outcomes 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), on request, when 
entering into a contract for the purchase of environmental outcomes under the Clean Water 
Commerce Account (CWCA) for a project that includes construction, reconstruction, or 
rehabilitation, to allow nonuniform payment schedules that allow for a cost-per-pound of 
nitrogen reduced that varies with the achievement of performance milestones, as agreed 
upon by both parties to the contract. The first performance milestone may not occur before 
the construction, reconstruction, or rehabilitation is complete. Further, in order to ensure 
the achievement of environmental outcomes agreed to in a CWCA contract, MDE may 
require (1) a minimum final payment and (2) for a contract award that is more than 
$500,000, additional financial protections, including a letter of credit, an insurance 
instrument, or a performance bond. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund administrative expenditures for MDE increase by an unknown 
but likely modest amount beginning in FY 2025. Overall finances of CWCA are 
unaffected; however, the structure of affected contracts for environmental outcomes is 
likely changed under the bill to provide nonuniform payments instead of level payments. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are potentially significantly affected, as 
discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1266/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Clean Water Commerce Account 
 
Chapters 694 and 695 of 2021 created CWCA. MDE is required to transfer $20.0 million 
each fiscal year from the Bay Restoration Fund (BRF) into the account to be used by MDE 
to purchase environmental outcomes to help the State achieve water quality goals. 
“Environmental outcomes” are nitrogen load reductions that can be directly measured or 
modeled using the Chesapeake Bay Program Models.  
 
Specified percentages of the funding must be used to procure environmental outcomes 
from certain types of practices or projects, and any unencumbered funds not used to 
purchase environmental outcomes according to the percentages are no longer subject to the 
percentage requirements and available for use consistent with the CWCA statute in 
subsequent fiscal years. 
 
MDE must (1) use a competitive process to invite funding proposals from interested 
persons, as specified, for the provision of environmental outcomes; (2) develop and use a 
scoring system to evaluate a submitted funding proposal; (3) provide each person that 
submits a funding proposal with a copy of the scoring system, as specified; and (4) publicly 
announce a request for proposals or otherwise initiate a procurement process for 
environmental outcomes to be funded under CWCA at least once per year.  
 
When evaluating proposals, MDE must prioritize specified factors, with the first priority 
being the dollar cost per unit of environmental outcome, followed by certain co-benefits. 
MDE must use consistent standards and processes for verifying environmental outcomes 
through the confirmation of modeling results, the confirmation of installations, or, where 
appropriate, the measurement of outcomes during or after the initiation of a project or 
practice. None of these requirements are altered by the bill. 
 
A contract entered into by MDE may be funded for the extended life of the project or 
practice yielding the environmental outcome, not to exceed 20 years. A contract must: 
 
 
require the owner of the project or practice to periodically submit status updates in 
accordance with the quantification plan for the environmental outcomes of the 
project or practice; 
 
require that payment for environmental outcomes be conditioned on the 
achievement and verification of the environmental outcomes in accordance with the 
quantification plan; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1266/ Page 3 
 
include a schedule of payments that will be made as environmental outcomes are 
achieved and verified; and 
 
require reporting on the amount of nitrogen and, to the extent that it can be feasibly 
determined without significant expense, phosphorus and sediment that are removed 
annually by the project or practice. 
 
An environmental outcome that is funded entirely with public funds is not eligible to be 
purchased with funds from CWCA. Subject to verification by MDE, if an environmental 
outcome is partially funded with public funds, CWCA may be used to purchase the 
remaining portion of the environmental outcome that is not funded with public funds. 
 
Provisions related to CWCA terminate June 30, 2030. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not affect the overall finances of CWCA. MDE will 
continue to approve the purchase of up to $20 million in environmental outcomes each 
fiscal year through fiscal 2030 and transfer $20 million from BRF to CWCA to pay for the 
outcomes. However, the structure of affected contracts for environmental outcomes is 
likely changed under the bill to provide nonuniform payments instead of level payments.  
 
MDE advises that it experiences additional administrative costs beginning in fiscal 2025, 
which are funded through the BRF Wastewater Account, due to increased complexity 
related to the administration of the program to allow for nonuniform payment schedules. 
MDE did not provide further detail on the potential amount of such costs but agrees that 
they are likely modest. Accordingly, special fund administrative expenditures for MDE 
increase by an unknown but modest amount beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Local/Small Business Effect:  Local governments and small businesses are potential 
recipients of CWCA funding and benefit from the ability to enter into contracts for projects 
that allow nonuniform payment schedules on request (and as agreed upon by both parties 
to the contract). However, MDE advises that proposals that include long-term financing 
will be considered less competitive compared to entities that, under the bill, do not include 
long-term financing. In addition, under the bill, MDE may require a minimum final 
payment and, for contract awards greater than $500,000, additional financial protections. 
Therefore, the effect on any particular local government or small business is unknown but 
could be significant (in the case of local governments) or meaningful (in the case of small 
businesses). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1266/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1144 (Senators Guzzone and Elfreth) - Education, Energy, 
and the Environment and Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Environmental 
Service; Anne Arundel and Worcester counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department 
of Legislative Services. 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 21, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross and 
Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4