START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1212 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1212 
(Delegate J. Lewis) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
State Retirement Agency - Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion and 
Governance Program 
 
 
This bill requires the State Retirement Agency (SRA) to employ a Director of Diversity, 
Equity, and Inclusion to perform specified functions related to enhancing access by and 
involvement of underrepresented groups. The bill also codifies the governance program of 
SRA’s Investment Division to monitor, evaluate, and quantify the risks and effects of 
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors on the State Retirement and Pension 
System’s (SRPS) investments. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special and reimbursable fund expenditures increase by a total of $107,100 
in FY 2025 for the new SRA position; special and reimbursable fund revenues increase 
commensurately for administrative fees to cover that cost. State expenditures (all funds) 
increase minimally to pay the State’s share. Out-years reflect annualization and inflation. 
Provisions related to the governance program codify existing practice. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$64,200 
$78,100 
$81,600 
$85,100 
$88,800 
ReimB. Rev. 
$42,800 
$52,100 
$54,400 
$56,700 
$59,200 
SF Expenditure 
$64,200 
$78,100 
$81,600 
$85,100 
$88,800 
GF/SF/FF Exp. 
$42,800 
$52,100 
$54,400 
$56,700 
$59,200 
ReimB. Exp. 
$42,800 
$52,100 
$54,400 
$56,700 
$59,200 
Net Effect 
($42,800) 
($52,100) 
($54,400) 
($56,700) 
($59,200)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Expenditures for local participating governmental units (PGUs) and other 
local employers increase minimally to pay their share of the cost of the new SRA position. 
No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1212/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion must:   
 
 
report directly to the SRA Executive Director;  
 
identify and minimize barriers to open and equitable processes by ensuring that SRA 
provides access and opportunities to underrepresented groups; 
 
engage with the SRPS Board of Trustees, staff, and external entities to promote and 
support diversity of participation and leadership; 
 
provide assistance as necessary to the Investment Division; 
 
provide advice and report to the SRPS board on topics including diversity, equity, 
and inclusion; and 
 
have the duties and functions that the SRA Executive Director or the SRPS board 
may delegate. 
 
On the recommendation of the SRA Executive Director and after receiving an affirmative 
vote from a majority of the Board of Trustees, the executive director must terminate the 
Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion. 
 
The governance program must be in accordance with the policies of SRPS. The Chief 
Investment Officer (CIO) must employ an individual to assist in the implementation of the 
governance program whose responsibilities must be consistent with fiduciary 
responsibilities. In addition to the responsibilities described above, they include:   
 
 
developing appropriate standards, policies, and processes for the implementation 
and management of the governance program; 
 
working across asset classes to integrate consideration of material ESG factors into 
investment due diligence and recommendations; 
 
providing recommendations to the CIO based on research and analysis of material 
ESG factors, including diversity, equity, and inclusion; 
 
assisting the Investment Division in identifying and recommending investment 
opportunities to the CIO; 
 
evaluating whether internal and external investment managers represent a diverse 
set of backgrounds; 
 
working with specified individuals, identify, analyze, define, and prioritize specific 
metrics to align with an inclusive environment; and 
 
supporting the SRPS board with the implementation of the State’s minority business 
policies by the Investment Division, as specified. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1212/ Page 3 
On the recommendation of the CIO and after receiving an affirmative vote from a majority 
of the Board of Trustees, the executive director must terminate the individual employed to 
implement the governance program. 
 
Current Law:  SRPS is established in statute to provide retirement and pension benefits 
for its members. The SRPS board consists of 15 members and is responsible for the 
management, general administration, and proper operation of the State’s retirement and 
pension plans. The board must (1) appoint an Executive Director of SRA and (2) on the 
recommendation of the executive director and the board’s Investment Committee, 
determine the qualification and appointment of the CIO, who is the head of the 
Investment Division. 
 
Fiduciary Duties 
 
A fiduciary of SRPS is defined as (1) a member of the Board of Trustees; (2) a member of 
the Investment Committee or other specified committees; or (3) an employee of SRA who 
exercises any discretionary authority or control over the management of the system or its 
assets. 
 
A fiduciary must discharge his or her duties solely in the interest of the participants and: 
 
 
for the exclusive purposes of providing benefits to the participants and for 
reasonable expenses; 
 
with the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under circumstances, then prevailing, 
that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would 
use; 
 
by diversifying investments so as to minimize the risk of large losses, unless it is 
clearly prudent not to do so; and 
 
in accordance with the laws, documents, and instruments governing the system. 
 
Chapters 24 and 25 of 2022 require an SRPS fiduciary, when managing assets of the system 
in accordance with statutory fiduciary responsibilities, to consider the potential systemic 
risks of the impact of climate change on the system’s assets. The Acts specify related 
requirements and reporting responsibilities. 
 
Administrative Costs 
 
Prior to fiscal 2013, SRA’s budget was funded solely from the system’s assets, but 
Chapter 397 of 2011 instead required participating employers of SRPS, including the State, 
local school boards, community colleges, and PGUs, to pay their prorated share of the 
system’s administrative costs based on their share of total membership in the system; the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1212/ Page 4 
State pays the share of public libraries. Thus, SRA’s operating budget is paid through a 
combination of special funds (60%, with administrative fees paid by local employers) and 
reimbursable funds (40%, with administrative fees paid by State agencies). Chapters 727 
and 728 of 2018 made expenses of the Investment Division nonbudgeted and, therefore, 
not included in the calculation of administrative fees paid by participating employers. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  In response to Chapters 24 and 25, the CIO established a governance 
program and created the position of Senior Governance Manager to lead the program. Thus, 
the bill’s provisions related to the governance program have no fiscal effect because they 
codify the existing program and position. 
 
The bill requires SRA to employ a Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion to perform 
specified duties. No such position exists in SRA; thus, special and reimbursable fund 
expenditures increase by $107,058 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for a 90-day start-up 
delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of SRA 
hiring one Director of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion, as required by the bill. It includes 
a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$99,802 
Operating Expenses 
7,256 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$107,058 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
State agency expenditures (all funds) increase by a combined total of about $42,800 to pay 
the State’s share of the cost of the new SRA position. Special and reimbursable fund 
revenues for SRA increase due to higher administrative fee assessments on the State and 
local governments. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Expenditures for PGUs and other local employers increase 
minimally due to higher administrative fee assessments to cover the cost of the new SRA 
position. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1212/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5