START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1273 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1273 
(Delegate Pruski) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Vehicle Laws - Manufacturers and Dealers - Delivery of Vehicles 
 
 
This bill authorizes a licensed dealer or distributor to electronically submit an order 
(instead of placing a written order) to a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch. 
Accordingly, a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch may not refuse to deliver 
certain new vehicles and truck component parts, as specified, to a licensed dealer or 
distributor on receipt of an electronic order, subject to other requirements. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch may not refuse to deliver 
new motor vehicles, new two-stage vehicles, or truck component parts, as the case may be, 
to a licensed dealer or distributor, in reasonable quantities and within a reasonable time 
after receipt of a written order, if specified requirements are met. Also, any system operated 
by a manufacturer, distributor, or factory branch or its affiliate for the allocation of new 
vehicles to dealers must be reasonable and fair for all dealers.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1273/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1003 (Senator Folden) - Judicial Proceedings. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2