START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1256 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1256 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo) 
Economic Matters 
 
 
Electricity – Tariffs, Distributed Energy Resources, and Electric Distribution 
System Support Services (Distributed Renewable Integration and Vehicle 
Electrification (DRIVE) Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each investor-owned electric company to file with the Public Service 
Commission (PSC) one or more time-of-use (TOU) tariffs to be available for appropriate 
customer classes on an opt-in basis and an enrollment target to achieve by January 1, 2028. 
PSC must also (1) adopt regulations to establish an expedited process for interconnecting 
bidirectional electric vehicle systems to the grid and (2) develop a program for each 
investor-owned electric company to establish a pilot program or temporary tariff to 
compensate owners and aggregators of “distributed energy resources” for “electric 
distribution system support services.” PSC may also approve or require an investor-owned 
electric company to offer upfront incentives or rebates to customers to acquire and install 
“renewable on-site generating systems.” The bill also addresses cost recovery, municipal 
and cooperative participation, and low- or moderate-income customers. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $410,600 in FY 2025 and by 
the amounts shown below in future years; expenditures in FY 2025 through 2028 reflect 
additional consultant costs. Special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. Special fund expenditures and revenues 
for the Office of People’s Counsel (OPC) may also increase beginning in FY 2025. The 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) advises that it can handle the bill’s requirements 
with existing budgeted resources. The effect on electricity prices is discussed in the 
Additional Comments section below.   
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$410,600 
$441,700 
$450,000 
$458,500 
$217,400 
SF Expenditure 
$410,600 
$441,700 
$450,000 
$458,500 
$217,400 
Net Effect 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1256/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
The effect on electricity prices is discussed in the Additional Comments section below.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. The effect on electricity prices is discussed in the 
Additional Comments section below.       
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:            
 
Definitions 
 
“Distributed energy resource” means an energy resource located on a customer’s premises 
that (1) produces or stores electricity or (2) modifies the timing or amount of the customer’s 
electricity consumption. 
 
“Electric distribution system support services” means the dispatch and control of a 
distributed energy resource to provide services that contribute to the efficient and reliable 
operation of the electric distribution system by an electric company or an aggregator acting 
at the direction of an electric company. It includes (1) local or system peak demand 
reduction; (2) demand response; (3) the avoidance or deferral of a transmission or 
distribution upgrade or capacity expansion; and (4) facilitating hosting capacity to 
accommodate additional distributed energy resources. 
 
“Renewable on-site generating system” means an energy system located on a customer’s 
premises that: 
 
 
generates or stores electricity from a Tier 1 renewable source or a Tier 2 renewable 
source, as those terms are defined in current law, that does not release greenhouse 
gasses (GHGs); 
 
is capable of providing electricity to (1) a home, business, or other structure serviced 
by an electric company and (2) the electric distribution system;  
 
is paired with an energy storage device that is configured to charge from the 
renewable source and the electric distribution system, unless, for the purpose of 
eligibility for net metering, the device is required to be charged only from the 
renewable source; and 
 
is interconnected and operates in parallel with an electric company’s transmission 
and distribution facilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1256/ Page 3 
It may include bidirectional electric vehicle service equipment located on a customer’s 
premises.  
 
Findings of the General Assembly 
 
The General Assembly finds and declares that: 
 
 
well-designed TOU pricing of electricity can help mitigate the impacts of 
electrification on the electric distribution system, reduce GHG emissions during 
peak hours, and encourage customer adoption of beneficial electrification measures 
through off-peak cost savings; 
 
widespread beneficial electrification will increase demand on the electric 
distribution system and potentially require significant system upgrades if consumers 
adopting beneficial electrification measures do not engage in a form of load 
management to mitigate the need for system upgrades and reduce the GHG 
intensities associated with generation emissions during peak hours; 
 
pairing the adoption of renewable on-site generating systems with beneficial 
electrification measures may (1) further reduce the State’s GHG emissions; 
(2) provide on-site resilience to consumers; and (3) facilitate load flexibility to 
mitigate impacts on the electric distribution system from load growth due to 
beneficial electrification; and 
 
it is reasonable to provide additional incentives and protections to low- and 
moderate-income households to (1) ensure access to the benefits of electrification 
and on-site energy systems and (2) protect those households from negative bill 
impacts during a transition to TOU rates. 
 
Time-of-use Tarriff  
 
By July 1, 2025, each investor-owned electric company must file with PSC one or more 
TOU tariffs for appropriate customer classes, to be made available to customers on an 
opt-in basis. Each TOU tariff must establish a sufficient price discount for off-peak hours 
compared to peak hours, as determined by the market or an investor-owned electric 
company’s cost of service, to encourage customers to adjust electricity use to off-peak 
hours. The tariffs must be accompanied by a reasonable enrollment target to try to achieve 
by January 1, 2028, through a combination of marketing, customer education, and other 
means to communicate the benefits and risks of TOU rates.  
 
PSC may require an investor-owned electric company to automatically enroll customers 
that receive an incentive from the company as part of a beneficial electrification program 
in a TOU tariff, but PSC must require that any automatically enrolled customers be 
provided an opportunity to opt-out. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1256/ Page 4 
By July 1, 2026, each investor-owned electric company must submit a report to PSC 
evaluating (1) the potential to avoid or defer electric distribution system capital projects 
through the use of TOU rates, demand-response and demand-side programs, and renewable 
on-site generating systems and (2) the merits and feasibility of transitioning all customers 
to a TOU tariff on an opt-out basis. By December 31, 2027, PSC must submit a report to 
the General Assembly on (1) the impacts of opt-in TOU tariffs on the electric distribution 
system; (2) the timeline, feasibility, and merits of transitioning all customers to a 
TOU tariff on an opt-out basis; and (3) whether a full transition to TOU rates is justified.  
 
An investor-owned electric company may recover all reasonable and prudent costs, 
including marketing costs, to achieve its proposed enrollment targets and execute its 
responsibilities under these provisions. For good cause, PSC may delay the deadline for an 
investor-owned electric company to comply with these provisions. A municipal electric 
utility or electric cooperative may file with PSC one or more TOU tariffs in the same 
manner as an investor-owned electric company under the bill, and if it does so, is then 
governed by the same provisions as an investor-owned electric company described above. 
 
Bidirectional Electric Vehicle Systems 
 
By May 1, 2025, PSC must adopt regulations to (1) establish expedited processes for 
interconnecting specified bidirectional electric vehicle systems to the electric distribution 
system and (2) provide investor-owned electric companies with adequate time to ensure 
electric distribution system reliability in advance of the electric vehicle system 
interconnections. 
 
An investor-owned electric company may require a customer to provide notice to the 
company if the customer installs a bidirectional electric vehicle system and must require a 
customer to apply for interconnection if the customer configures the system to provide 
electricity to the electric distribution system. A municipal electric utility or an electric 
cooperative may comply with these requirements in the same manner as an investor-owned 
electric company. 
 
Electric Distribution System Support Services Program 
 
PSC must develop a program for each investor-owned electric company to establish a pilot 
program or temporary tariff to compensate owners and aggregators of distributed energy 
resources for electric distribution system support services through an incentive mechanism 
determined by PSC. By July 1, 2025, each investor-owned electric company must submit 
a pilot program or temporary tariff to PSC for approval, subject to specified requirements 
for performance and compensation. PSC must approve, deny, or approve with amendments 
the pilot program or temporary tariff in an expedited manner. A municipal electric utility 
or electric cooperative may also establish a pilot program, temporary tariff, or performance 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1256/ Page 5 
mechanism under the program, subject to the same requirements as investor owned-electric 
companies (and other incentives for on-site generating systems described below). 
 
If PSC finds the transition to be in the public interest, PSC may establish a process for an 
investor-owned electric company to transition a pilot program or temporary tariff to a 
permanent program or tariff for electric distribution system support services; pilot 
customers may be transitioned to the permanent program or tariff.  
 
PSC may allow the energy generated by a renewable on-site generating system that 
provides electric distribution system support service under a pilot program or temporary 
tariff to count toward the investor-owned electric company’s GHG emissions reduction 
goals under EmPOWER Maryland.  
 
Except for electric vehicles that are part of a renewable on-site generating system and 
mobile energy storage devices, the cumulative energy storage capacity of any energy 
storage devices installed on a customer’s property in accordance with the bill must count 
toward capacity requirements under the Maryland Energy Storage Program.  
 
The cumulative nameplate capacity of renewable on-site generating systems participating 
in a pilot program or temporary tariff under the bill may not exceed 2% of the 
investor-owned electric company’s highest recorded coincident peak demand. 
 
Incentives for On-site Generating Systems 
 
Subject to specified requirements and considerations, PSC may approve or require an 
investor-owned electric company to offer upfront incentives or rebates to customers to 
acquire and install renewable on-site generating systems if the customer (1) enrolls in a 
pilot program or temporary tariff under the bill and (2) allows the system to be used for 
electric distribution system support services for at least five years. 
 
PSC may (1) authorize or require an investor-owned electric company to provide an 
additional incentive or rebate for low- or moderate-income customers who apply for an 
incentive or rebate and (2) require an investor-owned electric company to prioritize the 
offer of incentives or rebates to low- or moderate-income customers. 
 
PSC must consider establishing a limit on the amount of incentives or rebates issued in a 
manner that achieves deployment goals while mitigating potential customer impacts. 
 
When approving or requiring an incentive or rebate under the bill, PSC must consult with 
MEA to ensure that the incentive or rebated is designed to supplement, to the greatest extent 
possible, other available State and federal incentives for customer adoption of renewable 
on-site generating systems. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1256/ Page 6 
Cost Recovery 
 
An investor-owned electric company may recover all reasonable costs incurred in  
(1) participating in and administering an electric distribution system support services 
program and (2) offering an upfront incentive or rebate under the bill. To the extent 
feasible, the costs must be recovered by the investor-owned electric company within the 
calendar year in which those costs were incurred.  
 
Notwithstanding any provision of the bill, an investor-owned electric company may pursue 
and use a performance incentive mechanism to cover the cost of using distributed energy 
resources or an aggregator of distributed resources under the bill. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Public Service Commission and Rate Regulation 
 
PSC must supervise and regulate public service companies subject to its jurisdiction to  
(1) ensure their operation in the interest of the public and (2) promote adequate, 
economical, and efficient delivery of utility services in the State without unjust 
discrimination. In doing so, PSC must consider the public safety, the economy of the State, 
the maintenance of fair and stable labor standards for affected workers, the conservation of 
natural resources, the preservation of environmental quality, the achievement of the State’s 
climate commitments for reducing GHG emissions, and the protection of a public service 
company’s infrastructure against cybersecurity threats. PSC must also enforce compliance 
with legal requirements by public service companies. 
 
A public service company must charge just and reasonable rates for the regulated services 
that it renders. Generally, PSC has the power to set a just and reasonable rate of a public 
service company, as a maximum rate, minimum rate, or both. A “just and reasonable rate” 
means a rate that: 
 
 
does not violate any provision of the Public Utilities Article;  
 
fully considers and is consistent with the public good; and  
 
except for rates of a common carrier, will result in an operating income to the public 
service company that yields, after reasonable deduction for depreciation and other 
necessary and proper expenses and reserves, a reasonable return on the fair value of 
the public service company’s property used and useful in providing service to the 
public. 
 
Electric companies may currently offer TOU rates to customers, including residential 
customers.  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1256/ Page 7 
Climate Goals and the Electric Grid 
 
The Climate Solutions Now Act (CSNA) of 2022 made broad changes to the State’s 
approach to reducing statewide GHG emissions and addressing climate change. Among 
other things, the Act accelerated previous statewide GHG emissions reductions targets 
originally established under the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reduction Act by requiring the 
State to develop plans, adopt regulations, and implement programs to (1) reduce 
GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031 and (2) achieve net-zero statewide 
GHG emissions by 2045. 
 
CSNA established the goal of the State that the electric distribution system support, in a 
cost-effective manner, the State’s policy goals with regard to (1) GHG reduction; 
(2) renewable energy; (3) decreasing dependence on electricity imported from other states; 
and (4) achieving energy distribution resiliency, efficiency, and reliability. 
 
By December 1, 2024, and each year thereafter, PSC must submit a report to the 
General Assembly with information regarding the current status of electric distribution 
system evolution, including information on electric distribution system planning processes 
and implementation that promote specified goals, such as: 
 
 
measures to decrease GHG emissions incident to electric distribution, including 
high levels of distributed energy resources and electric vehicles; 
 
giving priority to vulnerable communities in the development of distributed energy 
resources and electric vehicle infrastructure;  
 
meeting anticipated increases in load; and 
 
incorporation of energy storage technology to support the electric distribution 
system, as specified. 
 
CSNA also required PSC to conduct a one-time study to assess the capacity of the 
distribution systems of the larger electric and gas companies to successfully serve 
customers under a managed transition to a highly electrified building sector, which can be 
viewed on the PSC website. 
 
Net Metering 
 
Net energy metering is the measurement of the difference between the electricity that is 
supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by an eligible 
customer-generator and fed back to the electric company over the eligible 
customer-generator’s billing period. PSC must require electric utilities to develop and 
make net metering tariffs available to eligible customer-generators. Generally, the 
generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may be up to 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1256/ Page 8 
2 megawatts, or up to 5 megawatts for a community solar energy generating system. 
Eligible energy sources are solar, wind, biomass, micro combined heat and power, fuel 
cell, and certain types of hydroelectric. There is a statewide net-metered capacity limit of 
3,000 megawatts. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  PSC advises that the bill creates significant new and incremental 
requirements that cannot be absorbed within existing resources. PSC requires 
two additional staff and must hire consultants with expertise in forecasting, modeling, 
incentives, and grid impacts associated with distributed energy resources. Consultant costs 
are assumed to be incurred in equal $250,000 increments in fiscal 2025 through 2028; 
actual timing and amounts may vary. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $410,628 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one engineer and one regulatory economist to implement the bill, including 
researching TOU rates and related issues, reviewing tariff changes, attending workgroup 
meetings, preparing required reports and comments, and participating in the development 
of applicable rules and regulations. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, ongoing operating expenses, and $250,000 in consultant costs. 
 
Positions 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$141,616 
Contractual Services 
250,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
19,012 
Total FY 2025 PSC Expenditures 
$410,628 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. Expenditures through 
fiscal 2028 also reflect $250,000 in annual consultant costs. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
OPC anticipates that participation in the complex PSC proceedings associated with the bill 
will require a significant portion of current agency resources, including both internal staff 
and external technical consultant expenses. Accordingly, special fund expenditures for 
OPC may increase beginning in fiscal 2025 for consultants and/or additional staff, 
depending on the amount of other PSC proceedings. OPC is also funded through 
assessments on public service companies; thus, any additional special fund expenditures 
are funded through a corresponding increase in special fund revenues from assessments 
imposed on public service companies. 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1256/ Page 9 
Additional Comments:  The State, local governments, and small businesses, as electric 
customers, are affected by the bill’s processes to transition to opt-in TOU rates, various 
incentives provided by electric companies, and electric company cost recovery. The net 
effect on any particular unit of government or small business is unknown, but likely 
depends on individual circumstances (such as the amount of savings under TOU rates and 
incentives, and whether those savings outweigh an increase in electric company 
distribution rates for the affected customer class).   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 959 (Senator Feldman) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9