START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1287 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1287 
(The Speaker, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
School Leadership Training Program - Alterations 
 
 
This bill combines two school leadership training programs, already required to be 
established by the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) in conjunction with 
the Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB), into one program and modifies the 
attendance requirement. Specifically, the bill establishes that (1) the State Superintendent 
of Schools; (2) local superintendents of schools; and (3) the chair and vice chair of the State 
Board of Education (SBE), local boards of education, and AIB all must complete the 
training. Senior instruction-related staff, other members of local boards of education, and 
school principals are not required to complete the training but are, to the extent practicable, 
encouraged to complete the training. The bill also expands the required content areas for 
the combined school leadership training program, alters the required modes of instruction 
for the program, and specifies that the program must occur over the course of one year 
(instead of one to two years). The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE and AIB can adapt the development of the school leadership training 
program without additional expenditures beyond those already required to implement the 
two-track program under current law. Minimal savings may be realized for SBE, and 
additional costs are incurred for AIB, for attendance at the training. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can likely facilitate participation of specified board 
members and superintendents in the training developed by MSDE and AIB using existing 
resources. Minimal savings associated with attendance at the training may be realized. 
Local revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1287/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 36 of 2021, The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future, 
required MSDE, in collaboration with AIB, to establish two school leadership training 
programs. One program is for the State Superintendent, local school superintendents, and 
senior instruction-related staff, and the other is for SBE members, members of local boards 
of education, and school principals. 
 
Under the bill, MSDE, in collaboration with AIB must establish a single school leadership 
training program, which the State Superintendent, local school superintendents, and the 
chair and vice chair of SBE, local boards of education, and AIB all must complete. Senior 
instruction-related staff, other members of local boards of education, and school principals 
are not required to complete the training but are, to the extent practicable, encouraged to 
complete the training. 
 
Under current law, the two programs are both cohort-based, provide leadership training 
over the course of one to two years, and allow participants to discuss and implement lessons 
and skills while working as school leaders. The programs must also be job-embedded to 
allow for application of knowledge and techniques, tailored to program participants using 
self-diagnostics and school-level diagnostics, evidence-based in accordance with the 
guidelines for the federal Every Student Succeeds Act, and include training on the 
Blueprint. 
 
The format for the unified program established by the bill mirrors the format specified for 
the two sperate programs under current law, except the combined program in the bill must 
(1) include regional gatherings of educational leaders and other meetings when appropriate; 
(2) be provided through both in-person and virtual sessions; (3) be job-embedded only to 
the extent practicable; and (4) be for a duration of one year. 
 
The current program for school superintendents and senior instruction-related staff must 
include:   
 
 
a review of education in the United States relative to countries with top performing 
education systems and the implications of high performance for students, the 
economic security of the United States, and quality of life; 
 
a model for strategic thinking that will assist education leaders to transform districts 
under their leadership; 
 
training to provide a working knowledge of research on how students learn and its 
implications; 
 
a research-based model for coaching school leaders; and 
 
lessons in transformational leadership. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1287/ Page 3 
The current program for board of education members and principals must include:   
 
 
a method for organizing schools to achieve high performance, including (1) building 
instructional leadership teams; (2) implementing career ladders for teachers; 
(3) overseeing teacher induction and mentoring systems; and (4) identifying 
recruiting and retaining high quality school leaders; 
 
a model for strategic thinking that will assist school leaders in driving redesign 
efforts in their schools; 
 
training to provide a deep understanding of standards-aligned instructional systems; 
 
training to provide a working knowledge of the research on how students learn and 
the implications of this research for instructional redesign, curriculum, and 
professional learning; 
 
a research-based model for instructional coaching; 
 
an overview of ethical leadership directly tied to the school leaders’ responsibility 
to drive equitable learning in their schools; and 
 
lessons in transformational leadership. 
 
The combined program under the bill incorporates or adapts elements from the 
requirements for the two training programs as specified under current law, including:   
 
 
a review of education in the United States relative to countries with top performing 
education systems and the implications of high performance for students, the 
economic security of the United States, and quality of life; 
 
a model for strategic thinking that will assist education leaders to transform districts 
and redesign schools under their leadership; 
 
training to provide a working knowledge of research on how students learn and its 
implications; 
 
a research-based model for coaching school leaders and instructional coaches; 
 
lessons in transformational leadership; 
 
a method for organizing schools to achieve high performance, including (1) building 
instructional leadership teams; (2) implementing career ladders for teachers; 
(3) overseeing teacher induction and mentoring systems; and (4) identifying 
recruiting and retaining high quality and diverse school leaders; 
 
training to provide a deep understanding of standards-aligned instructional systems; 
and 
 
an overview of ethical leadership directly tied to the educational leaders’ 
responsibility to drive equitable learning in their schools. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1287/ Page 4 
The bill adds two new requirements to the combined training program:   
 
 
a review of research regarding (1) the benefits to students from access to 
high-quality and diverse teachers; (2) methods to attract highly qualified teachers 
from diverse backgrounds who reflect the demographics of the students they teach; 
and (3) best practices for teacher retention, including retention of teachers from 
diverse backgrounds; and 
 
a review of research methods to attract and retain an inclusive workforce. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE and AIB have not yet established a superintendent school 
leadership training program as specified in § 6-124 of the Education Article. Therefore, 
MSDE and AIB advise that the eventual development of such a program can be adapted to 
reflect the bill’s changes without the need for additional expenditures beyond those 
required to develop a two-track program as specified in current law. To the extent SBE 
board members and the State Superintendent would have attended the training under 
current law, costs of attendance are likely reduced given the potential for virtual 
participation and shorter program duration. However, AIB incurs additional costs due to 
the requirement for training for the chair and vice chair and the potential for other members 
to attend the training. Absent a realized training program, the timing and amount of these 
costs cannot be estimated; regardless, they are assumed to be minimal. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill requires regional gatherings of leaders and the use of both 
virtual and in-person sessions. Therefore, some local governments may face minimal 
additional costs to facilitate transportation of personnel to such trainings. However, local 
school systems can likely accommodate participation in such trainings with existing 
resources as participation is required for only a limited number of local officials (local 
superintendents and the chairs and vice chairs of local boards of education). This analysis 
further assumes that senior instruction-related staff, other members of local boards of 
education, and school principals participate in the training only to the extent that local 
school systems can accommodate participation using existing resources. Also, to the extent 
local officials and employees would have attended the training under current law, costs of 
attendance are likely reduced given the potential for virtual participation and shorter 
program duration. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1287/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Accountability and 
Implementation Board; Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Baltimore City 
Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Prince George’s County 
Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 25, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5