START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1228 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1228 
(Delegate Stewart) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Consumer Protection - Telephone Solicitation - Exemptions and Remedies 
 
   
This emergency bill establishes that certain provisions that prohibit a person from making 
(or causing to make) a telephone solicitation that involves (1) an automated system for 
selection or dialing of telephone numbers or (2) the playing of a recorded message when a 
connection is completed to the number called do not apply to a noncommercial telephone 
solicitation for the purpose of public opinion research. Additionally, the bill establishes 
that the requirements and remedies provided under the State’s telephone solicitations law 
(Title 14, Subtitle 45 of the Commercial Law Article) may not be waived by an agreement, 
unless the agreement is part of a settlement of a legal dispute or action. However, an 
agreement may establish more extensive requirements or remedies than those established 
under State law. Pursuant to existing statute, a violation of Title 14, Subtitle 45 of the 
Commercial Law Article is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under the 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal 
penalty provisions. Finally, the bill authorizes a “called party” who is aggrieved by a person 
in violation of Title 14, Subtitle 45 to bring an action in accordance with a specified 
provision of MCPA to enjoin further violations and recover damages of up to $500 or actual 
damages, whichever is greater; however, on a finding of a willful or knowing violation, the 
court may award damages up to three times of the applicable amount. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1228/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A “telephone solicitation” is an organized activity, program, or campaign 
to communicate by telephone with residents of the State in order to:   
 
 
sell, lease, or rent goods or services (or attempt to do so); 
 
offer (or attempt to offer) a gift or prize; 
 
conduct (or attempt to conduct) a poll; or 
 
request (or attempt to request) survey information, if the results of the survey will 
be used directly to solicit persons to purchase, lease, or rent goods or services. 
 
A telephone solicitation includes the act of managing, directing, or supervising an 
individual engaged in telephone solicitation. A “called party” means a person who is a 
regular user of a telephone number that receives a telephone solicitation. 
 
Chapters 413 and 414 of 2023 specify that, unless prior express written consent is provided 
by the called party, a person is prohibited from making (or causing to be made) a telephone 
solicitation that involves (1) an automated system for the selection or dialing of telephone 
numbers or (2) the playing of a recorded message when a connection is completed to the 
number called. Chapters 413 and 414 also restrict the methods, times, and identifying 
information that a solicitor may utilize and establishes a rebuttable presumption that a 
telephone solicitation made to any area code in the State is made to a resident (or a person) 
who is reasonably presumed to reside or have a place of business in the State at the time 
the call is made. Certain entities and circumstances are not subject to these requirements. 
For example, Chapters 413 and 414 do not apply to:   
 
 
a telephone solicitation that is an isolated transaction and not performed in the 
course of a pattern of repeated transactions of a similar nature; 
 
a noncommercial telephone solicitation for religious, charitable, political, or 
educational purposes, as specified; 
 
certain business-to-business sales; or 
 
a person who solicits contracts for the maintenance or repair of goods previously 
purchased from the person making the solicitation (or on whose behalf the 
solicitation is made). 
 
A violation under the Acts is an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA, 
subject to MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. 
 
Additionally, the requirements of Chapters 413 and 414 do not preclude the applicability 
of specified provisions of the Public Utilities Article relating to telephone solicitations and 
automated dialing. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1228/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Public Service Commission; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3