START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1219 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1219 
(Delegate Feldmark, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Public and Nonpublic Middle and High Schools - Venue-Specific Emergency 
Action Plans for Athletic Facilities (The Bailey Bullock Act) 
 
 
This bill requires each public middle and high school to include a cardiac emergency 
response plan (CERP) as a component of its venue-specific emergency action plan for 
athletic facilities. It also requires all nonpublic middle and high schools receiving State 
funding to develop a venue-specific emergency action plan for athletic facilities, including 
a CERP, identical to the emergency action plans required of public middle and 
high schools. For both public and nonpublic schools, the CERP must (1) identify the 
appropriate school personnel as the cardiac emergency response team to respond to 
incidents involving sudden cardiac arrest or a similar life-threatening emergency while at 
an athletic facility; (2) coordinate with first responders in the local emergency medical 
services (EMS) to integrate the plan into local emergency response protocols; (3) include 
specified evidence-based core elements recommended by an appropriate national 
organization; and (4) be annually reviewed and updated by each middle school and 
high school. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  To the extent that the bill requires nonpublic schools to comply with 
provisions of the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator (AED) Program, 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) expenditures may 
increase, beginning in FY 2025, to furnish AEDs. The extent of such additional 
expenditures cannot be reliably estimated at this time.  
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems may incur minimal administrative and training costs 
under the bill, but school systems can likely integrate the required plan into existing related 
plans and practices with existing resources. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1219/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Venue-specific Emergency Action Plan for Public School Athletic Facilities 
 
Chapter 212 of 2022 requires each middle school and high school to develop a 
venue-specific emergency action plan for the operation and use of AEDs and for heat 
acclimatization. The venue-specific emergency action plan must also include coordination 
of care for other injuries and severe weather for outdoor facilities.  
 
The venue-specific emergency action plan must include guidelines for heat acclimatization 
for student athletes, as specified, and ensure that (1) each school is properly prepared and 
equipped to initiate cold water immersion for the treatment of exertional heat stroke; (2) a 
cooling modality is readily available to student athletes at all athletic practices and events 
on school property; (3) all members of the coaching staff are trained in cold water 
immersion; and (4) a trained member of the coaching staff is present at all athletic practices 
and events on school property. 
 
Public Schools Automated External Defibrillator Program 
 
Each county board must develop and implement an AED Program that meets certain 
requirements for each high school and middle school in the county. Each middle school 
and high school must develop a venue-specific emergency action plan for the operation 
and use of AEDs. Each middle school and high school must also develop a venue-specific 
emergency action plan for all athletic facilities that, among other provisions, includes 
operation and use of AEDs. 
 
According to the Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR), each county board must 
develop and implement a High School and Middle School AED Program requiring, at 
minimum one: 
 
 
AED on site in each public high school and middle school, which must be available 
for use at each school-sponsored athletic event; 
 
individual trained in the operation and use of an AED present at each 
school-sponsored athletic event; and 
 
individual trained in the operation and use of an AED on site at each high school 
and middle school during the regular school day. 
 
Among other specifications, the program must (1) comply with the rules, regulations, and 
policies that the State EMS Board determines are applicable; (2) designate an 
AED coordinator who is trained in cardiopulmonary resuscitation and AED operation who 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1219/ Page 3 
is responsible for implementation and administration of the AED Program; and (3) contact 
and collaborate with the closest jurisdictional EMS operational program once the 
High School and Middle School AED Program is approved by the EMS Board. 
 
The Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) must develop policies and 
implement a program to provide awareness to coaches, school personnel, students, and the 
parents of students, in collaboration with the Maryland Department of Health, each county 
board, the Maryland Public Secondary Schools Athletic Association, the Maryland Athletic 
Trainers’ Association, Parent Heart Watch, and licensed health care providers who treat 
heart issues on (1) the nature and warning signs of sudden cardiac arrest and (2) the risks 
associated with continuing to play or practice after experiencing a symptom of sudden 
cardiac arrest. 
 
Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program 
 
The AED Program permits an organization, business, association, or agency that meets 
specified requirements to make AEDs available to victims of sudden cardiac arrest. 
MIEMSS oversees the program, including approving entities to participate and issuing 
registrations. Under COMAR to be eligible for registration or renewal of registration, each 
facility must designate an AED coordinator who must:  
 
 
complete cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and AED training and subsequent 
refresher training, in accordance with specified requirements;  
 
be responsible for implementing and administering the AED Program at the facility; 
and  
 
ensure that monthly safety inspections of all supplemental and AED equipment are 
conducted.  
 
Likewise, a facility must ensure that all expected AED operators have completed CPR and 
AED training and subsequent refresher training, as specified. AEDs must be placed in 
locations that are visible and readily accessible to any person willing to operate the AED 
in the event of a suspected cardiac arrest. A facility at which an AED is operated must have 
a telephone or communication service available at all times for the notification of a public 
safety answering point; it must also submit data or other information concerning the 
AED Program as requested by MIEMSS. 
 
Additional Comments:  MSDE advises that 352 nonpublic schools in Maryland currently 
participate in at least one of the three programs that provide funding to nonpublic schools. 
Nonpublic schools may incur additional expenses to develop and administer the required 
bills. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1219/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1024 (Senator Brooks) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4