START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1235 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1235 
(Delegates Addison and Young) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – License Extensions 
 
 
This bill specifies, in Baltimore City, that a Class B-D-7 license issued for a premises in 
the 5517 block of Harford Road must be considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, for the 
purpose of transfer to another owner at this location, if the applicant enters into a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Hamilton Community Association. The 
bill also specifies that a Class B-D-7 license issued for a premises in the 2200 block of 
East Fayette Street must be considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, for the purposes of 
renewal to the current license year, and transfer to a different applicant at this location, if 
the applicant enters into an MOU with the Cleaning, Active, Restoring, Efforts Community 
Association (C.A.R.E.). The MOU for C.A.R.E. must (1) establish a community input 
process for the transfer of the license; (2) limit the license to the sale of beer and wine only 
during the first 12 months of operation immediately following the transfer; (3) include 
public safety measures relating to parking, lighting, music, noise, cameras, and trash; and 
(4) prohibit the license from being transferred to a new location. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024, and terminates July 31, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City revenues may increase minimally in FY 2025 to the extent 
a transfer and/or renewal of licenses occurs under the bill. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1235/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners may issue a 
Class B-D-7 license if it determines, upon consideration of the number of beer, wine, and 
liquor (BWL) outlets in the affected area and the outlets’ days of sale, that the license is 
reasonably necessary for public convenience. A Class B-D-7 license authorizes the licensee 
to sell BWL for on- and off-premises consumption. The annual license fee is $1,320, and 
the renewal fee is $50.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1079 (Senator McCray) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 12, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 12, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2