START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1203 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1203 
(Delegate Smith) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Economic Development - Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Program and 
Tax Increment Financing 
 
 
This bill establishes the Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Program and Fund in the 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO) to make loans for targeted 
investments in real estate and infrastructure projects to support specified economic, 
community development, inclusion, and equity objectives. MEDCO may set the terms and 
conditions for loans made under the program. The bill does not mandate funding, nor does 
it specify an intended level of discretionary funding. The bill also allows MEDCO, with 
local approval, to pledge specified alternative revenues under the Tax Increment Financing 
Act; pledged funds may be used for specified purposes, including to support the Strategic 
Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund. MEDCO must adopt implementing regulations. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for MEDCO increase by $15.0 million in 
FY 2025 and by $20.0 million annually from FY 2026 through 2029, under the 
assumptions discussed below. Special fund revenues and expenditures for MEDCO 
increase correspondingly as funds are received and used by the corporation for authorized 
purposes. Special fund revenues further increase beginning as early as FY 2025 from any 
pledged local revenues and beginning as early as FY 2026 from loan repayments. Special 
fund expenditures increase correspondingly as additional funds are used to provide new 
loans. In future years, State funding may decrease or cease. The State may also benefit 
from program loans, as discussed below. All funding is discretionary. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$15.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
GF Expenditure 
$15.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
SF Expenditure 
$15.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
$20.0 
Net Effect 
($15.0) 
($20.0) 
($20.0) 
($20.0) 
($20.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1203/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may increase beginning in FY 2025, as 
discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:    
 
Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Program 
 
The purpose of the program is to make loans for targeted investments in real estate and 
infrastructure projects to support transformative place-making, enhance transit-oriented 
development, enhance community development, and achieve inclusive and equitable 
economic growth objectives, with a focus on bringing underutilized assets into 
performance and generating revenue. 
 
Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund 
 
The Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund is established in MEDCO as a special, 
nonlapsing fund to provide loans for the cost of infrastructure projects that meet the 
purposes of the program. MEDCO must administer the fund, which consists of (1) money 
appropriated in the State budget; (2) premiums, fees, interest payments, and principal 
payments on loans made under the program; and (3) any other money from any other source 
accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only for loans made under the 
program. 
 
Program Loans 
 
An applicant is eligible for a loan under the program for projects located in a sustainable 
community, priority funding area, or transit-oriented development area, as those terms are 
defined in current law. MEDCO must establish an advisory loan committee to review loan 
applications and make recommendations on application approval. MEDCO must prioritize 
projects that:  
 
 
activate underutilized property owned by the government and institutions;   
 
offer significant development or redevelopment value;   
 
leverage private investment; and   
 
have the potential for significant job growth or retention.   
  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1203/ Page 3 
The bill specifies information that a loan application must contain, including a detailed 
strategic plan for the targeted investment and the amount of financial assistance requested. 
MEDCO may set the terms and conditions for loans under the program, including the 
length of the loan terms and renewals, appropriate fees, and loan amount per applicant. 
Loans may be used (1) to acquire property, including vacant sites; (2) for design and 
development of a project; and (3) for rehabilitation, construction, and demolition.  
 
The bill specifies further requirements and authorities for MEDCO in setting the terms of 
the loans, preparation of loan documents, and remedies in the event of misuse of loaned 
funds or nonpayment. 
 
Expansion of Tax Increment Financing Authority  
 
The bill also modifies the Tax Increment Financing Act to allow MEDCO, with the 
approval by resolution of the governing body of a political subdivision, to pledge 
alternative revenues generated within or otherwise directly attributable to a project located 
in an approved development district, a transit-oriented development, a Regional Institution 
Strategic Enterprise (RISE) zone, a sustainable community, or a State hospital 
redevelopment. The revenues pledged must be paid, as provided in the resolution, into a 
special account for the development district, transit-oriented development, RISE zone, 
sustainable community, or State hospital redevelopment to: 
 
 
secure the payment of debt service on bonds or MEDCO obligations; 
 
support the Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund established under the bill; 
or 
 
be applied to the other purposes stated in current law for local special accounts 
established under the Tax Increment Financing Act. (Statute uses the term “special 
fund” but these are not State special funds, so “account” is used in this fiscal and 
policy note for clarity.) 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Economic Development Corporation 
 
MEDCO is a nonbudgeted entity created in 1984 by the General Assembly to assist 
business and governmental entities through ownership, financing, and development of real 
and personal property projects. MEDCO purchases or develops property that is leased to 
others and makes loans to companies throughout the State to maintain or develop facilities. 
MEDCO has broad powers to finance projects and most often is a conduit issuer of 
tax-exempt revenue bonds to an eligible tax-exempt borrower. MEDCO has also issued its 
bonds to finance its own projects, which it owns and operates. MEDCO-owned projects 
consist mostly of student housing projects. Generally, MEDCO debt is not debt of the State, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1203/ Page 4 
and there is no implied State guaranty or State obligation to protect bondholders from 
losses.  
 
Tax Increment Financing Act 
 
All counties and municipalities in Maryland are authorized to utilize tax increment 
financing (TIF) under Title 12, Subtitle 2 of the Economic Development Article (the Tax 
Increment Financing Act). In Baltimore City, the authority to use TIF is provided in the 
city charter. Counties and municipalities (including Baltimore City) may issue bonds to 
finance the development of an industrial, commercial, or residential area.  
 
TIF is a public financing method that uses future gains in tax revenues to finance current 
improvements. The increase in the property tax revenue generated by new commercial 
development in a specific area, the TIF district, pays for bonds issued to finance site 
improvements, infrastructure, and other project costs located on public property. In a TIF 
district, the local government “freezes” the existing property tax base and uses the property 
tax revenue from this base as it would normally use such funds. The difference between 
the current tax base and the frozen base in each future year is termed the incremental 
valuation. The local government apportions the property tax revenue on the incremental 
valuation to a special account for certain purposes including to pay debt service on the 
bonds and to potentially pay for additional public expenditures in the TIF district. The TIF 
district ceases to exist upon the retirement of the bonds, and after that time, all property tax 
revenue may be appropriated by normal means. 
 
 
Alternative Revenues Pledged to Debt Service or MEDCO Obligations 
 
Additionally, a local government may pledge by or under a resolution that alternative local 
tax revenues generated within, or that are otherwise determined to be attributable to, a 
development district that is a transit-oriented development, a RISE zone, a sustainable 
community, or a State hospital redevelopment be paid, as provided in the resolution, into a 
special account to (1) secure the payment of debt service on bonds or MEDCO obligations 
or (2) be applied to the other eligible purposes under the Tax Increment Financing Act.  
 
“MEDCO obligation” means a bond, note, or other similar instrument that MEDCO issues 
under authority other than the Tax Increment Financing Act to finance the cost of 
infrastructure improvements located in or supporting a transit-oriented development, a 
sustainable community, a RISE zone, or a State hospital redevelopment.  
 
Targeted Development Areas 
 
Sustainable communities, priority funding areas, RISE zones, and transit-oriented 
development areas are designated areas that meet specified requirements and are eligible 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1203/ Page 5 
for a variety of State economic and community development programs. Priority funding 
areas are the largest of the four.   
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill does not mandate funding or otherwise specify an intended 
funding level for the program – State or otherwise. MEDCO advises that it does not intend 
to use its own nonbudgeted funds to implement the program. Additionally, the bill allows 
for, but does not require, certain local revenues to be used to support the Strategic 
Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund. Nevertheless, funding for a viable program that 
provides loans for infrastructure projects to, among other things, support transformative 
place-making, is assumed to be substantial. 
 
Therefore, this estimate assumes that $15.0 million in discretionary State funding is 
provided in fiscal 2025 and $20.0 million is provided annually from fiscal 2026 through 
2029 to provide initial funding for the program. In future years, discretionary State funding 
may decrease or cease as loan repayments, and, potentially, local revenues become 
available. Actual expenditures will vary to the extent that the timing and/or amount of 
discretionary funding is different from this estimate.  
 
MEDCO anticipates using existing staff to administer the program, at least initially. 
MEDCO employees are not State employees. This estimate assumes that MEDCO sets 
terms and conditions for loans under the program so as to cover its administrative costs 
with available State funding until other funds are available (loan repayments or local 
revenues). 
 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures for MEDCO increase by $15.0 million in 
fiscal 2025 and by $20.0 million annually from fiscal 2026 through 2029. Special fund 
revenues and expenditures for MEDCO increase correspondingly as funds are received and 
MEDCO provides loans to eligible recipients and pays for its administrative expenses. For 
purposes of this estimate, loans are assumed to be made in the fiscal year that general funds 
are appropriated (even though loans could be made in subsequent years with retained fund 
balance).  
 
Special fund revenues further increase beginning as early as fiscal 2025 from any pledged 
local revenues and beginning as early as fiscal 2026 from loan repayments. Special fund 
expenditures increase correspondingly as additional funds are used to provide new loans. 
 
The bill does not specify whether units of State government may apply for and receive 
funding under the program, although application requirements appear to assume that only 
business entities apply. Accordingly, the State may benefit from program loans used for 
eligible purposes under the program by private-sector recipients, and may benefit from 
direct program loans made to, for example, a State economic development entity. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1203/ Page 6 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill expands the authority of local governments under the Tax 
Increment Financing Act by allowing local alternative revenues to be pledged to a TIF 
special account; under current law, only various types of local tax revenues, including 
alternative tax revenues, may be pledged to a TIF special account. However, as an 
illustrative example, under the bill, a local government may establish additional parking 
fees and have that revenue pledged by MEDCO to a TIF special account. The bill also 
allows for alternative revenues to be used (1) for the same purposes authorized under 
current law for alternative tax revenues (i.e., the payment of TIF bonds or MEDCO 
obligations, plus any other eligible general purpose) and (2) to support the Strategic 
Infrastructure Revolving Loan Fund established under the bill. 
 
Accordingly, local government revenues and expenditures may increase, potentially 
significantly, beginning in fiscal 2025 as local alternative revenues are raised, pledged to 
TIF special accounts, and used for eligible purposes – including payment of local debt 
service, MEDCO obligations, and to support the Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan 
Fund. 
 
Additionally, MEDCO must prioritize Strategic Infrastructure Revolving Loan Program 
applications that activate underutilized property owned by the government and institutions. 
The bill does not specify whether local governments may apply for and receive funding 
under the program, although application requirements appear to assume that only business 
entities apply. Accordingly, local governments may benefit from program loans used for 
eligible purposes under the program by private-sector recipients, and local revenues and 
expenditures may further increase from direct program loans made to, for example, local 
economic development entities.    
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may benefit directly from loans made available 
under the program or from the use of the loaned funds for infrastructure spending. 
Additionally, small businesses may be affected by the expansion of local authority under 
the Tax Increment Financing Act – through, for example, additional fees or additional 
funding made available for infrastructure projects. 
 
Additional Comments:  The bill does not define alternative revenues, so it is unclear 
whether or not the term is inclusive of tax revenues. In either case, tax revenues may 
already be used for debt service, MEDCO obligations, and other eligible uses under the 
Tax Increment Financing Act, subject to various specified requirements – the distinction is 
whether or not tax revenues can be used to support the Strategic Infrastructure Revolving 
Loan Fund. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1203/ Page 7 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Economic Development Corporation; Department of 
Housing and Community Development; Maryland Department of Transportation;  
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7