START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1269 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1269 
(Baltimore County Delegation) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - License Applications - Online Notice 
 
 
This bill clarifies that the Baltimore County Board of License Commissioners must publish 
notice of an application for an alcoholic beverages license two times in two successive 
weeks in one newspaper of general circulation in Baltimore County. Further, the bill 
authorizes the board to fulfill the notice requirement related to applications for alcoholic 
beverages licenses by posting notice of an application hearing online at least 14 days prior 
to the application hearing date instead of publishing the notice in a local newspaper. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.      
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County expenditures decrease by as much as approximately 
$40,000 annually beginning FY 2025 from the reduction in costs associated with 
publishing information in local newspapers. Local revenues are not affected.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Before the board may approve an application for a license, the board must 
publish notice of the application two times in two successive weeks. The notification must 
be posted in two newspapers of general circulation in Baltimore County or, if only 
one newspaper of general circulation exists, in that newspaper. The notice must state the 
name of the applicant, the type of license for which the application is made, the location 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1269/ Page 2 
described in the application, and the date, time, and place set by the board for a hearing on 
the application.       
 
In Baltimore County, in addition to the newspaper notice, an inspector for the board must 
post a suitable notice in a conspicuous place at the location described in the application for 
at least 10 days before holding a hearing on the application. Such notice must state the class 
of licenses for which the application is made and the date, time, and location set by the 
board for an application hearing.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Baltimore County advises that, in fiscal 2023, the county spent 
$39,557 to publish notice of alcoholic beverage license hearings in accordance with current 
law. Under the bill, the county is authorized to post the information online, which can likely 
be accomplished with little to no additional cost. Therefore, Baltimore County expenditures 
decrease by as much as approximately $40,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to the 
extent the county posts alcoholic beverage hearing notices online instead of in local 
newspapers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2