START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1377 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1377 
(Delegate Pippy) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Frederick County - Alcoholic Beverages - Brewery and Distillery Licenses 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class DBR license in Frederick County and authorizes the 
Frederick County Board of License Commissioners to issue the license to a holder of a 
Class 5 brewery license and serve as the required on-premises consumption permit. The 
license holder may sell (1) food and nonalcoholic beverages and (2) beer brewed at the 
brewery for on- and off-premises consumption to the extent the license holder is allowed 
under the Class 5 brewery license. The bill also establishes a Class DDS permit and 
authorizes the board to issue the permit to a holder of a Class 1 distillery license and serve 
as the required on-premises consumption permit. The permit holder may sell (1) food and 
nonalcoholic beverages and (2) brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits that are 
distilled, rectified, blended, and bottled at the distillery for on- and off-premises 
consumption to the extent the permit holder is allowed under the Class 1 distillery license. 
The board must adopt regulations and set the annual fee for the Class DBR license and the 
Class DDS permit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County revenues may increase to the extent the board establishes 
and charges license and permit fees. Frederick County can handle any additional 
enforcement activity with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1377/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class 1 Distillery License 
 
A Class 1 distillery license authorizes the establishment and operation of a plant for 
distilling brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits at the location described in the 
license. It also authorizes the sale and delivery of those alcoholic beverages, with specified 
restrictions. The annual license fee is $2,000. 
 
A Class 1 distillery license also permits the license holder to conduct guided tours from 
10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., serve samples, and sell up to 2.25 liters of products manufactured 
on the licensed premises, for consumption off the licensed premises, and related 
merchandise, to persons of legal drinking age who participate in a guided tour of the 
licensed premises. 
 
Local licensing boards may grant an on-site consumption permit to a holder of a Class 1 
distillery license, which authorizes the license holder to use up to 7,750 gallons of liquor 
annually for mixed drinks sold through an on-premises consumption permit. 
 
Class 5 Brewery License 
 
The holder of a Class 5 brewery license may (1) establish and operate a plant for brewing 
and bottling malt beverages at the location described in the license; (2) import beer from a 
holder of a nonresident dealer’s permit; (3) contract to brew and bottle beer on behalf of 
other license holders; and (4) sell and deliver beer to a holder of a beer wholesaler’s license. 
The annual license fee is $1,500. 
 
A Class 5 brewery may serve samples of beer, from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., to an 
individual who participates in a guided tour of the brewery or attends a scheduled 
promotional event, as specified. Generally, the beer brewed at the brewery may also be 
sold for off-premises consumption at retail in a container other than a keg to an individual 
participating in a guided tour of the brewery or attending a scheduled promotional event or 
other organized activity at the brewery. 
 
Local licensing boards may issue on-premises consumption permits to applicants that hold 
a Class 5 brewery license and a Class D beer license. A local licensing board that does not 
issue a Class D beer license must establish an equivalent license and require the applicant 
to obtain that license before issuing a permit for on-premises consumption. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1377/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Small business distilleries that obtain a Class DDS permit and 
small business breweries that obtain a Class DBR license may benefit from the ability to 
sell food and nonalcoholic beverages under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1002 (Frederick County Senators) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3