START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1337 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1337 
(Delegate Woods, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Appeals and Grievances Process - Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill expands the required contents for the quarterly report each carrier must submit to 
the Insurance Commissioner regarding appeals and grievances. Each carrier must include 
in a quarterly report to the Commissioner (1) the number of members entitled to health care 
benefits under a policy, plan, or certificate issued or delivered in the State by the carrier 
and (2) the number of clean claims for reimbursement processed by the carrier. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  On a quarterly basis, each carrier must submit a report to the Commissioner 
that describes specified activities regarding appeals and grievances, including: 
 
 
the outcome of each grievance filed with the carrier; 
 
the number and outcomes of cases that were considered emergency cases and 
subject to an expedited procedure; 
 
the time within which the carrier made a grievance decision on each case, including 
emergency and nonemergency cases; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1337/ Page 2 
 
the number of grievances filed with the carrier that resulted from an adverse decision 
involving length of stay for inpatient hospitalization as related to the medical 
procedure involved; and 
 
the number of adverse decisions issued by the carrier for a nonemergency case and 
the type of service at issue in the adverse decisions. 
 
The report must also describe the number and outcome of all other cases that resulted from 
an adverse decision involving the length of stay for inpatient hospitalization as related to 
the medical procedure involved. 
 
The Commissioner must compile an annual summary report based on the information 
provided by carriers (and information provided by the Secretary of Health regarding health 
maintenance organizations) and provide copies of the summary report to the Governor and 
the General Assembly. 
 
Additional Comments:  The 2022 Report on the Health Care Appeals and Grievance Law 
published by the Maryland Insurance Administration in December 2023 can be found here. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2