START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 369

Chapter 369

(House Bill 1308)

AN ACT concerning

Real Property – Recordation of Instrument With False Information – Penalties
and Actions to Quiet Title

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a person from recording a deed or other instrument that
the person knows contains false information; establishing a certain statute of
limitations; authorizing a court to award certain costs in an action to quiet title if
the action or a defense to an action is based on the alleged recordation of a deed
containing false information; and generally relating to the recordation of a deed or
other instrument.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 5–106(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 5–106(gg)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Real Property
Section 3–104.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 14–607
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 14–617
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 369 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

5–106.

(a) Except as provided by this section, § 1–303 of the Environment Article, and §
8–1815 of the Natural Resources Article, a prosecution for a misdemeanor shall be
instituted within 1 year after the offense was committed.

(GG) A PROSECUTION FOR AN OFFENSE UNDER § 3–104.2 OF THE REAL
PROPERTY ARTICLE SHALL BE INSTITUTED WITHIN 3 YEARS AFTER THE OFFENSE
WAS COMMITTED.

Article – Real Property

3–104.2.

(A) A PERSON MAY NOT RECORD A DEED OR OTHER INSTRUMENT THAT THE
PERSON KNOWS CONTAINS FALSE INFORMATION, INCLUDING INFORMATION
RELATED TO THE OWNERSHIP OF THE PROPERTY.

(B) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS GUILTY OF A MISDEMEANOR
AND ON CONVICTION IS SUBJECT TO A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $500.

14–607.

(a) An answer to a complaint under this subtitle shall be verified and shall set
forth:

(1) Any claim the defendant has to the property that is the subject of the
action;

(2) Any facts tending to controvert any material allegations of the
complaint that the defendant does not wish to be taken as true; and

(3) A statement of any new matter constituting a defense.

(b) If the defendant disclaims any interest in the title of the property in the
answer or allows judgment to be taken without answer, the plaintiff may not recover costs.

14–617.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 369

(a) In all cases the plaintiff shall submit evidence at a hearing before the court
establishing the plaintiff’s title and the court may hear or take any evidence offered
respecting the claims of any defendant, other than claims the validity of which is admitted
by the plaintiff in the complaint.

(b) (1) A judgment in an action under this subtitle shall be recorded in the land
records of the county in which any portion of the property is located.

(2) The clerk shall index the judgment in accordance with § 3–302 of this
article, with the parties against whom the judgment is entered as grantor and the party in
whose favor the judgment is entered as grantee.

(C) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER § 14–607(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE, A COURT
MAY AWARD TO EITHER PARTY COSTS AND REASONABLE ATTORNEY’S FEES IF A
CLAIM OR DEFENSE IN THE CASE IS RELATED TO AN ALLEGED VIOLATION OF §
3–104.2 OF THIS ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3