START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 335

Chapter 335

(House Bill 1334)

AN ACT concerning

Housing and Community Development – Continuing the CORE Partnership
Fund – Extension

FOR the purpose of repealing the termination of the Continuing the CORE Partnership
Fund; requiring the Governor to include a certain appropriation in the annual budget
bill for the Fund; and generally relating to the Continuing the CORE Partnership
Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 4–511
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 639 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018
Section 2

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 640 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2018
Section 2

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

4–511.

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the Continuing the CORE Partnership Fund.

(b) There is a Continuing the CORE Partnership Fund.

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to assist the Department, in conjunction with the
Maryland Stadium Authority and Baltimore City, in expeditiously removing blighted
property within Baltimore City.

(d) The Secretary shall administer the Fund.

(e) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
the State Finance and Procurement Article.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 335 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(f) The Fund consists of:

(1) revenue distributed to the Fund under subsection (j) of this section;

(2) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; and

(3) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(g) The Fund may be used for:

(1) the purpose outlined in subsection (c) of this section; and

(2) administrative expenses.

(h) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the General Fund
of the State.

(i) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

(j) (1) For fiscal year 2020, the Governor may include in the annual budget
bill an appropriation of $30,000,000 to the Fund.

(2) For fiscal years 2021 through 2024, the Governor may include in the
annual budget bill an appropriation of $25,000,000 to the Fund.

(3) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER,
THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION
OF $50,000,000 TO THE FUND.

Chapter 639 of the Acts of 2018

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2018. [It shall remain effective for a period of 6 years and, at the end of June 30, 2024,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

Chapter 640 of the Acts of 2018

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 335

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2018. [It shall remain effective for a period of 6 years and, at the end of June 30, 2024,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3