START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1338 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1338 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Howard County Agricultural Preservation Advisory Board - Term Length - 
Alteration  
Ho. Co. 15-24 
 
 
This bill decreases the term of office, from five years to three years, of a member of the 
agricultural preservation advisory board in Howard County. Members serving on the 
advisory board on the bill’s effective date may serve for the remainder of their 
five-year terms. Each subsequent member appointed after the bill’s effective date must 
serve for a term of three years. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Howard County operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The General Assembly created the Maryland Agricultural Land 
Preservation Foundation (MALPF) to preserve productive agricultural land and woodland, 
limit the extent of urban development, and protect agricultural land and woodland as open 
space. The foundation, with the assistance and cooperation of landowners and local 
governments, purchases development rights easements as a means of protecting 
agricultural land and woodland production activities. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1338/ Page 2 
In each county containing productive agricultural land, the county governing body must 
appoint an agricultural preservation advisory board. While there are exceptions in certain 
counties, in general, (1) each advisory board must consist of five members, at least three of 
whom must be owner-operators of commercial farms who earn 50% or more of their 
income from farming and (2) each member must be appointed for a term of office of 
five years. Regarding term length, in Charles and Worcester counties, an advisory board 
member must serve a term of office of four years. In each county, no member must serve 
for more than two consecutive full terms. 
 
Each agricultural preservation advisory board must (1) advise the county governing body 
with respect to the approval of purchases of easements by MALPF within the county; 
(2) assist the county governing body in reviewing the status of land under easement; 
(3) advise MALPF concerning county priorities for agricultural preservation; (4) approve 
or disapprove an application by the county for certification or recertification of the 
county agricultural land preservation program by MALPF and the Maryland Department 
of Planning pursuant to § 5-408 of the State Finance and Procurement Article; (5) promote 
preservation of agriculture within the county by offering information and assistance to 
farmers with respect to the purchase of easements; (6) meet at least annually with forest 
conservation district boards in order to work cooperatively to encourage the promotion and 
retention of farmland and woodland in their respective jurisdictions; and (7) perform any 
other duties as assigned by the county governing body. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1128 (Howard County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Maryland Department of Agriculture; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2