START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1397 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1397 
(Delegate Simmons, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Judicial Proceedings and Finance 
 
Civil Rights - Discrimination Based on Protected Characteristics and 
Reproductive Freedom 
 
 
This emergency bill alters numerous statutory provisions that prohibit discrimination based 
on certain protected characteristics to include sexual orientation, gender identity, race, 
religious beliefs, marital status, and disability, thereby generally making certain protected 
characteristics consistent across multiple statutes. The bill also (1) replaces references of 
“gender” to “sex” in multiple statutes; (2) withdraws and repeals Chapter 244 of 2023; and 
(3) among other provisions, makes related changes within the Criminal Law Article in 
regard to certain characteristics, the discovery of which may not be used as legally adequate 
provocation for the mitigation of or a defense for specified crimes. Provisions regarding  
Chapter 244 take effect upon the bill’s enactment; other provisions take effect 
October 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures may increase minimally for the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MDL) to handle an increased volume of complaints, as discussed 
below. Otherwise, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or 
operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1397/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Prohibited Discrimination – Generally 
 
Statute includes numerous provisions that prohibit discrimination based upon certain bases 
(e.g., race, sex, age, religion, sexual orientation, etc.), as specified in statutory provisions.  
 
Although many types of discrimination are addressed in Title 20 of the State Government 
Article, the provisions are not exhaustive and other discriminatory practices are prohibited 
throughout statute. For example, under the Commercial Law Article, with respect to any 
aspect of a credit transaction, a creditor may not discriminate against any applicant on the 
basis of sex, marital status, race, color, religion, national origin, or age. (The bill adds 
sexual orientation, gender identity, and disability.)  
 
Protected characteristics also vary across and within statute. For example, under § 19-408 
of the Health‐General Article, a home health agency may not withhold services from an 
individual on the basis of age, sex, color, creed, national origin, source of payment, or 
ability to pay. (The bill adds sexual orientation, gender identity, disability, and race.) In 
§ 19-725 of the same Article (regarding health maintenance organizations), a person’s 
enrollment or transfer from group to individual status cannot be canceled/denied on the 
basis of age, sex, race, or health status. (The bill adds sexual orientation, gender identity, 
religious beliefs, and disability.)  
 
The Education Article, in general, prohibits the State Superintendent, a county board, or a 
county superintendent from discriminating against any public school employee in the State 
on the basis of race, religion, color, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, 
sexual orientation, or disability, as specified. (The bill adds gender identity to this 
provision.)  
 
Similarly, under the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law (within the Labor and 
Employment Article), an employer (regardless of size) may not discriminate between 
employees in any occupation by (1) providing less favorable employment opportunities 
based on sex or gender identity or (2) paying a wage to employees of one sex or gender 
identity at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sex or gender identity if 
both employees work in the same establishment and perform work of comparable character 
or work on the same operation, in the same business, or of the same type. (The bill adds 
race, religious beliefs, and sexual orientation to both provisions and disability to the 
first provision. It further specifies that in regard to the latter prohibited provision, the pay 
difference [must also be] based on the race, religious beliefs, sex, gender identity, or sexual 
orientation of the employees.)  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1397/ Page 3 
Under the Criminal Law Article, the discovery, perception, or belief about a person’s race, 
color, national origin, sex, gender identity, or sexual orientation (whether or not accurate) 
may not (1) constitute legally adequate provocation to mitigate a person’s charge from 
murder to manslaughter or (2) constitute a defense to the crime of assault in any degree. 
(The bill adds religious beliefs and disability to both provisions.)  
 
Among other findings, the Supreme Court of Maryland held in John Doe v. Catholic Relief 
Services, 484 Md. 640 (2023) that the prohibition against sex discrimination in the State’s 
Equal Pay for Equal Work Act does not include protection against discrimination based on 
sexual orientation. The court noted the General Assembly’s practice (as understood by the 
court) of specifically identifying categories it intends to protect in antidiscrimination 
statutes. The exclusion/omission in statute of a certain category, such as “sexual 
orientation,” therefore is deemed indicative of the General Assembly’s intent to exclude 
the category from the particular antidiscrimination statute. For further discussion of the 
court’s holding in Doe, please see the discussion in Cases and Decisions Update prepared 
by the Department of Legislative Services (DLS).  
 
Investigations, Enforcement, and Remedies – Generally 
 
Procedures for alleging discrimination and available remedies are specified in statute and 
differ depending on the type of discrimination alleged.  
 
In many instances, a person claiming to have been discriminated against may file a 
complaint with the Maryland Commission on Civil Rights (MCCR), which is the 
independent State agency charged with the enforcement of laws prohibiting discrimination 
in numerous areas, generally including employment, housing, public accommodations, and 
State contracting. Statutory provisions in the State Government Article specify the 
responsibilities of MCCR in investigating a claim of discrimination and attempting 
conciliation and the circumstances under which an individual must have an opportunity for 
an administrative hearing conducted by the Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH) or 
may, in some circumstances, elect to file a civil action in circuit court. Available remedies 
under these provisions vary depending on the type of discrimination alleged; such remedies 
may, under certain circumstances, include injunctive relief, the imposition of civil 
penalties, and actual and/or punitive damages, as specified.  
 
Other forms of discrimination prohibited in statute may be addressed, at least initially, 
directly with the relevant State agency. For instance, a complaint alleging certain violations 
under the Commercial Law Article (e.g., discrimination in lending, credit, and related 
financial transactions) may be filed with the Commissioner of Financial Regulation, who 
has jurisdiction to investigate the complaint and hold a hearing, as specified. On a finding 
that a creditor has engaged in discriminatory practices, the commissioner must order the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1397/ Page 4 
creditor to cease and desist from the act or practice; statute also establishes civil remedies, 
which may include actual and punitive damages, as specified.  
 
When the Commissioner of Labor and Industry has determined that the State’s Equal Pay 
for Equal Work Act has been violated, the commissioner must (1) try to resolve any issue 
informally by mediation or (2) ask the Attorney General to bring an action on behalf of the 
applicant or employee. The Attorney General may bring an action in the county where the 
violation allegedly occurred for injunctive relief, damages, or other relief. An employee 
may bring an action against the employer under specified circumstances.  
 
Chapter 244 of the Acts of 2023  
 
Chapter 244 proposes a constitutional amendment that, if approved by the voters at the next 
general election to be held in November 2024, (1) establishes an individual’s fundamental 
right to reproductive freedom, including, but not limited to the ability to make and 
effectuate decisions to prevent, continue, or end one’s own pregnancy and (2) prohibits the 
State from directly or indirectly denying, burdening, or abridging the right unless justified 
by a compelling State interest achieved by the least restrictive means.  
 
State Expenditures:  MDL advises that the bill’s expansion of protections under the 
State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work Act may lead to an indeterminate increase in complaints. 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures may increase to the extent that the bill increases 
complaints received for processing in a volume that cannot be accommodated using 
existing budgeted resources. Additionally, MDL may incur costs associated with additional 
training for investigators and to develop materials for educating employees and employers. 
This analysis assumes any potential additional expenditures are minimal.  
 
OAH can handle any increase in delegated contested cases using existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses are prohibited from engaging in specified 
discriminatory practices on the basis of an individual’s protected class and subject to 
various penalties depending on the circumstances of the case (e.g., actual or punitive 
damages, civil penalties, etc.) if found to be in violation. However, some of the conduct 
prohibited by the bill is already prohibited under current State law in certain circumstances. 
For example, under the bill, small business employers with fewer than 15 employees are 
prohibited from employment discrimination in regard to pay disparities based on certain 
characteristics (e.g., sexual orientation, race, etc.), per the bill’s changes to the State’s 
Equal Pay for Equal Work Act); employers with 15 or more employees, however, are 
already prohibited from employment discrimination based on these characteristics in State 
statute (under Title 20 of the State Government Article).  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1397/ Page 5 
Additional Comments:  Although the bill withdraws and repeals Chapter 244 of 2023, 
DLS notes that Chapter 245 of 2023 also included identical provisions and is unaffected 
by the bill. Thus, the substantive provisions formerly included in Chapter 244 (as 
referenced above) are still subject to referendum in the November 2024 general election 
via Chapter 245. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 590 (Senators Lam and Kelly) - Judicial Proceedings and 
Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; State Board of Contract Appeals; Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; 
Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Office of the Attorney 
General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; 
Maryland State Department of Education; University System of Maryland; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of General Services; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of 
Planning; Board of Public Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of 
Administrative Hearings; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Health Benefit 
Exchange; 
Maryland 
Insurance 
Administration; 
Public 
Service 
Commission; 
Baltimore City County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5