START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1340 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1340 
(Delegate Anderton) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Wicomico County - Alcoholic Beverages - Monopoly of Liquor Control Board 
and Dispensary - Repeal 
 
   
This bill, in Wicomico County, repeals the monopoly of the Liquor Control Board and its 
dispensary system for the sale and distribution of specified wine and liquor in the county. 
The bill (1) authorizes the holder of a Class A, B, C, or D license to purchase alcoholic 
beverages from a dispensary or a wholesaler; (2) repeals the prohibition for a holder of a 
Class 1 beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) or a Class 2 wine and liquor wholesaler’s license to 
sell or deliver liquor in the county for resale, as specified; and (3) makes conforming 
changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Wicomico County can handle any enforcement activity with existing 
resources. Wicomico County revenues decrease to the extent holders of specified licenses 
in the county choose to purchase wine and liquor through a wholesaler rather than through 
the county dispensary system. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local 
government.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1340/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Wicomico County Liquor Control Board has a monopoly in the county 
on the sale and distribution of liquor and of wine that contains more than 15.5% alcohol by 
volume through dispensaries.  
 
Generally, in Wicomico County, the holder of an alcoholic beverages license must 
purchase alcohol for retail sale from the dispensary. A holder of a Class 1 BWL or  
Class 2 wine and liquor wholesaler’s license may not sell or deliver liquor in 
Wicomico County for resale except to a county dispensary.  
 
A dispensary must sell liquor at wholesale to a beer, wine, and liquor license holder  
(1) for a Class A, B, or C license, at a markup not exceeding 15% above the operating cost 
to the dispensary, or (2) for a class D license, at a markup not exceeding 15% above the 
wholesale cost to the dispensary. The liquor control board may hold wine tasting and 
sampling promotional events in dispensaries, as specified. In addition, a dispensary may 
also sell chilled and nonchilled beer, wine, liquor, ice, or bottled water.  
 
Local Revenues:  Wicomico County revenues decrease to the extent the holders of 
Class A, B, C, and D licenses in the county choose to procure their specified alcoholic 
beverages through a wholesaler rather than through the dispensary system. However, any 
loss of revenue cannot be estimated at this time.   
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that holds a wholesaler’s license may 
experience additional sales under the bill. In addition, the holder of a Class A, B, C, or D 
license may experience additional savings as a result of being able to purchase alcoholic 
beverages through a wholesaler at potentially lower prices than the county dispensary.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Wicomico County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1340/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3