START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1339 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1339 
(Delegate Reilly, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Health Insurance - Hearing Aids for Adults - Coverage 
 
   
This bill requires insurers, nonprofit health service plans, and health maintenance 
organizations (collectively known as carriers) to provide coverage for all medically 
appropriate and necessary hearing aids for an adult covered under a policy or contract if 
the hearing aids are prescribed, fitted, and dispensed by a licensed audiologist. Carriers 
may limit the benefit to $1,400 per hearing aid for each hearing-impaired ear every 
36 months. An insured or enrollee may choose a hearing aid that is priced higher than the 
benefit limit and pay the difference in cost without financial or contractual penalty to the 
hearing aid provider. The bill does not prohibit carriers from providing coverage that is 
greater or more favorable. The bill takes effect January 1, 2025, and applies to all 
policies, contracts, and health benefit plans issued, delivered, or renewed in the State 
on or after that date.  
    
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal special fund revenue increase for the Maryland Insurance 
Administration (MIA) in FY 2025 from the $125 rate and form filing fee. Review of form 
filings can be handled with existing resources. No effect on the State Employee and Retiree 
Health and Welfare Benefits Program, which already complies with the bill’s requirements. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland law, there are more than 50 mandated health insurance 
benefits that certain carriers must provide to their enrollees, including coverage for hearing 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1339/ Page 2 
aids for a minor child if the hearing aids are prescribed, fitted, and dispensed by a licensed 
audiologist. A carrier may limit the benefit to $1,400 per hearing aid for each 
hearing-impaired ear every 36 months. An insured or enrollee may choose a hearing aid 
that is priced higher than the benefit limit and pay the difference in cost, without financial 
or contractual penalty to the hearing aid provider. Nothing prohibits a carrier from 
providing coverage that is greater or more favorable than the mandate.   
 
The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires nongrandfathered 
health plans to cover 10 essential health benefits (EHBs), which include items and services 
in the following categories:  (1) ambulatory patient services; (2) emergency services; 
(3) hospitalization; (4) maternity and newborn care; (5) mental health and substance use 
disorder services, including behavioral health treatment; (6) prescription drugs; 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices; (8) laboratory services; 
(9) preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management; and (10) pediatric 
services, including dental and vision care. 
  
Under § 31-116 of the Maryland Insurance Article, EHBs must be included in the State 
benchmark plan and, not withstanding any other benefits mandated by State law, must be 
the benefits required in (1) all individual health benefit plans and health benefit plans 
offered to small employers (except for grandfathered health plans) offered outside the 
Maryland Health Benefit Exchange (MHBE) and (2) all qualified health plans offered in 
MHBE.  
 
The Maryland benchmark plan includes hearing aids as an EHB. Although the original 
service covered was “hearing aids for a minor child,” the age restriction was removed due 
to prohibitions on age discrimination in the ACA. 
 
Additional Comments:  MIA advises that most large group plans sold in Maryland will 
not be allowed to include the $1,400 limit included under the bill. Although large group 
plans are not required to cover EHBs, federal regulations prohibit such plans from applying 
annual or lifetime dollar limits on any EHBs that are covered under the plan. Most carriers 
use the Maryland benchmark plan to define EHB for their large group plans offered in 
Maryland. Thus, the $1,400 limit will not be permissible. MIA notes that carriers may opt 
to use a different definition of EHB for their Maryland large group plans if they wish to 
impose the benefit limit for hearing aids, but doing so may have other consequences.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last 
three years. See SB 397 and HB 1145 of 2023 and HB 910 of 2021. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1339/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 778 (Senator Gallion) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3