START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1038

Chapter 1038

(House Bill 1330)

AN ACT concerning

Allegany County – Alcoholic Beverages – Underage Employees

FOR the purpose of altering the minimum age of an individual that may be employed by a
license holder in Allegany County; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages in
Allegany County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 9–102 and 9–1901
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 9–1902
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

9–102.

This title applies only in Allegany County.

9–1901.

(a) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 5 (“Conduct of Local License
Holders”) of Division I of this article apply in the county without exception or variation:

(1) § 4–502 (“Storage of alcoholic beverages”);

(2) § 4–503 (“Solicitations and sales outside of licensed premises”);

(3) § 4–505 (“Alcohol awareness program”);

(4) § 4–506 (“Evidence of purchaser’s age”);

(5) § 4–507 (“Retail delivery of alcoholic beverages”); and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1038 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) § 4–508 (“Display of license”).

(b) Section 4–504 (“Employment of underage individuals”) of Division I of this
article applies in the county, subject to § 9–1902 of this subtitle.

9–1902.

(a) A license holder may employ an individual between the ages of [18] 16 and 21
years.

(b) To be allowed to sell or serve beer, light wine, and liquor, an individual shall
be at least 18 years old.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2