START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1386 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1386 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - School Employee Antibias Training - Requirements 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to develop 
guidelines, as specified, for an antibias training program for school employees. Each local 
board of education, in consultation with teachers and other public school employees, must 
develop (or update) its training based on (or incorporating) the guidelines. Every other 
year, each local board of education must train each public school employee whose job 
duties include frequent interactions with students using its antibias training, as specified. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $100,000, likely incurred in FY 2025, 
to develop the antibias training program for school employees. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase, likely minimally, to develop the 
training and provide the required training to specified staff every other year. Revenues are 
not affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1386/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Antibias Guidelines 
 
The guidelines developed must include specified elements, including (1) raising awareness 
of biases, prejudices, intolerances, and discrimination faced by African Americans, 
Native Americans, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, Hispanic Americans, and other 
historically marginalized racial and ethnic minorities and (2) combating prejudices faced 
by historically marginalized religious minorities, including antisemitism and 
Islamophobia. In developing the guidelines, MSDE must incorporate lessons learned from 
real-life incidents of discriminatory bullying, harassment, or intimidation reported in 
accordance with the bullying, harassment, or intimidation policies required by law. MSDE 
periodically must update the guidelines.  
 
Public School Antibias Training 
 
Each local board of education must, in consultation with teachers and other public school 
employees, develop an antibias training based on the guidelines developed. If the local 
board has an antibias training in place before MSDE issues its guidelines, the local board 
must, in consultation with teachers and other public school employees, update its training 
to incorporate the practices identified in the guidelines. 
 
Antibias training must be job-embedded, paid professional development training that is 
provided during nonteaching time. To the extent practicable, the training must (1) be 
offered in a peer-to-peer setting; (2) take a half day or less to complete; and (3) incorporate 
lessons learned from incidents of bullying, harassment, or intimidation in the county, as 
reported. 
 
Current Law:  MSDE must require a local board of education to report incidents of 
bullying, harassment, or intimidation against students attending a public school in its 
jurisdiction. An incident of bullying, harassment, or intimidation may be reported by (1) a 
student; (2) the parent, guardian, or close adult relative of a student; or (3) a school staff 
member.  
 
Chapter 489 of 2008 required the State Board of Education to develop a model policy that 
prohibits bullying, harassment, and intimidation in schools. Using the model policy, local 
boards of education were required to develop policies for the public schools under their 
jurisdiction. A public school employee who reports an act of bullying, harassment, or 
intimidation in accordance with the local board of education’s policy is not civilly liable 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1386/ Page 3 
for any act or omission in reporting or failing to report an act of bullying, harassment, or 
intimidation. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE general fund expenditures increase by approximately 
$100,000 in fiscal 2025 to hire a consultant to develop guidelines for an antibias program 
for school employees. MSDE advises that it does not have staff expertise or capacity to 
develop the training as required by the bill. Although there is no deadline for MSDE to 
complete the guidelines, it is assumed for the purposes of this estimate that the guidelines 
are completed in fiscal 2025. To the extent that the guidelines take longer to complete, 
expenditures increase in out-years. However, it is assumed that general fund expenditures 
total, at most, approximately $100,000. It is also assumed that MSDE can oversee the 
development of the guidelines by the consultant and periodically update them using 
existing resources. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Local school system expenditures increase, likely minimally, to 
develop and provide the required training to specified staff every other year in the manner 
specified in the bill. St. Mary’s County Public Schools anticipates no significant 
fiscal impact. Costs may be absorbable by most local school systems to the extent they can 
incorporate the training into existing professional development schedules. However, some 
school systems incur additional costs due to the requirement for the training to be paid. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland 
Higher Education Commission; Maryland Independent College and University 
Association; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; Frederick 
County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1386/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4