START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1390 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1390 
(Delegate Harris) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Public Schools - Public School Construction - Funding and Administration 
 
 
This bill (1) repeals the scheduled termination of the School Safety Grant Program (SSGP) 
on June 30, 2026; (2) reduces the mandated appropriation for the Nancy K. Kopp Public 
School Facilities Priority Fund (PSFPF) by $10.0 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2027; (3) alters the purpose of PSFPF only for fiscal 2027; (4) under specified 
conditions in current law, requires the State to begin making payments to 
Prince George’s County for a public-private partnership (P3) in fiscal 2025 (instead of 
fiscal 2026); (5) makes various changes to the governance of the Prince George’s County 
P3 agreement; (6) establishes the Workgroup on the Assessment and Funding of School 
Facilities; (7) requires the State share of eligible construction costs to be 100% for 
high school construction projects that meet specified criteria; (8) requires the Interagency 
Commission on School Construction (IAC) to report on the eligibility of artificial 
intelligence (AI) weapon detection systems for State school construction funding; and 
(9) clarifies legislative intent regarding annual funding levels for school construction. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. Special fund expenditures increase by $54.0 million 
only in FY 2025 due to the mandated distribution. Special fund revenues decrease by 
$10.0 million annually beginning in FY 2027; special fund expenditures decrease 
correspondingly. No net effect on general fund expenditures as the continuation of SSGP 
is offset by the reduction in funding for PSFPF. This bill establishes a mandated 
distribution only in FY 2025, establishes a mandated appropriation beginning in 
FY 2027, and reduces another mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2027. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$0 
$0 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
SF Expenditure 
$54.0 
$0 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
Net Effect 
($54.0) 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1390/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase by $54.0 million in FY 2025 due 
to the mandated distribution. Other provisions have no net effect on local revenues for 
school construction but do affect the distribution of those funds beginning in FY 2025 and 
how some of those funds may be spent beginning in FY 2027, and may affect local 
matching requirements. 
   
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Annual Funding for School Construction 
 
The bill clarifies that legislative intent expressed in current law – that the State should 
provide at least $450.0 million annually for public school construction – does not include 
funding provided through the Built to Learn (BTL) program. 
 
Nancy K. Kopp Public School Facilities Priority Fund 
 
Only for fiscal 2027, the purpose of PSFPF is to provide State funds to address the severity 
of issues in a school, including (among other things) air conditioning, heating, and 
plumbing.  
 
Prince George’s County Public-private Partnership Project 
 
The bill repeals the July 1, 2024 deadline for the Prince George’s County Board of 
Education to enter into a P3 agreement that is eligible for State funding. A memorandum 
of understanding (MOU) governing a P3 project in Prince George’s County that receives 
State funding (as required under current law) must specify that the governance structure 
for the program is the Prince George’s County Superintendent of Schools, the 
Prince George’s County Executive, and the chair of the Prince George’s County Council. 
The bill makes additional technical and conforming changes to the requirements for 
P3 agreements in Prince George’s County. 
 
Workgroup on the Assessment and Funding of School Facilities 
 
Beginning June 1, 2025, the workgroup must (1) consider how the relative condition of 
public school facilities should be prioritized, as specified, and (2) determine whether (and 
how) the results of the statewide facilities assessment should be incorporated into school 
construction funding decisions. The Department of Legislative Services, in consultation 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1390/ Page 3 
with IAC, must staff the workgroup. By January 1, 2026, the workgroup must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly.  
 
Prince George’s County School Construction Priority 
 
The bill requires that the Prince George’s County Board of Education give priority to 
High Point High School as the next major project in its capital improvement program after 
New Northern Adelphi Area High School.  
 
State Share of Construction Costs 
 
The State share of eligible construction costs must be 100% for a school construction 
project if: 
 
 
the project is located in a county for which the State share in fiscal 2025 is less than 
55% and the county has a student enrollment of 60,000 or less, as specified; 
 
the allocation is to be used for a public high school that has the highest rate of 
students eligible for free and reduced-price meals of any high school in the county; 
 
the project is classified as a major renovation; and 
 
the planning and design for the project occurs in fiscal 2025 or 2026.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Built to Learn Act and Prince George’s County P3 Funding 
 
The Built to Learn Act, enacted as Chapter 20 of 2020, authorizes the Maryland Stadium 
Authority (MSA) to issue up to $2.2 billion in revenue bonds, backed by annual payments 
from the Education Trust Fund (ETF) beginning in fiscal 2022, for public school 
construction projects in the State, including to support a P3 agreement to build six new 
schools (later increased to eight) in Prince George’s County. Proceeds from the revenue 
bonds are allocated among local school systems as shown in Exhibit 1 (based on MSA’s 
most recent projection of anticipated revenues of $1.7 billion given increases in interest 
rates since the program’s enactment). Funds must be used to build or renovate schools 
within 10 years. 
 
Proceeds from the MSA bond sales and the amounts transferred from ETF for debt service 
and expenses are deposited into the Supplemental Public School Construction Financing 
Fund (financing fund), a nonbudgeted fund administered by MSA. In each of fiscal 2024 
and 2025, MSA must deposit $27.0 million from the financing fund into the 
Prince George’s County Public-Private Partnership Fund (P3 Fund), administered by IAC; 
beginning in fiscal 2026, MSA must continue to make those annual payments to the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1390/ Page 4 
P3 Fund if Prince George’s County deposits the amount required under the MOU into the 
fund. Beginning in fiscal 2026 and through not later than fiscal 2055, IAC must pay the 
Prince George’s County Board of Education from the P3 Fund an amount specified in the 
MOU for availability payments to the P3 private partner(s); IAC must make these payments 
only if the P3 agreement remains in effect and Prince George’s County deposits into the 
P3 Fund the amount specified in the MOU. The bill requires IAC to begin making 
payments from the P3 Fund in fiscal 2025 (as long as the same conditions are met). 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Allocation of Built to Learn Bond Sale Proceeds 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
Percent of Total 
Proceeds 
Anne Arundel 
12.5% 
$212.5 
Baltimore City 
21.0% 
357.0 
Baltimore 
21.0% 
357.0 
Frederick 
5.1% 
86.7 
Howard 
6.6% 
112.2 
Montgomery 
21.0% 
357.0 
Prince George’s 
* 
* 
All Other Counties 
11.5% 
195.5 
Unallocated/Maryland Stadium Authority 
1.3% 
22.1 
Total 
100.0% 
$1,700.0 
 
* Under Chapter 20 of 2020, as amended by Chapter 679 of 2023, Prince George’s County receives 
$27.0 million annually for up to 30 years to supplement local funds for an availability payment if it enters 
into a public-private partnership agreement, subject to other provisions in the Act. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
School Safety Grant Program 
 
Chapter 14 of 2018 (the 21st Century School Facilities Act) created SSGP to provide grants 
to local school systems for school security improvements, including:   
 
 
secure and lockable doors for each classroom; 
 
an area of safe refuge in each classroom; and 
 
surveillance and other security technology for school monitoring purposes. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1390/ Page 5 
IAC is responsible for administering the program, in consultation with the Maryland Center 
for School Safety (MCSS). Under an MOU between the two entities, MCSS handles the 
application process and IAC processes payments for the program. 
 
The Governor must provide $10.0 million in the annual operating or capital budget for the 
program. Since fiscal 2023, the program has been funded with general funds, and the 
fiscal 2025 operating budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $10.0 million in 
general funds for the program.  
 
The Built to Learn Act expressed legislative intent that funding for SSGP (and the Aging 
Schools Program) be consolidated into PSFPF beginning in fiscal 2027. Accordingly, 
Chapter 679 of 2023 terminated SSGP effective June 30, 2026, with the intention of 
shifting its funding to the priority fund. PSFPF has since been renamed to honor 
Nancy K. Kopp.  
 
Nancy K. Kopp Public School Facilities Priority Fund 
 
The purpose of PSFPF is to provide State funds to address the facility needs of the highest 
priority schools in the State, as identified by a statewide facilities assessment completed by 
IAC. Highest priority must be given to schools with severe facility issues that have required 
the school to be closed during the current or previous school year. Current law specifies 
that if the statewide facilities assessment is not completed, the purpose of the fund is to 
provide State funds to address the severity of issues in a school, including (among others) 
air conditioning, heating, and plumbing. However, as the facilities assessment is complete, 
this contingency does not apply. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2027 and annually thereafter, the Governor must appropriate at least 
$80.0 million to the fund. Money expended from the fund is supplemental to and is not 
intended to take the place of funding that would otherwise be appropriated to primary and 
secondary schools in the State. 
 
State Share of Eligible Costs  
 
The State pays at least 50% of eligible costs of school construction and renovation projects, 
based on a funding formula that takes into account numerous factors, including each local 
school system’s wealth and ability to pay. The 21st Century School Facilities Act requires 
that the cost-share formula be recalculated every two years (previously, statute required 
recalculation every three years). Exhibit 2 shows the State share of eligible school 
construction costs for all Maryland jurisdictions for fiscal 2023 and 2024; fiscal 2025; and 
fiscal 2026, as approved by IAC. Counties whose calculated State share would have been 
lower in fiscal 2023 than in fiscal 2022 were held harmless by Chapter 698 of 2021; 
Garrett County’s State share was adjusted in accordance with provisions of Chapter 698. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1390/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 2 
State Share of Eligible School Construction Costs 
Fiscal 2023-2026 
 
County 
FY 2023 and 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Allegany  
90% 
89% 
89% 
Anne Arundel  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Baltimore City  
96% 
94% 
91% 
Baltimore  
61% 
59% 
57% 
Calvert  
56% 
56% 
56% 
Caroline  
88% 
94% 
94% 
Carroll  
59% 
57% 
54% 
Cecil  
66% 
64% 
61% 
Charles  
65% 
64% 
64% 
Dorchester  
93% 
98% 
98% 
Frederick  
65% 
67% 
67% 
Garrett  
90% 
89% 
89% 
Harford  
63% 
61% 
58% 
Howard  
56% 
54% 
51% 
Kent  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Montgomery  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Prince George’s  
73% 
71% 
68% 
Queen Anne’s  
51% 
50% 
50% 
St. Mary’s  
58% 
58% 
58% 
Somerset  
100% 
100% 
100% 
Talbot  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Washington  
79% 
78% 
78% 
Wicomico  
100% 
98% 
95% 
Worcester  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Maryland School for the Blind 
93% 
89% 
89% 
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction 
 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  IAC advises that Prince George’s County expects to make an initial 
availability payment of $54.0 million under the terms of the P3 agreement it is currently 
finalizing. This represents the sum of the $27.0 million payments from MSA to the P3 Fund 
in both fiscal 2024 and 2025. Therefore, special fund expenditures from the P3 Fund to 
Prince George’s County increase by $54.0 million in fiscal 2025 due to the mandated 
acceleration of the IAC payments to Prince George’s County by one year. As payments 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1390/ Page 7 
were scheduled to begin in fiscal 2026 and continue for up to 30 years, there is no effect in 
the out-years (except that payments may end earlier than projected).  
 
General fund expenditures increase by $10.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2027 to 
maintain the mandated appropriation for SSGP but are offset by a $10.0 million reduction 
in funding for PSFPF. Therefore, there is no net effect on general fund expenditures. 
However, special fund revenues and expenditures for PSFPF decrease by $10.0 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2027. 
 
Maintaining SSGP has no practical effect on administrative costs for IAC or MCSS, as 
staffing is already in place to continue operating the program. The clarification of 
legislative intent regarding State funding for public school construction has no practical 
effect as the State has met the $450.0 million threshold without BTL funding each year 
since the intent was established. 
 
Increasing the State share of school construction costs for specified projects has no effect 
on total State spending for school construction, but likely reduces funding available for 
projects in other counties. 
 
IAC can report on the eligibility of AI weapon detection systems with existing resources. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Prince George’s County revenues increase by $54.0 million in 
fiscal 2025 due to the mandated distribution so that it can make the availability payment 
under the terms of its anticipated P3 MOU.  
 
Requiring the Prince George’s County Board of Education to give preference to High Point 
High School has no direct effect on local finances but may affect the timeline for other 
school construction projects in the county. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, State funding for the highest priority school construction projects, 
as identified by the statewide facilities assessment, decrease by $10.0 million annually. 
However, local revenues for school safety improvements increase by $10.0 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2027. Accordingly, local matching fund requirements may be 
affected.  
 
Major high school renovation projects in Howard, Kent, Queen Anne’s, Talbot, and 
Worcester counties are eligible for a 100% State share of eligible construction costs if they 
meet the other criteria in the bill. Thus, revenues in these counties may increase for several 
years beginning in fiscal 2025 (and through the completion of the project(s)). As total State 
funding for school construction is fixed each year by the Governor and the  
General Assembly through the capital budget process, revenues for school construction 
likely decrease in other jurisdictions.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1390/ Page 8 
Additional Comments:  Under current law, Prince George’s County must enter into a 
P3 agreement by July 1, 2024, or forfeit all State funding in support of the agreement. To 
date, it has not completed an agreement; IAC advises that the county is in the process of 
finalizing an agreement, which it hopes to complete by the deadline (but may not). The bill 
repeals the deadline, virtually ensuring that Prince George’s County receives BTL funding. 
This analysis does not reflect any potential consequences – either for the county or the 
State – of the county failing to enter into an agreement by the deadline in the absence of 
the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Interagency 
Commission on School Construction; Maryland Center for School Safety; Department of 
Budget and Management; Baltimore County Public Schools; Montgomery County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8