START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1333 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1333 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Public Health - Maryland Commission on Health Equity and Commission on 
Public Health - Revisions 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Commission on Health Equity (MCHE), using a health 
equity framework, to develop and monitor a “statewide health equity plan” as required by 
the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) under any agreement entered 
into between the State and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). MCHE 
must coordinate with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and the Health Services 
Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) when establishing an advisory committee. The bill 
repeals the requirement that the Governor designate the MCHE chair; instead, the Secretary 
of Health and the Executive Director of HSCRC, or their designees, must cochair MCHE. 
The bill expands the purpose of MCHE and alters its duties and membership. The bill also 
alters reporting requirements for and extends the termination date of the Commission on 
Public Health (CPH). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any additional workload for MDH and HSCRC, as well as expense 
reimbursements for new members of MCHE, can be handled with existing budgeted 
resources. Any impact from extending the termination date of CPH can likely be absorbed 
within existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Statewide health equity plan” means the equity plan required under a 
cooperative grant funding agreement with CMMI. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1333/ Page 2 
Alterations to Purpose and Duties of the Maryland Commission on Health Equity 
 
The purpose of MCHE is expanded to include developing a statewide health equity plan 
and providing direct advice to the State’s independent health regulatory commissions. 
 
The bill reduces the number of factors MCHE is directed to examine to determine their 
impact on the health of residents of the State. Specifically, the following factors are 
repealed:  inclusion, diversity, and equity in the workplace; barriers to career success and 
promotion in the workplace; access to transportation and mobility; and social justice. 
 
Alterations to Membership of the Maryland Commission on Health Equity 
 
The bill removes the following members (or their designees) from MCHE:  the Secretaries 
of Agriculture, Commerce, the Environment, General Services, Information Technology, 
Juvenile Services, Labor, Natural Resources, State Police, Transportation, and Veterans 
Affairs; and the Commissioner of Correction. 
 
The following members (or their designees) are added to MCHE’s membership:  the 
Deputy Secretary of Health Care Financing; the Executive Director of HSCRC; the 
Executive Director of the Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities; the 
Executive Director of the Maryland Health Care Commission; the Executive Director of 
the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission; and at least 14 specified 
additional members appointed by the Secretary of Health with the advice of HSCRC. 
 
Overall, the total membership of MCHE increases from 26 members to at least 
33 members. 
 
Commission on Public Health 
 
The bill requires CPH to submit an interim (rather than a final) report of its findings and 
recommendations by December 1, 2024; a final report must be submitted by 
October 1, 2025. Accordingly, the termination date of CPH is extended by one year to 
June 30, 2026. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Commission on Health Equity 
 
MCHE was established in 2021 to (1) employ a health equity framework in specified 
examinations; (2) provide advice to the Secretary of Health and others on issues of racial, 
ethnic, cultural, or socioeconomic health disparities; (3) facilitate coordination of expertise 
and experience in developing a comprehensive health equity plan addressing the social 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1333/ Page 3 
determinants of health; and (4) set goals for health equity and prepare a plan for the State 
to achieve health equity in alignment with other statewide planning activities. 
 
MCHE is staffed by MDH and comprises one member of the Senate; one member of the 
House of Delegates; the Secretaries of Aging, Agriculture, Budget and Management, 
Commerce, Disabilities, the Environment, General Services, Health, Housing and 
Community Development, Human Services, Information Technology, Juvenile Services, 
Labor, Natural Resources, Planning, State Police, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs; the 
Commissioner of Correction; the State Superintendent of Schools; the Maryland Insurance 
Commissioner; a representative of a local health department; and specified additional 
representatives from MDH. 
 
The Governor must designate the chair from among the members. A member of MCHE 
may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the 
standard State travel regulations. 
 
Among other things, MCHE is responsible for determining the impact of the following 
factors on the health of Maryland residents:  access to safe and affordable housing; 
educational attainment; opportunities for employment; economic stability; inclusion, 
diversity, and equity in the workplace; barriers to career success and promotion in the 
workplace; access to transportation and mobility; social justice; environmental factors; 
public safety, including the impact of crime, citizen unrest, the criminal justice system, and 
governmental policies that affect individuals who are in prison or released from prison; and 
food insecurity. 
 
MCHE is also directed to provide direct advice to the Secretary, and indirect advice to 
MDH’s senior administrators and planners through the Secretary, regarding issues of racial, 
ethnic, cultural, or socioeconomic health disparities. 
 
MCHE must, in coordination with the State-designated health information exchange, 
establish an advisory committee to make recommendations on data collection, needs, 
quality, reporting, evaluation, and visualization for the commission to carry out its work. 
 
Commission on Public Health 
 
Chapter 385 of 2023 established CPH to make recommendations to improve the delivery 
of “foundational public health services” in the State. CPH must assess the foundational 
public health capabilities of MDH and local health departments. Based on this assessment, 
CPH must make recommendations for reform in specified areas. CPH submitted an interim 
report on its findings and recommendations to the Governor and specified committees of 
the General Assembly in December 2023; a final report is due by December 1, 2024. CPH 
terminates June 30, 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1333/ Page 4 
Additional Comments:  CMS released the first of two Notice of Funding Opportunities 
for the AHEAD Model on November 16, 2023. The AHEAD Model is a new federal option 
from CMMI that would allow Maryland to continue statewide efforts to improve health 
care quality and control costs under the Total Cost of Care model. A key component of the 
AHEAD Model is that participating states must develop a statewide health equity plan. 
States must set at least one behavioral health-specific equity goal within their plan. The 
health equity plan must include strategies to increase safety net provider recruitment and 
use social risk adjustment of provider payments to address the needs of vulnerable 
populations. The plan should also seek to promote health-related social needs screening 
among hospitals and primary care providers so that patients can be connected to necessary 
community resources. Participating hospitals will also need to develop their own health 
equity plans in alignment with the state’s health equity priorities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  National Academy for State Health Policy; Department of 
Commerce; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the 
Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4