START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1341 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1341 
(Delegate Anderton) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Wicomico County - Alcoholic Beverages - Class B Beer, Wine, and Liquor 
Licenses - Purchases From Licensed Wholesalers and Self-Distribution 
 
 
This bill, in Wicomico County, (1) authorizes the holder of a Class B beer, wine, and liquor 
(BWL) license to purchase liquor for retail sale from a county dispensary or from a licensed 
wholesaler; (2) specifies that a county dispensary may not charge the license holder more 
than 15% above the wholesale operating cost to the dispensary, and (3) establishes that the 
holder of a Class B BWL restaurant license that has been issued a Class 9 limited distillery 
license may sell products manufactured under the distillery license at the place described 
in the Class B license in a manner consistent with the underlying Class B license for on- and 
off-premises consumption. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Wicomico County can handle any enforcement activity within existing 
resources. Wicomico County revenues decrease to the extent holders of Class B BWL 
licenses purchase liquor from a licensed wholesaler instead of through the county 
dispensary.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In Wicomico County, the Liquor Control Board has a monopoly on the 
sale and distribution in the county of wine that contains more than 15.5% alcohol by 
volume and liquor.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1341/ Page 2 
Generally, the Wicomico County Board of License Commissioners is authorized to issue a 
Class B BWL license to hotels that meet specified room and seating requirements and to 
restaurants that meet specified seating requirements and have average daily receipts from 
the sale of food exceeding the average daily receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
The license holder must purchase liquor for retail sale from a county dispensary, and the 
license holder cannot be charged more than 15% above the wholesale operating cost to the 
county dispensary. The annual fee is $1,980 for hotels and $1,320 for restaurants.  
 
The board may issue a wine permit to the holder of a Class B BWL license for use by a 
restaurant that meets specified hours of operations and menu requirements, in addition to 
having an area used for the preparation and consumption of food and beverages that is at 
least 80% of the area of the premises. The wine permit authorizes the license holder to sell, 
at retail, at the place described in the license (1) beer, wine, and liquor for on-premises 
consumption, and (2) wine for off-premises consumption. The term for the wine permit is 
the same as the term of the Class B license.   
 
The Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission may only issue a Class 9 limited 
distillery license to the holder of a Class D or Class B BWL license where sales for both 
on- and off-premises consumption are permitted for use on the premises for which the 
license was issued. Generally, the limited distillery license authorizes the holder to distill, 
rectify, and bottle brandy, rum, whiskey, alcohol, and neutral spirits, acquire bulk alcoholic 
beverages, store the manufactured products, sell to licensed wholesalers or authorized  
out-of-state entities, sell at retail, conduct guided tours, and serve samples to tour 
participants.  
 
Local Revenues:  Wicomico County revenues decrease to the extent holders of 
Class B BWL licenses choose to purchase liquor from licensed wholesalers instead of from 
the county dispensary. However, an estimate of this revenue loss cannot be estimated at 
this time.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small business that holds a Class B BWL license may 
experience savings to the extent they choose to purchase liquor from a licensed wholesaler 
instead of through the county dispensary. However, the extent of such an effect cannot be 
estimated at this time. In addition, any restaurant that holds a Class B BWL license that has 
also been issued a Class 9 limited distillery license may experience additional sales under 
the bill.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1341/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 941 (Senator Mautz) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Wicomico County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3