START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1308 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1308 
(Delegates Wivell and Valentine) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Real Property - Recordation of Instrument With False Information - Penalties 
and Actions to Quiet Title 
 
 
This bill prohibits a person from recording a deed or other instrument that the person knows 
contains false information, including information related to the ownership of the property. 
A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum penalty of a $500 fine; 
prosecution must be initiated within three years after the offense was committed. 
Additionally, unless otherwise prohibited under § 14‐607(b) of the Real Property Article, 
the bill authorizes a court to award either party costs and reasonable attorney’s fees in an 
action to quiet title, if a claim or defense in the case is related to an alleged recordation of 
a deed or other instrument with false information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s provisions, including any potential minimal increase in fine 
revenues from cases heard in the District Court, are not anticipated to materially affect 
State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  In general, prosecution for a misdemeanor must be commenced within 
one year after the offense was committed. However, statute includes numerous exceptions. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1308/ Page 2 
Statutory provisions set forth a process by which a person may bring action to “quiet” title 
(determine the validity of adverse claims or other issues regarding title) to real property. In 
such actions, the court is deemed to have obtained possession and control of the property 
for the purposes of the action. Statutory provisions do not limit any authority the court may 
have to grant equitable relief that may be proper under the circumstances. 
 
A complaint (and answer) in such actions must be verified and include specified 
information. For example, an answer must state (1) any claim the defendant has to the 
property that is the subject of the action; (2) any facts tending to controvert any material 
allegations of the complaint that the defendant does not wish to be taken as true; and (3) a 
statement of any new matter constituting a defense. Pursuant to § 14‐607(b) of the 
Real Property Article, if a defendant disclaims any interest in the title of the property in the 
answer or allows judgment to be taken without answer, the plaintiff may not recover costs. 
 
In all cases, the plaintiff must submit evidence at a hearing before the court establishing 
the plaintiff’s title, and the court may hear or take any evidence offered respecting the 
claims of any defendant (other than claims to which the plaintiff admitted validity in the 
complaint). A judgment in an action to quiet title must be recorded in the land records of 
the county in which any portion of the property is located. The clerk is required to index 
the judgment in accordance with specified law governing the indexing of instruments, with 
the party against whom judgment is entered listed as the grantor of the property, and the 
party in whose favor the judgment is entered listed as the grantee. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 845 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2