START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1362 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1362 
(Delegate Valderrama, et al.) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Board of Cosmetologists - Membership - Alteration 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the State Board of Cosmetologists to include 
one licensed esthetician; the bill also reduces the number of consumer members of the 
board (from two to one). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Altering membership of the board does not affect State operations or 
finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State Board of Cosmetologists (within the Maryland Department of 
Labor) issues two full-service licenses (cosmetologist and senior cosmetologist) and 
four limited licenses (hairstylist, blow drying, nail technician, and esthetician). A 
cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, nail, 
and esthetic services. (The other licenses authorize the licensee to provide just that service.) 
The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for licensure as a cosmetologist must pass 
a written and a practical examination and have successfully completed either a registered 
apprenticeship program or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1362/ Page 2 
The board has seven members appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Secretary 
of Labor. Four members must be licensed cosmetologists; one member must be an owner 
or educator affiliated with a private cosmetology school; and two must be consumers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 629 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2