START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1321 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1321 
(Charles County Delegation) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Land Use - Southern Maryland Code Counties - Subdivision Regulations - 
Property Dedication and Fee 
 
 
This bill authorizes a code county in the Southern Maryland class, as established in the 
Local Government Article, to provide in the county’s subdivision regulations for (1) the 
dedication of real property for recreation or (2) in lieu of dedication, the payment of a fee 
to be used by the county for the purchase, development, and improvement of real property 
for recreational facilities.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Charles County revenues and expenditures may increase, as discussed 
below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Code Counties – Southern Maryland Class 
 
Under the Local Government Article, a code county means a county that has adopted code 
home rule under Article XI-F of the Maryland Constitution. There are four classes of code 
counties, based on the geographic region of the State where the county is located. The 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1321/ Page 2 
Southern Maryland class consists of Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary’s counties (to the extent 
those counties have adopted code home rule). Unless limited to one or more classes, a 
public general law enacted by the General Assembly that applies to code counties applies 
to each code county, regardless of class. 
 
Charles County is currently the only county in the Southern Maryland class that has 
adopted code home rule.  
 
Code Counties – Development Impact Fees 
 
Under § 20-701 of the Local Government Article, by public local law, the county 
commissioners of a code county may impose development impact fees to finance any of 
the capital costs of additional or expanded public works, improvements, and facilities 
required to accommodate new construction or development. 
 
Division I of the Land Use Article – Subdivision Regulations 
 
Under Division I of the Land Use Article, before exercising specified subdivision powers, 
a local jurisdiction’s planning commission must recommend subdivision regulations to the 
legislative body for the health, safety, welfare, and common interest of the citizens of the 
local jurisdiction. The subdivision regulations may include provisions for the purposes of, 
among other things, adequately and conveniently placing public school sites and open 
spaces for traffic, utilities, access of fire-fighting apparatus, recreation, and access to light 
and air. “Legislative body” means the elected body of a local jurisdiction, including the 
board of county commissioners, the county council, and the governing body of a municipal 
corporation.  
 
Pursuant to provisions of Division I that apply specifically to Charles County, the 
subdivision regulations in Charles County may provide for the reservation of property for 
traffic, recreation, or other public purposes. A reservation of property may not continue for 
longer than three years without the written approval of all persons with a legal or equitable 
interest in the property.   
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Charles County revenues and expenditures may increase to the extent 
the county uses the authority under the bill and fees are collected in lieu of dedication of 
real property for recreation under the county’s subdivision regulations. However, it is not 
clear to what extent the authority under the bill to provide for payment of fees provides the 
county with authority beyond the existing development impact fee authority under 
§ 20-701 of the Local Government Article. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small business 
developers to the extent Charles County uses the authority in the bill and requires, under 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1321/ Page 3 
its subdivision regulations, dedication of real property for recreation or payment of a fee in 
lieu of dedication of property. However, similar to the Local Fiscal Effect, it is not clear to 
what extent the authority under the bill provides the county with authority beyond existing 
law. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles and St. Mary’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3