START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1358 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1358 
(Delegate Ruff, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation and 
Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Natural Resources - Gwynns Falls State Park - Focus Group, Advisory 
Committee, and Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and Baltimore City to 
(1) convene focus group meetings on the establishment of the Gwynn Falls State Park with 
community members and stakeholders that reside or operate in the vicinity of the proposed 
State park; (2) develop a list of priority needs and associated cost assessments for park 
operations and improvements, as specified; and (3) establish a specified stakeholder 
advisory committee to advise DNR and Baltimore City on the scope and management of 
the park. A related reporting requirement is established. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. General/special fund expenditures increase by as much 
as $70,000 in FY 2025 and by as much as $30,000 in FY 2026, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not directly affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF/SF Exp. 
0 
70,000 
30,000 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($70,000) 
($30,000) 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore City did not respond to repeated requests for information 
regarding this fiscal and policy note. However, it is assumed that Baltimore City can work 
with DNR to implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not 
directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1358/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The list of priority needs and associated cost assessments for park 
operations and improvements must include (1) capital improvements; (2) critical 
maintenance; (3) enhanced natural resource management and restoration, including the 
implementation of a biohabitats study; (4) historic site restoration; (5) enhanced outdoor 
recreation amenities, including trail improvements; (6) adding park staff and procuring 
equipment and supplies; and (7) law enforcement and public safety. 
 
By December 1, 2025, DNR must submit a report to the General Assembly on (1) property 
owned by the State in Baltimore City that is suitable for inclusion in the park; (2) property 
owned by Baltimore City or a nonprofit organization in Baltimore City that is suitable for 
inclusion in the park and for which the landowners are willing to enter into a partnership 
agreement; and (3) the funding needed to establish and promote Gwynns Falls State Park. 
 
Current Law:  Pursuant to DNR regulations, the State park system is administered under 
the jurisdiction of the Maryland Park Service to preserve and protect the best of Maryland’s 
natural and historic places for the enjoyment and appreciation of its citizens. The parks are 
managed to provide public benefits, including (1) natural resource conservation; 
(2) cultural and historic preservation; (3) watershed protection; (4) education and 
interpretation; and (5) nature-based outdoor recreation, including trails, picnicking, 
boating, camping, cabins, hunting, fishing, and swimming. 
 
DNR is authorized to enter into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with a local 
government, bicounty agency, or nonprofit organization to establish a “partnership park” 
in the State and to enter into a partnership agreement with a local government, bicounty 
agency, or nonprofit organization to manage a partnership park in the State. “Partnership 
park” means a unit of the State park system managed by DNR in partnership with a local 
government, a bicounty agency, or a nonprofit organization. 
 
State Expenditures:  DNR advises that it can work with Baltimore City to implement 
most of the bill’s requirements using existing budgeted resources; however, if a significant 
level of detail is required for the list of priority needs and associated cost assessments that 
DNR and Baltimore City are required to develop, DNR may need to hire a consultant to 
assist with that effort. If a consultant is needed, DNR advises that related costs are 
estimated to total no more than $100,000.  
 
This analysis assumes that there is no effect in fiscal 2024 (despite the bill’s June 1, 2024 
effective date). Based on the information provided by DNR regarding the potential need to 
hire a consultant, it is assumed that, due to the December 1, 2025 reporting deadline, 
general/special fund expenditures increase by as much as $70,000 in fiscal 2025 and by as 
much as $30,000 in fiscal 2026.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1358/ Page 3 
Even though the bill does not terminate, there are no ongoing requirements once the report 
has been submitted. Therefore, it is assumed that the bill does not directly affect State 
expenditures beyond fiscal 2026.  
 
Additional Comments:  To the extent DNR enters into an MOU to establish the park as a 
partnership park (and any partnership agreement to manage the partnership park) – as it is 
authorized to do under current law – State and local finances are further affected. Any such 
effects are not addressed in this analysis. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1183 (Senator Carter)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3