START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1334 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1334 
(Delegate Smith) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Housing and Community Development – Continuing the CORE Partnership 
Fund – Extension 
 
   
This bill extends indefinitely the Continuing the CORE Partnership Fund in the Department 
of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) and requires the Governor, for 
fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, to include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $50.0 million to the fund. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024 or 2025. Pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general fund 
expenditures increase by $50.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026 due to the mandated 
appropriation, as discussed below. To the extent PAYGO general funds replace general 
obligation (GO) bonds that otherwise would be appropriated to Project CORE, those 
GO bonds are available for other capital projects, as discussed below. This bill establishes 
a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
PAYGO GF exp 
0 
0 
50.0 
50.0 
50.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
($50.0) 
($50.0) 
($50.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect Baltimore City finances or 
operations, as discussed below.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1334/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Project CORE and the Continuing the CORE Partnership Fund 
 
On January 5, 2016, Governor Lawrence J. Hogan, Jr. and Baltimore City Mayor 
Stephanie Rawlings-Blake announced Project CORE (Creating Opportunities for Renewal 
and Enterprise) as a multi-year State-city partnership to demolish thousands of vacant 
buildings in Baltimore City and replace them with green space and economic development 
projects. DHCD, the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA), and Baltimore City entered into 
a memorandum of understanding on February 10, 2016.  
 
Chapters 639 and 640 of 2018 established the Continuing the CORE Partnership Fund 
within DHCD. The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund with the stated purpose of assisting 
DHCD, in conjunction with MSA and Baltimore City, in expeditiously removing blighted 
property within Baltimore City. The fund consists of money appropriated in the State 
budget to the fund any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the 
fund. The fund may be used for administrative expenses. For fiscal 2020, the Governor was 
explicitly authorized to include in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $30.0 million 
to the fund. For fiscal 2021 through 2024, the Governor was explicitly authorized to include 
in the annual budget bill an appropriation of $25.0 million to the fund. Chapters 639  
and 640 terminate June 30, 2024.  
 
DHCD advises that since the fund’s inception it has never received funding, but that 
Project CORE is operated with GO bond proceeds through the Strategic Demolition and 
Smart Growth Impact Fund, as discussed below. Additional information regarding 
Project CORE can be found here.  
 
Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
 
Chapter 30 of 2016 established the Strategic Demolition and Smart Growth Impact Fund 
within DHCD. The fund is a special, nonlapsing fund, the stated purpose of which is to 
provide grants and loans to assist in predevelopment activities, including interior and 
exterior demolition, land assembly, architecture and engineering, and site development for 
revitalization projects in designated areas of the State. The fund may only be used to 
provide grants and loans for such activities to government agencies and community 
development organizations in an area designated as a sustainable community or a qualified 
opportunity zone. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the 
fund; (2) repayments of loans made from the fund; (3) interest earnings of the fund; and 
(4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. To be 
eligible for a grant or loan from the fund, a government agency or a community 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1334/ Page 3 
development organization is not required to provide evidence of a matching fund. DHCD 
must award grants and loans from the fund on a competitive basis. The fiscal 2025 capital 
and operating budgets as passed by the General Assembly include $30.0 million in 
GO bond proceeds and $30.0 million in PAYGO general funds for the fund; DHCD advises 
that $50.0 million of that amount ($25.0 million in GO bond proceeds and $25.0 million in 
PAYGO general funds) is for Project CORE. The five-year Capital Improvement Program 
(CIP) includes $60.0 million annually in GO bond proceeds for the fund through 
fiscal 2029 ($50.0 million of which is for Project CORE).  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the fiscal 2025 capital and operating budgets as 
passed by the General Assembly include a total of $50.0 million in GO bond proceeds and 
PAYGO general funds for Project CORE through the Strategic Demolition and Smart 
Growth Fund; the CIP also includes $50.0 million annually in GO bond proceeds for 
Project CORE through fiscal 2029.  
 
The bill requires the Governor, for fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, to include in 
the annual budget bill an appropriation of $50.0 million to the Continuing the CORE 
Partnership Fund. The Office of the Attorney General interprets “the annual budget bill” 
to refer only to the annual operating budget and further advises that the Governor cannot 
satisfy a funding mandate with GO bonds in the capital budget. Therefore, PAYGO general 
fund expenditures increase by $50.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026 due to the 
mandated appropriation. However, to the extent PAYGO general funds replace GO bonds 
that otherwise would be appropriated to Project CORE (as currently planned in the CIP) to 
maintain current funding levels for the program, those GO bonds are available for other 
capital projects. 
 
As DHCD has operated Project CORE for several years, it can continue to operate the 
program using existing staff.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, the CIP includes $50.0 million annually in 
GO bond funding for Project CORE through fiscal 2029. To the extent PAYGO general 
funds replace GO bonds that otherwise would be appropriated to Project CORE, funding 
levels for Project CORE are maintained at the current level and there is no effect on 
Baltimore City. However, to the extent PAYGO general funds are appropriated in addition 
to the GO bonds included in the CIP (i.e., the mandated funding supplements planned 
capital spending), Baltimore City may receive additional funding as a result of the bill’s 
mandated appropriation.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1334/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland Stadium Authority; 
Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4