START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1357 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1357 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Howard County - Payment in Lieu of Taxes Agreements - Moderate Income 
Housing  
Ho. Co. 8-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes Howard County to exempt real property belonging to the owners of 
specified moderate income housing developments if the owner and the county enter into a 
specified payment in lieu of taxes (PILOT) agreement. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, 
and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  Howard County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in FY 2025 
to the extent that certain moderate income housing developments are exempt from real 
property taxes. The amount of any decrease depends on the number of moderate income 
housing developments taking place in the county and the assessed value of each affected 
property. County property tax revenue decreases will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT 
agreements between the county and developers.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes Howard County to enter into a PILOT agreement with 
owners of specified moderate income housing developments if (1) the owner of the real 
property and Howard County agree that the owner must pay a negotiated amount in lieu of 
the county property tax and (2) the owner of the real property enters into an agreement with 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1357/ Page 2 
Howard County to maintain a number of residential units located at the real property as 
housing for moderate income households that exceeds the minimum number of moderate 
income housing units required by local zoning laws in effect on the date of the agreement.  
 
The Howard County Executive must publish the methodology to be used for calculating 
the negotiated payment amount for PILOT agreements on the county’s website. The 
methodology may be revised at any time. The county executive must reevaluate the 
methodology to be used for calculating a negotiated payment amount for a potential 
agreement at least once every five years. If any revisions are made to the most recently 
published methodology, the county executive must publish the revised methodology on the 
county’s website. 
 
Howard County may not enter a PILOT agreement unless the negotiated payment amount 
for the agreement was determined in accordance with the methodology most recently 
published on the county’s website. 
 
Current Law:  A PILOT is an agreement between a jurisdiction and a developer, business, 
or landowner that substitutes a negotiated payment for annual real estate taxes that are 
traditionally due on a property. The Guide to the Property Tax Structure in Maryland 
provides a summary on the jurisdictions with existing PILOT agreements and the extent to 
which the assessable base has been exempt from taxation. The Guide to Local Government 
Taxing Authority provides an overview on each county government’s statutory authority 
to impose local taxes and establish tax credits and exemptions.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Howard County property tax revenues may decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2025 to the extent that certain moderate income housing developments are exempt 
from real property taxes. The amount of any decrease depends on the number of moderate 
income housing developments taking place and the assessed value of each affected 
property. For fiscal 2024, the county real property tax rate is $1.25 per $100 of assessed 
value. Property tax decreases will be mitigated by negotiated PILOT agreements between 
the county and developers. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1147 (Howard County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; State Department of Assessments and Taxation; 
Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1357/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 3, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3