START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 378

Chapter 378

(House Bill 1388)

AN ACT concerning

Labor and Employment – Noncompete and Conflict of Interest ~~Clauses~~ ~~–~~ Clauses
for Veterinary and Health Care Professionals and Study of the Health Care
Market

FOR the purpose of applying to certain veterinary and health care professionals certain
provisions of law stating that certain noncompete and conflict of interest provisions
in certain employment contracts are null and void as being against the public policy
of the State; establishing certain prohibitions regarding noncompete and conflict of
interest provisions for certain health care employment contracts and similar
documents and agreements; requiring the Maryland Health Care Commission to
contract with a private consultant to study certain issues related to the health care
market in the State; ~~applying~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~retroactively;~~ and generally relating to
~~noncompete~~ ~~and~~ ~~conflict~~ ~~of~~ ~~interest~~ ~~clauses~~ ~~in~~ ~~employment~~ ~~contracts~~ employment of
veterinary and health care professionals.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–716
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

3–716.

(a) (1) This section SUBSECTION applies:

(i) to an employment contract or a similar document or agreement
concerning:

1. an employee who earns equal to or less than 150% of the
State minimum wage rate established under § 3–413 of this title; OR

2. EMPLOYMENT IN A POSITION FOR WHICH THE
EMPLOYEE:

A. IS REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 378 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

A. UNDER THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE; OR

B. IS EMPLOYED IN A POSITION THAT PROVIDES DIRECT
PATIENT CARE; AND

C. EARNS EQUAL TO OR LESS THAN $350,000 IN TOTAL
ANNUAL COMPENSATION; OR

B. 3. AS AN EMPLOYEE LICENSED AS A VETERINARY
PRACTITIONER OR VETERINARY TECHNICIAN UNDER TITLE 2, SUBTITLE 3 OF THE
AGRICULTURE ARTICLE; and

(ii) whether or not the employer and employee entered into the
employment contract or similar document or agreement in the State.

(2) This section SUBSECTION does not apply to an employment contract or
a similar document or agreement with respect to the taking or use of a client OR PATIENT
list or other proprietary client–related OR PATIENT–RELATED information.

(b) (3) A noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment
contract or a similar document or agreement that restricts the ability of an employee to
enter into employment with a new employer or to become self–employed in the same or
similar business or trade shall be null and void as being against the public policy of the
State.

(B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO AN EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT
OR SIMILAR DOCUMENT OR AGREEMENT CONCERNING EMPLOYMENT IN A POSITION
FOR WHICH THE EMPLOYEE:

(I) IS REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED UNDER THE HEALTH
OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE;

(II) IS EMPLOYED IN A POSITION THAT PROVIDES DIRECT
PATIENT CARE; AND

(III) EARNS MORE THAN $350,000 IN TOTAL ANNUAL
COMPENSATION.

(2) (I) THE PERIOD FOR WHICH A NONCOMPETE OR CONFLICT OF
INTEREST PROVISION IN AN EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT OR SIMILAR DOCUMENT OR
AGREEMENT IS IN EFFECT MAY NOT EXCEED 1 YEAR FROM THE LAST DAY OF
EMPLOYMENT.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 378

(II) THE GEOGRAPHICAL RESTRICTION IN A NONCOMPETE OR
CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROVISION IN AN EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT OR SIMILAR
DOCUMENT OR AGREEMENT MAY NOT EXCEED 10 MILES FROM THE PRIMARY PLACE
OF EMPLOYMENT.

(3) ON REQUEST OF A PATIENT, AN EMPLOYER OF AN EMPLOYEE
DESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL PROVIDE NOTICE TO A
PATIENT OF THE NEW LOCATION WHERE A FORMER EMPLOYEE WILL BE PRACTICING.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~construed~~ ~~to~~
~~apply~~ ~~retroactively~~ ~~and~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~applied~~ ~~to~~ ~~and~~ ~~interpreted~~ ~~to~~ ~~affect~~ ~~an~~ ~~employment~~ ~~contract~~
~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~similar~~ ~~contract~~ ~~or~~ ~~agreement~~ ~~entered~~ ~~into~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~effective~~ ~~date~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Health Care Commission shall contract with a private
consultant to study, in consultation with relevant stakeholders:

(1) the effect of private equity firms on the health care market in the State,
including:

(i) the impact on the State’s ability to meet the goals and objectives
of the Total Cost of Care Model; and

(ii) the impact on efforts to address health disparities and social
determinants of health;

(2) the payer mix for physician practices and groups with private equity
ownership;

(3) the impact of hospital consolidations on physician practices;

(4) the acquisition of physician practices; and

(5) the impact on the ability of nonprofit hospitals and health systems to
maintain access to care, including the ability to hire and retain physicians.

(b) On or before January 1, 2025, the Commission shall report on the findings and
recommendations from the study required under subsection (a) of this section to the Senate
Finance Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee, in
accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That § 3–716(a)(1)(i)2 and (b) of
the Labor and Employment Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall be construed to
apply only to employment contracts or similar documents or agreements for employment
executed on or after July 1, 2025.
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 378 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION ~~3.~~ ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4