START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

Chapter 377

(House Bill 1397)

AN ACT concerning

~~Human~~ ~~Relations~~ ~~–~~ ~~Discrimination~~ ~~–~~ ~~Protected~~ ~~Characteristics~~
Civil Rights – Discrimination Based on Protected Characteristics and
Reproductive Freedom

FOR the purpose of altering certain provisions of law prohibiting discrimination based on
certain protected characteristics to include prohibitions on discrimination based on
sexual orientation, gender identity, race, religious beliefs, marital status, and
disability; withdrawing and repealing Chapter 244 of the Acts of the General
Assembly of 2023; and generally relating to prohibitions against discrimination
based on protected characteristics and reproductive freedom.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 11–102(e), 12–113(a), 12–305(a), 12–503(b)(1), 12–603, 12–702, and
12–704(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 5–106(p) and 8–102(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Criminal Law
Section 2–207(c), 3–209(b), 10–304, and 10–305
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–104(b), 7–128(c), 23–605(a)(2), and 23–806(a)(3)(iii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–408(b), 19–710(h), and 19–725(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 14–5F–10(c) and 19–311(15)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 16–305
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Human Services
Section 8–707(b)(1)(viii)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Insurance
Section 15–112(h)(1) and 27–910(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 3–304 and 3–307(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Land Use
Section 16–204 and 16–304(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2012 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 7–507(h)(1) and 18–204
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 8A–801(b)

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 13–219(c)(1), 19–101(a), 19–102, 19–103(j)(1), 19–114, and 19–115
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 8–214(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY withdrawing, recalling, and repealing
Chapter 244 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

11–102.

(e) “Discriminatory boycott” means the entering into or carrying out of any
provision, express or implied, of any agreement, understanding or contractual arrangement
for economic benefit between any person and any foreign government, foreign person, or
international organization, which is not specifically authorized by the law of the United
States and which is required or imposed, either directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly,
by the foreign government, foreign person, or international organization in order to restrict,
condition, prohibit, or interfere with any business relationship on the basis of a domestic
individual’s race, color, creed, religion, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, DISABILITY, GENDER
IDENTITY, or national origin. Except, that entering into an agreement, understanding or
contractual arrangement with respect to the handling or shipping of goods while in
international and not intrastate transit or executing and delivering any other document
with respect to the handling or shipping of goods while in international and not intrastate
transit or carrying out or complying with any provision with respect to the choice of carrier
in international and not intrastate transit or the international routing of goods while in
international and not intrastate transit contained in any such agreement, understanding,
contractual arrangement or other document may not constitute a discriminatory boycott
within the meaning of this subtitle.

12–113.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a lender may not refuse to
lend money to any person solely because of:

(1) Geographic area or neighborhood; or

(2) Race, creed, color, age, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER
IDENTITY, DISABILITY, marital status, handicap, or national origin.

12–305.

(a) In granting or denying an application for a loan, a licensee may not
discriminate against any loan applicant only on the basis of race, color, creed, national
origin, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, DISABILITY, marital status, or
age.

12–503.

(b) (1) A seller or financial institution may not discriminate solely on the basis
of RACE, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS,
DISABILITY, marital status, geographic area of residence, neighborhood of residence, or
age against a buyer who wishes to establish an account. Refusal to establish an account for
a buyer who is under the age of 18 is not discrimination solely on the basis of age.

12–603.

A seller or sales finance company may not discriminate against a buyer solely on the
basis of the RACE, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, RELIGIOUS
BELIEFS, DISABILITY, marital status, geographic area of residence, neighborhood of
residence, or age of the buyer. Refusal to grant credit to a buyer who is under the age of 18
is not discrimination solely on the basis of age.

12–702.

(a) The General Assembly finds that there is a need to insure that the various
financial institutions and other persons and firms engaged in the extension of credit
exercise their responsibility to make credit available with fairness, impartiality, and
without discrimination on the basis of sex or marital status. Economic stabilization would
be enhanced, and competition among the various financial institutions and other persons
and firms engaged in the extension of credit would be strengthened by an absence of
discrimination on the basis of sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY,
DISABILITY, marital status, race, color, religion, national origin, or age (provided the
applicant has capacity to contract).

(b) It is the purpose of this subtitle to require that financial institutions and other
persons and firms engaged in the extension of credit do not deny credit on the basis of sex,

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, DISABILITY, marital status, race, color,
religion, national origin, or age (provided the applicant has capacity to contract).

12–704.

With respect to any aspect of a credit transaction:

(1) A creditor may not discriminate against any applicant on the basis of
sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, DISABILITY, marital status, race, color,
religion, national origin, or age;

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

5–106.

(p) A prosecution for an offense of discrimination on the basis of sex, SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, GENDER IDENTITY, RACE, OR DISABILITY in
paying wages under §§ 3–301 through 3–308 of the Labor and Employment Article shall be
instituted within 3 years after the performance of the act on which the prosecution is based.

8–102.

(b) A citizen may not be excluded from jury service due to color, disability,
economic status, national origin, race, religion, [or] sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, OR
GENDER IDENTITY.

Article – Criminal Law

2–207.

(c) The discovery or perception of, or belief about, another person’s race, color,
national origin, sex, gender identity, [or] sexual orientation, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, OR
DISABILITY, whether or not accurate, does not constitute legally adequate provocation to
mitigate a killing from the crime of murder to manslaughter.

3–209.

(b) The discovery or perception of, or belief about, another person’s race, color,
national origin, sex, gender identity, [or] sexual orientation, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, OR
DISABILITY, whether or not accurate, is not a defense to the crime of assault in any degree.

10–304.

Motivated either in whole or in substantial part by another person’s or group’s race,
color, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, [gender] SEX, gender identity, disability, or
national origin, or because another person or group is homeless, a person may not:
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) (i) commit a crime or attempt or threaten to commit a crime against
that person or group;

(ii) deface, damage, or destroy, or attempt or threaten to deface,
damage, or destroy the real or personal property of that person or group;

(iii) burn or attempt or threaten to burn an object on the real or
personal property of that person or group; or

(iv) make or cause to be made a false statement, report, or complaint
that the person knows to be false as a whole or in material part, to a law enforcement officer
of the State, of a county, municipal corporation, or other political subdivision of the State,
or of the Maryland–National Capital Park and Planning Police, about that person or group,
with the intent to deceive and to cause an investigation or other action to be taken as a
result of the statement, report, or complaint, in violation of § 9–501 of this article; or

(2) commit a violation of item (1) of this section that:

(i) except as provided in item (ii) of this item, involves a separate
crime that is a felony; or

(ii) results in the death of a victim.

10–305.

A person may not deface, damage, or destroy, attempt or threaten to deface, damage,
or destroy, burn or attempt or threaten to burn an object on, or damage the real or personal
property connected to a building that is publicly or privately owned, leased, or used,
including a cemetery, library, meeting hall, recreation center, or school:

(1) because a person or group of a particular race, color, religious belief,
sexual orientation, [gender] SEX, gender identity, disability, or national origin, or because
a person or group that is homeless, has contacts or is associated with the building; or

(2) if there is evidence that exhibits animosity against a person or group,
because of the race, color, religious beliefs, sexual orientation, [gender] SEX, gender
identity, disability, or national origin of that person or group or because that person or
group is homeless.

Article – Education

6–104.

(b) The State Superintendent, a county board, a county superintendent, or an
assistant to any one of these may not make any distinction or discriminate in favor of or

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

against any public school employee of this State because of race, religion, color, ancestry or
national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, GENDER IDENTITY, or
disability unrelated in nature and extent so as to reasonably preclude the performance of
the employment except, as to sex, if the employment of a certain sex is reasonably necessary
because of the nature of the employment.

7–128.

(c) Each middle and high school shall seek to enroll each student in the next most
rigorous subject matter course in accordance with subsection (b) of this section without
regard to the student’s race, ethnicity, [gender] SEX, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER
IDENTITY, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, address, disability status, socioeconomic status, or the
language spoken in the student’s home.

23–605.

(a) (2) An employee organization that submits a petition to the Director under
paragraph (1) of this subsection may not discriminate with regard to terms or conditions of
membership because of [gender] SEX, DISABILITY, MARITAL STATUS, color, creed, race,
national origin, religion, sexual [preference] ORIENTATION, gender identity, or political
affiliation.

23–806.

(a) (3) The petition shall contain:

(iii) A statement that the employee organization has no terms or
conditions of membership that discriminate with regard to race, color, creed, [gender] SEX,
SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, age, political affiliation, national origin,
religion, marital status, or disability; and

Article – Health – General

19–408.

(b) A home health agency may not withhold any home health care services from
an individual because of the individual’s age, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER
IDENTITY, DISABILITY, RACE, color, creed, national origin, source of payment, or ability
to pay.

19–710.

(h) (1) The procedures for offering health care services and offering and
terminating contracts to subscribers may not discriminate unfairly on the basis of age, sex,

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, DISABILITY, race,
health, or economic status. [This]

(2) THE requirement UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
does not prohibit:

[(1)] (I) Reasonable underwriting classifications for establishing contract
rates; or

[(2)] (II) Experience rating.

19–725.

(a) A health maintenance organization may not cancel the enrollment of a
member or refuse to transfer a member from a group to an individual basis because of age,
sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, DISABILITY,
race, or health status.

Article – Health Occupations

14–5F–10.

(c) The Board may not discriminate, in any manner, against any applicant or
licensee for reason of sex, age, race, color, creed, sexual orientation, gender identity,
DISABILITY, or national origin.

19–311.

Subject to the hearing provisions of § 19–312 of this subtitle, the Board may deny a
license to any applicant, fine a licensee, reprimand any licensee, place any licensee on
probation, or suspend or revoke a license if the applicant or licensee:

(15) Refuses, withholds from, denies, or discriminates against an individual
with regard to the provision of professional services on the basis of race, age, [gender] SEX,
sexual orientation, GENDER IDENTITY, disability, religion, ethnic origin, or HIV status;

Article – Housing and Community Development

16–305.

(a) An employee organization that is certified or that seeks certification as an
exclusive representative shall submit to the labor relations administrator a copy of the
employee organization’s constitution and bylaws and any amendment to them.

(b) The constitution or bylaws shall include:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

(1) a pledge that the employee organization accepts members without
regard to age, marital status, national origin, race, religion, disabilities, SEX, sexual
orientation, or gender IDENTITY;

(2) the right of members to participate in the affairs of the employee
organization;

(3) procedures for periodic elections of officers by secret ballot;

(4) fair procedures governing disciplinary actions;

(5) procedures for the accurate accounting of all income and expenditures;

(6) a requirement that a certified annual financial report be produced; and

(7) the right of members to inspect the employee organization’s accounts.

Article – Human Services

8–707.

(b) A contract awarded or renewed between an agency and a provider shall
require the provider to:

(1) post conspicuously a “Residents’ Bill of Rights” in the facility of the
provider stating that a resident has a right:

(viii) not to be discriminated against on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status, personal appearance, sexual orientation,
GENDER IDENTITY, familial status, family responsibilities, matriculation, political
affiliation, disability, source of income, or place of residence or business; and

Article – Insurance

15–112.

(h) A carrier may not deny an application for participation or terminate
participation on its provider panel on the basis of:

(1) [gender] SEX, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, race, age,
religion, national origin, or a protected category under the federal Americans with
Disabilities Act;

27–910.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) A health network may not deny health care services to an enrollee on the basis
of [gender] SEX, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, race, age, religion, national
origin, or a protected category under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Article – Labor and Employment

3–304.

(a) In this section, “providing less favorable employment opportunities” means:

(1) assigning or directing the employee into a less favorable career track, if
career tracks are offered, or position;

(2) failing to provide information about promotions or advancement in the
full range of career tracks offered by the employer; or

(3) limiting or depriving an employee of employment opportunities that
would otherwise be available to the employee but for the employee’s sex or gender identity.

(b) (1) An employer may not discriminate between employees in any
occupation by:

(i) paying a wage to employees [of one sex or gender identity] at a
rate less than the rate paid to OTHER employees [of another sex or gender identity] if
[both] THE employees work in the same establishment and perform work of comparable
character or work on the same operation, in the same business, or of the same type AND
THE PAY DIFFERENCE IS BASED ON THE RACE, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, SEX, GENDER
IDENTITY, OR SEXUAL ORIENTATION OF THE EMPLOYEES; or

(ii) providing less favorable employment opportunities based on sex,
RACE, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, DISABILITY, or gender identity.

(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection, an employee shall
be deemed to work at the same establishment as another employee if the employees work
for the same employer at workplaces located in the same county of the State.

(c) Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, subsection (b) of this
section does not prohibit a variation in a wage that is based on:

(1) a seniority system that does not discriminate on the basis of sex or
gender identity;

(2) a merit increase system that does not discriminate on the basis of sex
or gender identity;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

(3) jobs that require different abilities or skills;

(4) jobs that require the regular performance of different duties or services;

(5) work that is performed on different shifts or at different times of day;

(6) a system that measures performance based on a quality or quantity of
production; or

(7) a bona fide factor other than sex or gender identity, including education,
training, or experience, in which the factor:

(i) is not based on or derived from a gender–based differential in
compensation;

(ii) is job related with respect to the position and consistent with a
business necessity; and

(iii) accounts for the entire differential.

(d) This section does not preclude an employee from demonstrating that an
employer’s reliance on an exception listed in subsection (c) of this section is a pretext for
discrimination on the basis of sex [or], SEXUAL ORIENTATION, gender identity,
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, RACE, OR DISABILITY.

(e) An employer who is paying a wage in violation of this subtitle may not reduce
another wage to comply with this subtitle.

3–307.

(a) (1) If an employer knew or reasonably should have known that the
employer’s action violates § 3–304 of this subtitle, an affected employee may bring an action
against the employer for injunctive relief and to recover the difference between the wages
paid to employees of one sex [or], SEXUAL ORIENTATION, gender identity, RELIGIOUS
BELIEFS, OR RACE, OR WHO HAVE A DISABILITY and the wages paid to employees of
another sex [or], SEXUAL ORIENTATION, gender identity, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, OR
RACE, OR WHO DO NOT HAVE A DISABILITY who do the same type work and an additional
equal amount as liquidated damages.

Article – Land Use

16–204.

(a) An employee organization that is certified or that seeks certification as an
exclusive representative under this subtitle shall submit to the labor relations
administrator:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) a copy of the employee organization’s constitution and bylaws; and

(2) any change in the constitution or bylaws.

(b) The constitution or bylaws shall include:

(1) a pledge that the employee organization accepts members without
regard to age, marital status, national origin, race, religion, disability, SEX, sexual
orientation, or gender IDENTITY;

(2) the right of members to participate in the affairs of the employee
organization;

(3) procedures for periodic elections of officers by secret ballot;

(4) fair procedures governing disciplinary actions;

(5) procedures for the accurate accounting of income and expenditures;

(6) a requirement that a certified annual financial report be produced; and

(7) the right of members to inspect the organization’s accounts.

16–304.

(b) The constitution or bylaws shall include:

(1) a pledge that the employee organization accepts members without
regard to age, race, [gender] SEX, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, religion,
marital status, or national origin;

(2) the right of members to participate in the affairs of the employee
organization;

(3) procedures for periodic elections of officers by secret ballot;

(4) fair procedures governing disciplinary actions;

(5) procedures for the accurate accounting of income and expenditures;

(6) a requirement that an annual financial report be produced; and

(7) the right of members to inspect the employee organization’s accounts.

Article – Public Utilities

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

7–507.

(h) (1) An electricity supplier may not discriminate against any customer
based wholly or partly on race, color, creed, national origin, GENDER IDENTITY,
DISABILITY, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, or sex of an applicant for service or for any arbitrary,
capricious, or unfairly discriminatory reason.

18–204.

(a) An employee organization that is certified or that seeks certification as an
exclusive representative under this subtitle shall submit to the labor relations
administrator:

(1) a copy of the employee organization’s constitution and bylaws; and

(2) any subsequent change in the employee organization’s constitution or
bylaws.

(b) The constitution or bylaws shall include:

(1) a pledge that the employee organization accept members without
regard to age, marital status, national origin, race, religion, disability, sexual orientation,
SEX, or gender IDENTITY;

(2) the right of members to participate in the affairs of the employee
organization;

(3) procedures for periodic elections for officers by secret ballot;

(4) fair procedures governing disciplinary actions;

(5) procedures for the accurate accounting of all income and expenditures;

(6) a requirement that an independent annual financial report be
produced; and

(7) the right of members to inspect the organization’s accounts.

Article – Real Property

8A–801.

(b) A park owner or operator of a mobile home park, or his agent or employee,
may not refuse, withhold from, or deny to any person any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, or privileges of the mobile home park or leases to the premises

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

because of race, creed, color, sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, or national
origin of that person.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

13–219.

(c) The nondiscrimination clause shall:

(1) prohibit discrimination in any manner by the contractor against an
employee or applicant for employment because of sex, SEXUAL ORIENTATION, GENDER
IDENTITY, DISABILITY, race, age, color, creed, or national origin;

19–101.

(a) It is the policy of the State not to enter into a contract with any business entity
that has discriminated in the solicitation, selection, hiring, or commercial treatment of
vendors, suppliers, subcontractors, or commercial customers on the basis of race, color,
religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, GENDER
IDENTITY, or on the basis of disability or any otherwise unlawful use of characteristics
regarding the vendor’s, supplier’s, or commercial customer’s employees or owners.

19–102.

It is the intent of the State to avoid becoming a passive participant in private sector
commercial discrimination by refusing to procure goods and services from business entities
that discriminate in the solicitation, selection, hiring, or commercial treatment of vendors,
suppliers, subcontractors, or commercial customers on the basis of race, color, religion,
ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, GENDER IDENTITY, sexual
orientation, or on the basis of disability or other unlawful forms of discrimination by
providing a procedure for receiving, investigating, and resolving complaints of
discrimination filed against business entities that:

(1) have submitted a bid or proposal; or

(2) have been selected to engage in, or are engaged in, providing goods or
services to the State.

19–103.

(j) (1) “Discrimination” means any disadvantage, difference, distinction, or
preference in the solicitation, selection, hiring, or commercial treatment of a vendor,
supplier, subcontractor, or commercial customer on the basis of race, color, religion,
ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual orientation, GENDER

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 377

IDENTITY, or on the basis of disability or any otherwise unlawful use of characteristics
regarding the vendor’s, supplier’s, or commercial customer’s employees or owners.

19–114.

Every contract and subcontract shall contain a nondiscrimination clause that reads
as follows:

“As a condition of entering into this agreement, the company represents and
warrants that it will comply with the State’s Commercial Nondiscrimination Policy, as
described under Title 19 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland. As part of such compliance, the company may not discriminate on the
basis of race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual
orientation, GENDER IDENTITY, or on the basis of disability or other unlawful forms of
discrimination in the solicitation, selection, hiring, or commercial treatment of
subcontractors, vendors, suppliers, or commercial customers, nor shall the company
retaliate against any person for reporting instances of such discrimination. The company
shall provide equal opportunity for subcontractors, vendors, and suppliers to participate in
all of its public sector and private sector subcontracting and supply opportunities, provided
that nothing contained in this clause shall prohibit or limit otherwise lawful efforts to
remedy the effects of marketplace discrimination that have occurred or are occurring in the
marketplace. The company understands and agrees that a material violation of this clause
shall be considered a material breach of this agreement and may result in termination of
this agreement, disqualification of the company from participating in State contracts, or
other sanctions. This clause is not enforceable by or for the benefit of, and creates no
obligation to, any third party.”.

19–115.

All requests for bids or proposals issued for State contracts shall include the
following certification to be completed by the bidder:

“The undersigned bidder hereby certifies and agrees that the following information
is correct:

In preparing its bid on this project, the bidder has considered all proposals submitted
from qualified, potential subcontractors and suppliers, and has not engaged in
“discrimination” as defined in § 19–103 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the
Annotated Code of Maryland; to wit: discrimination in the solicitation, selection, or
commercial treatment of any subcontractor, vendor, supplier, or commercial customer on
the basis of race, color, religion, ancestry or national origin, sex, age, marital status, sexual
orientation, GENDER IDENTITY, or on the basis of disability or other unlawful forms of
discrimination. Without limiting the foregoing, “discrimination” also includes retaliating
against any person or other entity for reporting any incident of “discrimination”. Without
limiting any other provision of the solicitation for bids on this project, it is understood and
agreed that, if this certification is false, such false certification will constitute grounds for

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 377 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

the State to reject the bid submitted by the bidder on this project, and terminate any
contract awarded based on the bid. As part of its bid or proposal, the bidder shall provide
to the State a list of all instances within the immediate past 4 years where there has been
a final adjudicated determination in a legal or administrative proceeding in the State of
Maryland that the bidder discriminated against its subcontractors, vendors, suppliers, or
commercial customers, and a description of the status or resolution of that complaint,
including any remedial action taken. As a condition of submitting a bid or proposal to the
State, the bidder agrees to comply with the State’s Commercial Nondiscrimination Policy
as described under Title 19 of the State Finance and Procurement Article of the Annotated
Code of Maryland.”.

Article – Tax – Property

8–214.

(a) If a country club or golf course that meets the qualifications of § 8–212 of this
subtitle allows or practices discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, SEXUAL
ORIENTATION, GENDER IDENTITY, DISABILITY, or national origin in granting
membership or guest privileges, the country club or golf course may not make or continue
an agreement under this subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Chapter 244 of the Acts of the
General Assembly of 2023 be and it is hereby withdrawn and recalled for appropriate
legislative action.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Chapter 244 of the Acts of the
General Assembly of 2023 be and it is hereby repealed.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 1 of this Act shall
take effect October 1, 2024.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
4 of this Act, this Act is an emergency measure, is necessary for the immediate preservation
of the public health or safety, has been passed by a yea and nay vote supported by
three–fifths of all the members elected to each of the two Houses of the General Assembly,
and shall take effect from the date it is enacted.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16