START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1388 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1388 
(Delegate Hill, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations and 
Environment and Transportation 
Finance 
 
Labor and Employment - Noncompete and Conflict of Interest Clauses for 
Veterinary and Health Care Professionals and Study of the Health Care Market 
 
 
This bill expands the application of provisions of current law stating that a noncompete or 
conflict of interest provision in an employment contract is null and void under State law to 
an employment contract for an employee that is licensed as a veterinary practitioner or 
veterinary technician or, for employment contracts executed on or after July 1, 2025, 
specified health care professionals as discussed below. On request of a patient, an employer 
must provide notice to a patient of the new location where a former employee subject to 
specified provisions of the bill will be practicing. Additionally, the Maryland Health Care 
Commission (MHCC) must contract with a private consultant to study, in consultation with 
relevant stakeholders, specified topics related to the health care market in the State. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. Special fund expenditures increase by approximately 
$150,000 only in FY 2025 for MHCC to hire a consultant to conduct the study. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
0 
150,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($150,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1388/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  For employment contracts executed on or after July 1, 2025, the bill 
expands the application of provisions of current law stating that a noncompete or conflict 
of interest provision in an employment contract is null and void under State law to an 
employment contract for an employee who is required to be licensed under the Health 
Occupations Article, provides direct patient care, and earns $350,000 or less in total 
annual compensation. This provision does not apply to an employment contract or a similar 
document or agreement with respect to the taking or use of a client or patient list or other 
proprietary client-related or patient-related information. 
 
Licensed health care professionals providing direct patient care and earning more than 
$350,000 may be subject to an employment contract or similar agreement that includes a 
noncompete or conflict of interest provision, but the noncompete or conflict of interest 
provision period for employment contracts executed on or after July 1, 2025, may not 
exceed one year from the last day of employment. In addition, the geographical restriction 
in a noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an applicable employment contract may 
not exceed 10 miles from the primary place of employment. 
 
MHCC must study:   
 
 
the effect of private equity firms on the health care market in the State, including 
specified impacts; 
 
the payer mix for physician practices and groups with private equity ownership; 
 
the impact of hospital consolidations on physician practices; 
 
the acquisition of physician practices; and 
 
the impact on the ability of nonprofit hospitals and health systems to maintain access 
to care, including the ability to hire and retain physicians. 
 
By January 1, 2025, MHCC must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House 
Health and Government Operations Committee on the study’s findings and 
recommendations. 
 
Current Law:  For an employee who earns equal to or less than 150% of the State 
minimum wage rate, a noncompete or conflict of interest provision in an employment 
contract or a similar document or agreement that restricts the ability of an employee to 
enter into employment with a new employer or to become self-employed in the same or 
similar business or trade is null and void as being against the public policy of the State. 
The provision is null and void whether or not the employer and employee entered into the 
employment contract or similar document or agreement in the State. The provision does 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1388/ Page 3 
not apply to an employment contract or a similar document or agreement with respect to 
the taking or use of a client list or other proprietary client-related information. 
 
Federal Trade Commission 
 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued a final rule on April 23, 2024, banning 
noncompetes. Under the FTC’s final rule, existing noncompetes for the vast majority of 
workers will no longer be enforceable after the rule’s effective date, but existing 
noncompetes for senior executives can remain in force. Employers, however, are 
prohibited from entering into or enforcing new noncompetes with senior executives. The 
final rule defines senior executives as workers earning more than $151,164 annually and 
who are in policy-making positions. The final rule will become effective 120 days after 
publication in the Federal Register. 
 
Maryland Health Care Commission 
 
MHCC is an independent commission within the Maryland Department of Health with a 
mission to plan for health system needs, promote informed decision making, increase 
accountability, and improve access in a rapidly changing health care environment by 
providing timely and accurate information on availability, cost, and quality of services to 
policymakers, purchasers, providers, and the public. 
 
State Expenditures:  Assuming it takes at least one month to issue a request for proposal 
to hire a consultant for the bill’s required study, special fund expenditures increase by 
approximately $150,000 only in fiscal 2025 for MHCC to hire a consultant to conduct the 
study on the health care market in the State. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill has no effect on small businesses that employ low-wage 
licensed health care workers, veterinary practitioners, and veterinary technicians if these 
employees earn 150% or less of the State minimum wage rate. However, small businesses 
that employ veterinary practitioners and veterinary technicians earning more than 150% of 
the State minimum wage rate may no longer use noncompete agreements. Small businesses 
that employ licensed health care professionals who provide direct patient care and earn 
$350,000 or less in annual compensation may no longer use noncompete agreements 
executed on or after July 1, 2025. Also, for employment contracts executed on or after 
July 1, 2025, the noncompete or conflict of interest provision period may not exceed 
one year from the last day of employment for licensed health care professionals who 
provide direct patient care and earn more than $350,000 in annual compensation. 
 
A recent study by the U.S. Government Accountability Office found that noncompete 
agreements reduce job mobility and may reduce wages and new firm creation. The study 
also reports that a substantial proportion of health care workers are subject to noncompete 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1388/ Page 4 
agreements. Thus, the bill may have a potential meaningful impact on some small 
businesses that are veterinary practices or in the health care industry by potentially 
encouraging job mobility, higher wages, and new firm creation. 
 
However, once the federal FTC final rule banning noncompetes takes effect, which is 
120 days after its publication in the Federal Register, the bill has minimal effect on small 
businesses as only existing noncompetes for senior executives can remain in force under 
the FTC final rule. Regardless of when the FTC final rule takes effect, small businesses 
that employed licensed health care professionals who provided direct patient care and 
earned more than $350,000 must provide notice to a patient upon the patient’s request of 
the new location where a former employee will be practicing. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1182 (Senator Jennings) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Health Care 
Commission; 
Maryland 
Department 
of 
Labor; 
Federal 
Trade 
Commission; 
U.S. Government Accountability Office; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4