START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 326

Chapter 326

(House Bill 1362)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Cosmetologists – Membership – Alteration

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the State Board of Cosmetologists; and
generally relating to the State Board of Cosmetologists.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 5–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 5–202(a), (c), and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

5–201.

There is a State Board of Cosmetologists in the Department.

5–202.

(a) (1) The Board consists of seven members.

(2) Of the seven members of the Board:

(i) four shall be licensed cosmetologists;

(ii) ONE SHALL BE A LICENSED ESTHETICIAN;

(III) one shall be affiliated with a private cosmetology school as an
educator or owner; and

[(iii)] (IV) [two] ONE shall be A consumer [members] MEMBER.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 326 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) The Governor shall appoint the members with the advice of the
Secretary.

(c) [Each] THE consumer member of the Board:

(1) shall be a member of the general public;

(2) may not be a licensee or otherwise be subject to regulation by the Board;

(3) may not be required to meet the qualifications for the professional
members of the Board; and

(4) may not, within 1 year before appointment, have had a financial
interest in or have received compensation from a person regulated by the Board.

(d) While a member of the Board, [a] THE consumer member may not:

(1) have a financial interest in or receive compensation from a person
regulated by the Board; or

(2) grade any examination given by or for the Board.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2