START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1304 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1304 
(Delegate Kaiser, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Department of Health and Department of Aging - Earned Income Tax 
Credit - Distribution of Information and Training 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to develop a process for 
providing information about the availability of the State’s earned income tax credit to 
enrollees and potential enrollees in specified programs and other individuals receiving 
specified services. The bill further requires the Maryland Department of Aging (MDOA) 
to provide periodic training to the Maryland Access Point network to increase awareness 
of the availability of the State’s earned income tax credit. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can likely be handled with existing budgeted 
resources, as discussed below. To the extent the bill results in increased utilization of the 
State earned income and poverty level tax credits, general fund revenues may decrease 
beginning as early as FY 2025. 
 
Local Effect:  To the extent the bill results in increased utilization of the local earned 
income and poverty level tax credits, local revenues may decrease beginning as early as 
FY 2025, and Montgomery County expenditures for its earned income tax credit 
supplement program may increase beginning as early as FY 2025, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal operational impact on small business 
pharmacies that participate in the Prescription Drug Repository Program. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1304/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MDH must develop a process for providing information about the 
availability of the State’s earned income tax credit to (1) enrollees and potential enrollees 
in the Maryland Medical Assistance Program, Maryland Children’s Health Program, and 
Qualified State Long-Term Care Insurance Partnership when providing information about 
these programs; (2) individuals receiving services under the Senior Prescription Drug 
Assistance Program; and (3) individuals receiving donated prescription drugs and medical 
supplies under the Prescription Drug Repository Program. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Earned Income Tax Credit 
 
Maryland’s earned income tax credit offers both refundable and nonrefundable credits 
against the State income tax and a nonrefundable credit against the local income tax for 
low- to moderate-income resident taxpayers. The State nonrefundable credit is generally 
equal to 50% of the amount of an eligible taxpayer’s federal earned income tax credit for 
the taxable year. A taxpayer for whom the State nonrefundable credit is less than the 
taxpayer’s State income tax liability may also be eligible to claim the State and local 
poverty level tax credits. 
 
Maryland Access Point 
 
The Aging and Disability Resource Center – known as “Maryland Access Point” – is the 
State’s Aging and Disability Resource Center for purposes of the federal Older Americans 
Act Amendments of 2006. The purpose of the program is to provide a coordinated system 
of information and access for individuals seeking long-term services and supports, 
including in-home, community-based, and institutional services. 
 
State Expenditures:  As the bill generally contemplates the distribution of information to 
specified program enrollees and prospective enrollees through existing outreach for these 
programs, it is assumed that MDH can handle the bill’s requirements with existing 
budgeted resources. The Department of Legislative Services notes that the Qualified State 
Long-Term Care Insurance Partnership is jointly administered by MDH and the Maryland 
Insurance Administration (MIA); thus, MDH may require the assistance of MIA in 
distributing information to current or prospective policyholders. 
 
MDOA advises that it can provide periodic training to the Maryland Access Point network 
as required under the bill with existing budgeted resources. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1304/ Page 3 
State Revenues/Local Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the bill results in increased utilization 
of the State earned income and poverty level tax credits, general fund revenues decrease 
beginning as early as fiscal 2025. Any such impact cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
To the extent the bill results in increased utilization of the State’s local earned income and 
poverty level tax credits, local income tax revenues decrease beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025. In addition, Montgomery County expenditures for the Working Families 
Income Supplement Program, which provides a match to county residents based on the 
amount of the State earned income tax credit, may increase beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Department of Aging; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3