START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 967

Chapter 967

(House Bill 1357)

AN ACT concerning

Howard County – Payment in Lieu of Taxes Agreements – Moderate Income
Housing

Ho. Co. 8–24

FOR the purpose of authorizing certain owners of real property and the governing body of
Howard County to enter into payment in lieu of taxes agreements for maintaining a
certain number of moderate income housing units at the property; requiring the
County Executive of Howard County to publish on the county’s website the
methodology used to calculate the negotiated payment amount under a payment in
lieu of taxes agreement authorized under this Act and to periodically reevaluate the
methodology; prohibiting the governing body of Howard County from entering an
agreement unless the negotiated payment amount for the agreement was
determined in accordance with the methodology most recently published on the
county’s website; and generally relating to payment in lieu of taxes agreements in
Howard County.

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 7–521
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

7–521.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “MODERATE INCOME” AND “MODERATE INCOME
HOUSING UNIT” HAVE THE MEANINGS STATED IN TITLE 13, SUBTITLE 4 OF THE
HOWARD COUNTY CODE.

(B) IN HOWARD COUNTY, REAL PROPERTY MAY BE EXEMPT FROM COUNTY
PROPERTY TAX IF:

(1) THE OWNER OF THE REAL PROPERTY AND THE GOVERNING BODY
OF HOWARD COUNTY AGREE THAT THE OWNER SHALL PAY A NEGOTIATED AMOUNT
IN LIEU OF THE COUNTY PROPERTY TAX; AND
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 967 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE OWNER OF THE REAL PROPERTY ENTERS INTO AN
AGREEMENT WITH THE GOVERNING BODY OF HOWARD COUNTY TO MAINTAIN A
NUMBER OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS LOCATED AT THE REAL PROPERTY AS HOUSING
FOR MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLDS THAT EXCEEDS THE MINIMUM NUMBER OF
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING UNITS REQUIRED BY LOCAL ZONING LAWS IN EFFECT
ON THE DATE OF THE AGREEMENT.

(C) REAL PROPERTY DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION IS
EXEMPT WHEN THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION ARE MET.

(D) (1) THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF HOWARD COUNTY:

(I) SHALL PUBLISH ON THE COUNTY’S WEBSITE THE
METHODOLOGY TO BE USED FOR CALCULATING THE NEGOTIATED PAYMENT
AMOUNT FOR AN AGREEMENT AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS
SECTION; AND

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, MAY
REVISE AT ANY TIME THE METHODOLOGY PUBLISHED UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH.

(2) AT LEAST ONCE EVERY 5 YEARS, THE COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF
HOWARD COUNTY SHALL REEVALUATE THE METHODOLOGY TO BE USED FOR
CALCULATING A NEGOTIATED PAYMENT AMOUNT FOR A POTENTIAL AGREEMENT
AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) IF ANY REVISIONS ARE MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OR (2) OF
THIS SUBSECTION TO THE MOST RECENTLY PUBLISHED METHODOLOGY, THE
COUNTY EXECUTIVE OF HOWARD COUNTY SHALL PUBLISH THE REVISED
METHODOLOGY ON THE COUNTY’S WEBSITE.

(E) THE GOVERNING BODY OF HOWARD COUNTY MAY NOT ENTER AN
AGREEMENT AUTHORIZED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION UNLESS THE
NEGOTIATED PAYMENT AMOUNT FOR THE AGREEMENT WAS DETERMINED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THE METHODOLOGY MOST RECENTLY PUBLISHED ON THE
COUNTY’S WEBSITE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2