START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1329 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1329 
(Delegate Attar) 
Judiciary 
Judicial Proceedings 
 
Division of Parole and Probation – Private Home Detention Monitoring – Earned 
Compliance Credits 
 
   
This bill authorizes individuals under supervision by a private home detention monitoring 
agency (PHDMA) to receive earned compliance credits in order to reduce the period of 
home detention. On request by the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP), the PHDMA 
responsible for monitoring an individual who is subject to monitoring as a condition of 
probation must forward a report with specified information regarding the individual’s 
compliance during the monitoring period. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any potential minimal increase in expenditures for the Judiciary to handle 
the number of requests for adjustment of home detention that may be generated by the bill 
is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances, including in the circuit courts.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Earned Compliance Credits:  Once a combination of time served on probation, parole, or 
mandatory supervision, and earned compliance credits satisfy the supervised individual’s 
active term of home detention, DPP must place the individual on abatement. A supervised 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1329/ Page 2 
individual whose period of active home detention has been completely reduced as a result 
of earned compliance credits must remain on abatement until the expiration of the 
supervised individual’s sentence, unless the supervised individual consents to continued 
home detention or the supervised individual violates a condition of probation, parole, or 
mandatory release supervision, including failure to pay a required payment of restitution. 
If a supervised individual violates a condition of probation while on abatement, a court 
may order the supervised individual to be returned to active supervision or home detention.  
 
Report to Division of Parole and Probation:  On request by DPP, the PHDMA responsible 
for monitoring an individual who is subject to monitoring as a condition of probation must 
forward a report of the individual’s compliance during the monitoring period. The report 
must, at a minimum, include (1) the conditions of monitoring set by the sentencing court; 
(2) all infractions that the individual has committed during the monitoring period, even if 
the infraction did not result in a reported violation to DPP or the sentencing court; and  
(3) any other information in the possession of the PHDMA concerning the individual that 
DPP determines is relevant. 
 
Definitions:  “Earned compliance credit” is expanded to include home detention and 
compliance with any supervision requirements of a PHDMA. “Home detention” means 
monitoring by a PHDMA licensed under Title 20, Subtitle 1 of the Business Occupations 
and Professions Article. “Supervised individual” includes an individual being monitored 
by a PHDMA as a condition of probation. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Earned Compliance Credits:  Chapters 564 and 565 of 2012 require the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) to (1) establish a program of earned 
compliance credits to create a reduction in the period of active supervision for a “supervised 
individual” and (2) develop policies and procedures for implementation. 
 
With certain exceptions, a “supervised individual” means an individual placed on probation 
by a court or one who is serving a period of parole or mandatory release supervision after 
release from a correctional facility. “Supervised individual” does not include (1) a person 
incarcerated, on probation, or convicted in the State for a crime of violence; (2) a person 
incarcerated, on probation, or convicted in the State for a crime under Title 3, Subtitle 3 of 
the Criminal Law Article (sexual crimes); (3) a person incarcerated, on probation, or 
convicted in the State for a violation of § 2-503 (homicide by motor vehicle or vessel while 
under the influence of alcohol or alcohol per se), § 5-612 (controlled dangerous substances 
(CDS) – volume dealer), § 5-613 (CDS – drug kingpin), § 5-614 (CDS – importer), 
§ 5-627 (CDS near school), or § 5-628 (CDS – use of minor) of the Criminal Law Article; 
(4) a person registered or eligible for registration under Title 11, Subtitle 7 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article (sex offender registration); (5) a person who was convicted in any other 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1329/ Page 3 
jurisdiction of a crime and the person’s supervision was transferred to this State; or (6) a 
person who was convicted in this State of a crime and the person’s supervision was 
transferred to another state. 
 
Chapter 515 of 2016, also known as the Justice Reinvestment Act, requires DPP to place 
specified individuals on probation, parole, or mandatory supervision on abatement when a 
combination of time served on probation, parole, or mandatory supervision and earned 
compliance credits satisfy the specified individual’s active term of supervision. 
 
“Earned compliance credit” means a 20-day reduction from the period of active supervision 
of the supervised individual for every month that a supervised individual (1) exhibits 
compliance with the conditions and goals of the supervised individual’s probation, parole, 
or mandatory release supervision, as determined by DPSCS; (2) has no new arrests; (3) has 
not violated any conditions of no contact imposed on the supervised individual; (4) is 
current on court-ordered payments for restitution, fines, and fees relating to the offense for 
which earned compliance credits are being accrued; and (5) is current in completing any 
community supervision requirements included in the conditions of the supervised 
individual’s probation, parole, or mandatory release supervision. 
 
DPP must develop an automated application for the tracking and awarding of earned 
compliance credits. Further, a supervised individual who is placed on abatement is not 
required to regularly report to a parole or probation agent or pay a supervision fee.  
Twenty-five percent of the savings realized by DPSCS as a result of the application of 
earned compliance credits must revert to the department, and any remaining savings must 
be allocated to the Performance Incentive Grant Fund, as specified. 
 
Private Home Detention Monitoring Agencies:  Generally, under § 5-201 of the Criminal 
Procedure Article, in accordance with eligibility criteria, conditions, and procedures 
required under the Maryland Rules, the court may require, as a condition of a defendant’s 
pretrial release, that the defendant be monitored by a PHDMA licensed under Title 20 of 
the Business Occupations and Professions Article. PHDMAs are licensed by DPSCS.  
 
PHDMA’s must (1) monitor individuals in accordance with any applicable orders of court; 
(2) monitor 24 hours a day and 7 days a week individuals who are under a court order that 
requires monitoring by a PHDMA; and (3) use electronic equipment or other monitoring 
methods that meet or exceed standards established in regulations by the Secretary of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services. 
 
Upon determining that a defendant subject to private home detention monitoring under the 
provisions of § 5-201(b) has been missing for 24 hours, the PHDMA responsible for 
monitoring the defendant must, on the next business day, notify the court that ordered 
private home detention monitoring as a condition of the defendant’s pretrial release. If the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1329/ Page 4 
court that ordered private detention monitoring as a condition of a defendant’s pretrial 
release requests that it be notified if the defendant violates any other conditions of pretrial 
release, the PHDMA responsible for monitoring the defendant must provide the court with 
the requested notice. 
 
Upon determining that an individual who is subject to private home detention monitoring 
as a condition of probation has been missing for 24 hours, the PHDMA responsible for 
monitoring the individual must, on the next business day, notify DPP. 
 
The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR 12.11.10.09) requires PHDMAs to have 
policies and procedures for the immediate notification to the local law enforcement agency, 
and next working day notification to the court that ordered home detention, the State’s 
Attorney, and the supervising probation agent, if applicable, when a monitored individual 
is determined to have escaped. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may have a meaningful impact on small business 
PHDMAs due to any reductions in monitoring as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information 
Source(s): 
 
Baltimore, 
Carroll, 
Harford, 
Queen 
Anne’s, 
and 
St. Mary’s counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4