START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 325

Chapter 325

(House Bill 1302)

AN ACT concerning

Cosmetologists – Esthetic Services – Definition

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “provide esthetic services” to include certain
services and to provide that it does not include the diagnosis of illness, disease, or
injury or performing ablation of the dermis or hypodermis; and generally relating to
the provision of esthetic services.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 5–101(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 5–101(o)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(o) (1) “Provide esthetic services” means to provide to an individual, for
compensation, the service of:

[(1)] (I) cleansing, exercising, EXFOLIATING, massaging, COSMETIC
MICRONEEDLING, stimulating, TONING, or performing any other similar procedure on
the skin or scalp by electrical, mechanical, or any other means;

[(2)] (II) applying to the face, BODY, OR SCALP an alcohol, cream, lotion,
astringent, or cosmetic preparation; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 325 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(3)] (III) removing superfluous hair by the use of [a depilatory, tweezers,
or wax] ELECTRICAL, MECHANICAL, OR ANY OTHER MEANS OTHER THAN BY THE USE
OF A LASER LIGHT–BASED DEVICE.

(2) “PROVIDE ESTHETIC SERVICES” INCLUDES:

(I) APPLYING MAKEUP;

(II) APPLYING EYELASH EXTENSIONS;

(III) (II) PERFORMING SUPERFICIAL EXFOLIATION
TREATMENTS OF THE EPIDERMIS USING PROFESSIONAL AND OTHER
COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE PRODUCTS OR DEVICES;

(IV) (III) PERFORMING TREATMENTS FOR THE RELAXATION,
HYDRATION, CONTOURING, AND BEAUTIFICATION OF THE FACE, SKIN, BODY,
EYELASHES, OR EYEBROWS; AND

(V) (IV) PERFORMING NONABLATIVE SKIN REJUVENATION.

(3) “PROVIDE ESTHETIC SERVICES” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) THE DIAGNOSIS OF ILLNESS, DISEASE, OR INJURY; OR

(II) PERFORMING ABLATION OF THE DERMIS OR HYPODERMIS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2