START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1302 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1302 
(Delegates Valderrama and Harrison) 
Economic Matters 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Cosmetologists - Esthetic Services - Definition 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “provide esthetic services” to include specified services; 
however, the bill explicitly excludes from the definition (1) the diagnosis of illness, disease, 
or injury or (2) performing ablation of the dermis or hypodermis. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect the State Board of 
Cosmetologists’ finances or operations. The board can implement the bill’s changes with 
existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under the bill, “provide esthetic services” means to provide 
to an individual, for compensation, the service of (additions in italics):   
 
 
cleansing, exercising, exfoliating, massaging, cosmetic microneedling, stimulating, 
toning, or performing any other similar procedure on the skin or scalp by electrical, 
mechanical, or any other means; 
 
applying to the face, body, or scalp an alcohol, cream, lotion, astringent, or cosmetic 
preparation; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1302/ Page 2 
 
removing superfluous hair by the use of electrical, mechanical, or any means other 
than by the use of a laser-based device (rather than by the use of a depilatory, 
tweezers, or wax). 
 
The bill specifies that “provide esthetic services” includes: 
 
 
applying eyelash extensions; 
 
performing superficial exfoliation treatments of the epidermis using professional 
and other commercially available products or devices; 
 
performing treatments for the relaxation, hydration, contouring, and beautification 
of the face, skin, body, eyelashes, or eyebrows; and 
 
performing nonablative skin rejuvenation. 
 
State Board of Cosmetologists (Generally) 
 
The State Board of Cosmetologists (within the Maryland Department of Labor) issues 
two full-service licenses (cosmetologist and senior cosmetologist) and four limited licenses 
(hairstylist, blow-drying, nail technician, and esthetician). 
 
A cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, 
nail, and esthetic services. The other licenses authorize the licensee to provide just that 
service. The board also registers apprentices. Applicants for licensure must pass a written 
and a practical examination and have successfully completed either a registered 
apprenticeship program or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill may allow small businesses to provide and charge for 
additional esthetic services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1044 (Senators Gile and Kelly) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1302/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3