START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 381

Chapter 381

(House Bill 1409)

AN ACT concerning

Dorchester County – Definition of Public School Employee – Alteration

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “public school employee” to include
supervisory noncertificated employees in Dorchester County for purposes of
collective bargaining; and generally relating to the definition of “public school
employee” in Dorchester County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–401(a) and 6–501(a) and (i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 6–401(e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

6–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(e) (1) “Public school employee” means a certificated professional individual
who is employed by a public school employer or an individual of equivalent status in
Baltimore City, except for a county superintendent or an individual designated by the
public school employer to act in a negotiating capacity as provided in § 6–406(c) of this
subtitle.

(2) In Montgomery County, “public school employees” include:

(i) Certificated and noncertificated substitute teachers employed by
the public school employer for at least 7 days before March 1 of the school fiscal year ending
June 30, 1978, and each year after; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 381 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Home and hospital teachers employed by the public school
employer for at least 7 days before March 1 of the school fiscal year ending June 30, 2000,
and each year after.

(3) In Baltimore County, “public school employee” includes a secondary
school nurse, an elementary school nurse, and a special school nurse.

(4) In Frederick County, “public school employee” includes a social worker
employed by a public school employer.

(5) In Prince George’s County, “public school employee” includes home and
hospital teachers and Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) instructors.

(6) In Baltimore County, Calvert County, Charles County, and Garrett
County, “public school employee” includes Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC)
instructors.

(7) In Carroll County, “public school employee” includes:

(i) A registered nurse;

(ii) Supervisory noncertificated employees as defined under §
6–501(i) of this title; and

(iii) Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) instructors.

(8) IN DORCHESTER COUNTY, “PUBLIC SCHOOL EMPLOYEE”
INCLUDES SUPERVISORY NONCERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES AS DEFINED UNDER §
6–501(I) OF THIS TITLE.

6–501.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(i) “Supervisory employee” includes any individual who responsibly directs the
work of other employees.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2