START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1498 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1498 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners - Aiding or Abetting Unauthorized 
Practice - Prohibition 
 
 
This bill prohibits an individual from aiding or abetting the unauthorized practice of 
massage therapy in the State. A violator is guilty of a felony and on conviction is subject 
to (1) for a first offense, a fine of up to $5,000 or imprisonment for up to one year and 
(2) for a subsequent offense, a fine of up to $20,000 per day or imprisonment for up to 
five years. A violator must reimburse the State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners for 
the direct costs resulting from a prosecution. In addition to criminal penalties, a violator is 
subject to a civil fine of up to $10,000 as assessed by the board and payable to the State 
Board of Massage Therapy Fund. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The civil/criminal penalty provisions of the bill do not have a material impact 
on State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The civil/criminal penalty provisions of the bill do not have a material 
impact on local finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under current law, the board licenses massage therapists and registers 
massage therapy practitioners. A registered massage therapy practitioner may not practice 
massage therapy in a health care setting. Chapters 705 and 706 of 2022 phase out the 
registered massage practitioner credential. Until October 31, 2026, an individual may 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1498/ Page 2 
practice massage therapy in the State if the individual is either (1) licensed by the board or 
(2) registered by the board to practice massage therapy in a non-health care setting. 
Beginning November 1, 2026, an individual must be licensed by the board to practice 
massage therapy in the State. 
 
Generally, an individual may not practice, attempt to practice, or offer to practice massage 
therapy, massage, myotherapy, or any synonym or derivation of these terms in the State 
unless licensed or registered by the Board. Current law provides a six-month grace period 
to practice after a license or registration has expired without penalty. Otherwise, a person 
who practices or attempts to practice massage therapy without a license or registration is 
subject to a misdemeanor. For a first offense, an individual is subject to a fine of up to 
$2,000 or imprisonment for up to six months; a subsequent offense is subject to a fine of 
up to $6,000 or imprisonment for up to one year. Chapter 706 also subjects a person who 
practices massage therapy without a license or registration to a civil fine of up to $10,000. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2