START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1441 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1441 
(Delegate Atterbeary, et al.) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Early Childhood Education - Publicly Funded Prekindergarten Programs - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill makes numerous changes related to publicly funded prekindergarten programs, 
including adjusting staff credentials, altering slot allocations for private providers, 
requiring agreements between local boards and relevant agencies, authorizing applications 
for State funding for leased space, introducing support initiatives, establishing a career 
ladder for private prekindergarten providers, establishing provider hubs, and extending 
funding timelines for grant programs. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million in FY 2025 to implement 
the career ladder for private prekindergarten providers. Special fund expenditures increase 
by $5.7 million in FY 2026, which reflects the mandated appropriation for the Child Care 
Credential Program. Special fund expenditures are not directly affected by the extension 
of the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant program, but the extension causes indeterminate 
secondary effects on State education aid (not shown in the table, but discussed below). 
This bill establishes and extends mandated appropriations for FY 2026 through 2029. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
1.0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
SF Expenditure 
0 
5.7 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($1.0) 
($5.7) 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1441/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The impact of allowing a local school system to apply for State school 
construction funding for leased space is likely minimal. Potential significant impact on 
State funding and local effort requirements due to the extension of the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Grant, as explained below. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local 
government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  In general, the bill (1) alters the credentials required for staff for specified 
prekindergarten providers, including those who receive Prekindergarten Expansion Grants; 
(2) establishes a career ladder for private prekindergarten providers; (3) changes the 
proportion of prekindergarten slots to be provided by eligible private providers, including 
removing Tier I children from the calculation; (4) expands the requirements for existing 
agreements among local boards of education, the Maryland State Department of Education 
(MSDE), eligible private providers, and other relevant agencies, and requires MSDE to 
develop a model memorandum of understanding (MOU) for those agreements; 
(5) authorizes a local board of education to apply for State funding for leased space for a 
prekindergarten program; (6) establishes programs to aid eligible prekindergarten 
providers in meeting requirements, including professional development opportunities and 
technical support; (7) establishes prekindergarten provider hubs; and (8) extends funding 
mandates for several prekindergarten grant programs. 
 
Staff Qualification for Public Prekindergarten Providers 
 
The bill establishes that the requirement that all specified prekindergarten providers have 
high staff qualifications (described under Current Law) for teachers and teaching assistants 
by the 2027-2028 school year applies only to public providers. 
 
Beginning on July 1, 2024, high staff qualifications for public provider teaching assistants 
includes documented experience of actively serving as a teaching assistant in a publicly 
funded prekindergarten classroom for a minimum of 5 years for 20 hours per week and 
180 days per year. 
 
Beginning in the 2025-2026 school year, high staff qualifications for eligible private 
provider educators means meeting the requirements of the early childhood educator career 
ladder established by the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1441/ Page 3 
Early Childhood Educator Career Ladder for Private Providers 
 
By July 1, 2025, MSDE must establish an early childhood educator career ladder for 
eligible private providers. The early childhood educator career ladder is for teachers and 
assistant teachers employed by eligible private providers. The purpose of the early 
childhood educator career ladder is to (1) transform early childhood education teaching 
into a high-status profession in the State; (2) attract high-performing students to pursue the 
high-status early childhood education teaching profession; and (3) retain high-quality early 
childhood education teachers who gain additional responsibility, authority, status, and 
compensation as they gain additional expertise. 
 
The early childhood educator career ladder must (1) adequately compensate early 
childhood educators for their work; (2) provide early childhood educators with the 
opportunity to identify and work with prekindergarten teachers and teaching assistants; 
(3) provide early childhood educators the opportunity to develop their skills and knowledge 
by participating in job-embedded professional development; and (4) compensate early 
childhood educators at greater rates as they advance to the next level of the career ladder. 
 
The levels of the career ladder are:   
 
 
level one is an early childhood teaching assistant; 
 
level two is a prekindergarten lead teacher; and 
 
level three is an early childhood consulting teacher. 
 
Early Childhood Teaching Assistant:  In order to qualify as an early childhood teaching 
assistant, an educator must have a high school diploma and, by July 1, 2027, earn and 
maintain a Child Development Associate (CDA) with preschool designation or hold 
an associate degree in early childhood education or child development. Alternatively, on 
July 1, 2024, an individual must have documented experience of actively providing 
services in early childhood education for a minimum of 15 years for at least 20 hours per 
week and 180 days per year. 
 
Prekindergarten Lead Teacher:  In order to qualify as a prekindergarten lead teacher, an 
educator must hold at least a bachelor’s degree, as specified, from a U.S. or foreign 
institution. Alternatively, on July 1, 2024, an individual must have documented experience 
of actively providing services in early childhood education for a minimum of 10 years for 
at least 20 hours per week and 180 days per year. 
 
Individuals who hold a bachelor’s degree in a field unrelated to early childhood education, 
child development or a related field or who qualify via the experience pathway must also 
achieve a minimum score on the Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS) 
assessment as set by MSDE. By July 1, 2030, a prekindergarten lead teacher who qualifies 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1441/ Page 4 
through the experience pathway must earn an associate degree in early childhood 
education. Teachers from level three of the career ladder must mentor and provide 
professional support to a prekindergarten lead teacher seeking an associate degree to ensure 
that the teacher earns a degree within the required amount of time. 
 
In order to maintain status as a prekindergarten lead teacher, each year a lead teacher must 
complete at least 20 working hours of professional learning and development. 
 
Early Childhood Consulting Teacher:  In order to qualify as an early childhood consulting 
teacher, an educator must (1) be a prekindergarten lead teacher in good standing; 
(2) beginning in the 2027-2028 school year, hold early childhood education certification 
or be pursuing certification; (3) be able to lead other early childhood educators in an 
effective and disciplined way to improve the curriculum and instruction of prekindergarten 
students; (4) demonstrate the skills and knowledge to mentor early childhood assistant 
teachers and new prekindergarten lead teachers, including by helping them to meet the 
educational and certification qualifications necessary to qualify for and maintain status on 
the career ladder; and (5) supervise and support prekindergarten lead teachers, if 
practicable through prekindergarten provider hubs, in one or more sites in order to improve 
developmentally appropriate instructional practices for prekindergarten students. 
 
Proportion of Slots Provided by Private Providers 
 
The bill changes the phased-in requirement for local boards of education to ensure that a 
certain proportion of eligible prekindergarten slots in each county are provided by private 
providers. This requirement initially mandated a minimum of 30% private provider slots 
in 2022-2023, increasing by 5 percentage points annually until reaching 50% by the 
2026-2027 school year. Under the bill, beginning in 2024-2025 school year, at least 10% 
of the slots must be provided by eligible private providers, increasing by 
10 percentage points annually until reaching 50% by the 2028-2029 school year. 
 
MSDE must issue a waiver from the requirements, if the local board of education meets 
the current waiver requirements and the local board of education demonstrates to MSDE 
that it has made a good faith effort to fully embrace the mixed delivery system, including 
adopting an MOU as specified. 
 
The bill extends by two years the deadline by which MSDE may exclude certain children 
from the prekindergarten calculation to determine the proportion public and private 
prekindergarten slots through an annual waiver. Specifically, MSDE may exclude 
Tier I children 
who 
are 
three 
years 
old 
from 
the 
calculation 
until 
the 
2031-2032 school year, rather than the previously set 2029-2030 school year. Additionally, 
MSDE may exclude Tier I children who are four years old from the calculation until the 
2028-2029 school year, instead of the 2026-2027 school year. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1441/ Page 5 
Model Memorandum of Understanding 
 
MSDE must develop a model MOU for use by local boards of education in fulfilling 
existing requirements. In addition to current MOU requirements, the model MOU must 
include (1) the adoption of an early childhood educator career ladder by eligible private 
providers; (2) a method for the local board to distribute a list of eligible public and private 
providers in the same area with a parent interested in enrolling a child in a prekindergarten 
program; and (3) facilitation of peer-to-peer eligible prekindergarten provider meetings, 
through a prekindergarten provider hub if one is established in the area, in which eligible 
prekindergarten providers are able to share best practices in the field. 
 
Funding for Prekindergarten through the State’s Capital Improvement Program 
 
A local board of education may apply for funding from the Capital Improvement Program 
(CIP) for assistance on renovations to public facilities leased as eligible public 
prekindergarten programs. The management of public facilities leased under this provision 
must be the responsibility of the building owner and not the local board. 
 
Provider Aid Program 
 
MSDE must establish a program to aid eligible prekindergarten providers in meeting the 
requirements of the publicly funded prekindergarten programs. 
 
The program must give eligible private providers information about training for teachers 
and teaching assistants, help them meet the criteria for childcare support programs, and 
support them in implementing early childhood curriculum standards. To the extent 
practicable, MSDE must provide programmatic support through prekindergarten provider 
hubs. 
 
MSDE also must also publish a list of eligible private providers in each local school system 
available on its website and share it with local economic development offices, small 
business support centers, local management and workforce development boards, and 
offices supporting minority and women-owned businesses. These entities must assist 
private prekindergarten providers within their areas in enrolling in business support 
services and adopting a business plan to meet the requirements of publicly funded 
prekindergarten programs. To the extent practicable, specified organizations must work 
with prekindergarten provider hubs to provide support. 
 
MSDE must also inform the public about publicly funded prekindergarten programs. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1441/ Page 6 
Prekindergarten Provider Hubs 
 
MSDE must create Prekindergarten Provider Hubs in centralized and diverse locations 
across the State to integrate as many individuals as possible into the State’s mixed 
prekindergarten delivery system. These hubs must form partnerships among early 
childhood educators on the career ladder, licensed child care centers, registered family or 
large family child care homes, and any other entities deemed beneficial by MSDE for 
incorporating eligible children into the mixed delivery system. The hubs must coordinate 
support among entities serving children and families to maximize the placement of eligible 
children in prekindergarten slots. 
 
Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund 
 
In addition to current requirements, to qualify for funding from the Child Care Career and 
Professional Development Fund an individual must commit to work in an approved child 
care setting for at least 20 hours per week for a period of time determined by the Office of 
Child Care within MSDE after completing the course of study. Awards must be prioritized 
to the following applicants:  (1) an applicant who has not completed any college courses 
from an accredited college or university; and (2) an applicant who attends or has been 
accepted by an accredited college or university that offers native language or bilingual 
coursework in early childhood education or a related field. Award recipients who do not 
complete the service requirement must repay MSDE, but MSDE may waive the repayment 
under specified circumstances.  
 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Eligibility 
 
In addition to current requirements, in order to receive a Prekindergarten Expansion Grant, 
a teacher and teacher’s aide in a classroom receiving this funding (excluding Montessori 
schools or programs) must each meet high staff qualifications (as discussed in Current Law 
and amended by the bill). 
 
Mandated Funding 
 
The bill extends mandated funding for the Maryland Child Care Credential Program 
beyond fiscal 2024 by requiring the Governor to appropriate an amount in fiscal 2026 that 
is at least equal to the amount appropriated in fiscal 2024.  
 
Finally, the bill also extends the fiscal year by which funds appropriated to the 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program must be consolidated into the publicly funded 
full-day prekindergarten program by four fiscal years, from fiscal 2026 to 2030. To that 
end, the Governor must, through fiscal 2029, annually appropriate to the fund an amount 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1441/ Page 7 
that is at least equal to the total amount of all funds received by the Expansion Grant 
Program in the prior fiscal year. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
 
The Blueprint for Maryland’s Future (Blueprint) legislation (including Chapter 771 of 
2019, Chapters 36 and 55 of 2021, and Chapter 33 of 2022) established new programs, 
updated education funding formulas, and, among other provisions, included mechanisms 
for holding units of State and local government accountable for implementing the 
Blueprint. 
 
State and local government units responsible for implementing an element of the Blueprint 
must develop implementation plans consistent with a specified Comprehensive 
Implementation Plan that describe the goals, objectives, and strategies that will be used to 
improve student achievement and meet the Blueprint recommendations for each segment 
of the student population. 
 
High Staff Qualifications 
 
All eligible prekindergarten providers must include structural elements that are 
evidence-based and nationally recognized as important for ensuring program quality, 
including, beginning in the 2027-2028 school year, high staff qualifications. This includes 
teachers who, at a minimum hold (1) State certification for teaching in early childhood 
education or (2) a bachelor’s degree in any field and are pursing residency through the 
Maryland Approved Alternative Preparation Program, which includes early childhood 
coursework, clinical practice, and evidence of pedagogical content knowledge. 
 
Memorandum of Understanding 
 
Each local board of education must enter into a MOU with MSDE, each eligible private 
provider participating in publicly funded prekindergarten in the county, and other 
applicable government agencies. Before executing an MOU, each local board must submit 
an implementation plan of the proposed MOU to the Accountability and Implementation 
Board. Each MOU must meet specified requirements. An MOU must seek to avoid, to the 
extent practicable, a disproportionate concentration of students of the same race, ethnicity, 
disability status, and income within an eligible provider. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1441/ Page 8 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grants Program and Publicly Funded Prekindergarten 
 
The Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program, administered by MSDE, is intended to 
broaden the availability of high-quality prekindergarten and school readiness services 
throughout the State for children and their families in coordination with the expansion of 
publicly funded full-day prekindergarten under the Blueprint. Before approving qualified 
providers for prekindergarten services to receive a grant under this section, a qualified 
provider must certify to MSDE that for each classroom funded by Prekindergarten 
Expansion Grants the provider will meet specified conditions. The Governor must 
annually, through fiscal 2025, appropriate to the Prekindergarten Expansion Fund an 
amount that is at least equal to the total amount of all funds received by the program in the 
prior fiscal year. Beginning in fiscal 2026, funds appropriated to the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Fund must be consolidated into the publicly funded full-day prekindergarten 
program. 
 
A local department of social services or a local health department must notify a parent or 
guardian that their child may be eligible for publicly funded prekindergarten programs if 
the parent or guardian (1) applied for economic services with the local department of social 
services or the local health department and (2) has a child who will be 3 or 4 years old by 
September 1 of the next academic year. By December 1 of each year, each local department 
of social services and each local health department must report to the General Assembly 
on the number of parents who were given a notification and subsequently enrolled their 
child in a publicly funded prekindergarten program. 
 
With regard to prekindergarten, a Tier I child is a child who is three or four years old whose 
family income is less than or equal to 300% of the federal poverty level or who is a 
homeless youth and whose family chooses to enroll the child in full-day prekindergarten. 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes $26.6 million for the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Grants and $132.6 million for the Full-day Prekindergarten funding formula, 
which is $159.2 million in total. 
 
Public School Construction Program Funding Related to Leased Facilities 
 
Leasing is among the expenditures that are generally ineligible for State funding under the 
Public School Construction Program. A policy of the Interagency Commission on School 
Construction (IAC) does, however, enable the allocation of State bond proceeds to 
capital-improvement projects in leased facilities that are not owned by a local school 
system. The policy makes capital-improvement projects in non-local education agency 
(LEA)-owned leased facilities eligible for IAC allocation of State bond proceeds if 
specified criteria are satisfied. These criteria include a minimum 25-year lease duration. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1441/ Page 9 
LEAs may apply for funding from CIP or a Pass-through Grant, established in Chapter 344 
of 2022, for capital improvements to facilities leased by the school system or other entity 
for a public school purpose. While these funds may be used solely for eligible school capital 
improvement expenses authorized under the program from which funding is being 
requested, eligible capital improvement expenses do not include operating expenses, 
including but not limited to, lease or rent payments, utilities, taxes, fees, maintenance, 
moveable furniture and equipment with a median useful life of less than 15 years, 
insurance, salaries, or wages. 
 
Maryland Child Care Credential Program 
 
For the Maryland Child Care Credential Program, an individual may apply to the OCC for 
a staff credential, including a CDA credential, or an administrator credential. If a person 
pursues, obtains, or already holds an OCC-approved credential, the OCC may award to the 
individual an achievement bonus, a training reimbursement, or a training voucher. 
 
The Governor must appropriate $4.0 million for the program for fiscal 2021. For each of 
fiscal 2022 through 2024, funding for the program must increase by 10% over the prior 
fiscal year. 
 
Consistent with the expiration of the funding mandate for the program, the fiscal 2025 
budget as introduced does not include funding for the Child Care Credential Program. 
 
Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund 
 
The Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund within MSDE may award 
funding to an individual who has:   
 
 
obtained at least a level two in the Maryland Child Care Credential Program; 
 
documented at least one year of experience working with groups of children in an 
approved setting; and 
 
been accepted by an accredited college or university for enrollment in at least 
one course for credit toward a degree in early childhood education or related field. 
 
An award may only be:   
 
 
applied toward the cost of (1) tuition and fees or (2) textbooks required by a course 
in which the awardee is enrolled; and 
 
used by the awardee for the actual expense of college coursework incurred 
subsequent to an award to the completion of (1) a college degree in early childhood 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1441/ Page 10 
education or a related field or (2) developmental coursework required to meet 
prerequisites for a degree program in early childhood education or a related field. 
 
Statute does not include a mandated appropriation for the fund, and the fiscal 2025 budget 
as introduced does not include funding for the program. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share  
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of the maintenance of effort 
(MOE) requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The 
per-pupil MOE amount is based upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent 
(FTE) enrollment and (2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. (There is a 
certain adjustment for fiscal 2024 MOE for specified counties.) The local share amount 
equals the local share of the foundation formula, compensatory education, English 
language learner, special education, comparable wage index (CWI), full-day 
prekindergarten, college and career ready, transitional supplemental instruction (through 
fiscal 2026), and career ladder grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from the 
compensatory education State funding floor are required to fund the local share of the 
concentration of poverty grant programs. However, for some counties, the combined local 
share across these several programs is subject to adjustments described below. 
 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several existing and new funding formula programs. The law also 
includes a mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund each 
year. This involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by 
dividing the county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An 
“education effort index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average 
education effort,” is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for each 
county, which is the county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid) is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or (3) at 
least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased 
up from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. 
State relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1441/ Page 11 
effort adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per-pupil MOE is met each 
year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the Guaranteed Tax 
Base (GTB) program, the local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except 
that for Baltimore City only the amount above $10.0 million may be reduced from the local 
share; (2) if a county receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% 
for the foundation and 40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at 
least 0.13, the local share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, 
the local share may not be reduced below the required per-pupil MOE amount. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The GTB program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions to maintain or 
increase local education tax effort (i.e., local education appropriation as a percent of local 
tax base). The program provides additional State education aid to counties that have less 
than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and provide local education funding 
above the minimum local share required by the foundation program. The program uses 
local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for each eligible 
school system. 
 
State Expenditures:  MSDE advises that to implement the bill, the Division of Early 
Learning must develop a career ladder and update the credentialing system for alignment, 
which requires the support of a vendor. MSDE estimates costs of up to $500,000. Further, 
MSDE advises that the career ladder implementation requires MSDE to rapidly increase 
the number of staff who are reliable in the CLASS assessment tool in order to have enough 
staff who can observe experienced teachers. MSDE estimates training costs of up to 
$500,000 in work for an existing vendor. As the bill requires MSDE to establish the career 
ladder by July 1, 2025, general fund expenditures increase by up to $1.0 million in 
fiscal 2025. MSDE advises that the remaining changes, including development of the 
model MOU and the prekindergarten hubs can be implemented with existing resources. 
 
As shown in Exhibit 1, special fund expenditures increase by $5.7 million in fiscal 2026 
for the Child Care Credential Program Grant, due to the requirement for the Governor to 
provide at least equal to the amount appropriated in fiscal 2024 (which was $5.7 million); 
this analysis does not assume any discretionary funding for the program in fiscal 2025 as 
none was provided in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly. 
Fiscal 2026 expenditures are from the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) as 
these formulas are funded through the fund.  
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1441/ Page 12 
The Prekindergarten Expansion Grant is extended by four years to fiscal 2029, which is 
assumed to be offset by equivalent reductions in State funding under the full-day 
prekindergarten funding program. Current law requires the Prekindergarten Expansion 
Grant to be funded at a level that is at least as much as the prior fiscal year. Thus, it is 
assumed that the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant is funded at $26.6 million in each of 
fiscal 2027 to 2029, and thus State funding under the full-day prekindergarten program is 
reduced by the same amounts in these years. 
 
Unlike the prekindergarten expansion grant program, the full-day prekindergarten program 
entails a local share component. Reduced State funding of the full-day prekindergarten 
program under the bill will result in reduced local share of major education aid, which in 
turn will (1) reduce State funding under the education effort adjustment, beginning in 
fiscal 2026, (2) alter required local effort beginning as early as fiscal 2026, and (3) likely 
alter State funding and associated local share relief under GTB, as soon as fiscal 2027. 
These impacts may be significant, but they cannot be reliably estimated. 
   
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Special Fund and General Fund Expenditures Increases Due to Funding Formulas 
Fiscal 2026-2029 
 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Child Care Credential Program 
$5,687 
0 
0 
0 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant 
0 
26,644 
26,644 
26,644 
Full-day Prekindergarten Funding Formula 
0 
(26,644) 
(26,644) 
(26,644) 
Special and General Fund Effect 
$5,687 
$0 
$0 
$0 
 
Note:  Fiscal 2026 expenditures are special fund expenditures from the Blueprint for Maryland’s Fund, 
expenditures in fiscal 2028 and beyond are from the general fund due to the Blueprint funds being exhausted. 
Further, State funding and associated local share relief under the Guaranteed Tax Based may be impacted as 
soon as fiscal 2027; however, any such impact cannot be reliably estimated and is not shown in this exhibit.   
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Expenditures: State funding of, and local effort on behalf of, public schools will be 
altered by the offset of full-day prekindergarten State funding assumed to occur as a result 
of extending State funding for the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant program through 
fiscal 2029. While these impacts may be significant, they cannot be reliably estimated.  
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1441/ Page 13 
The overall fiscal effect of authorizing a local board of education to apply for funding from 
the CIP for assistance on renovations to public facilities leased as eligible public 
prekindergarten programs is likely minimal. IAC advises that the bill’s authorization is not 
consistent with its current policy related to leased facilities, which may negatively affect 
access to CIP funding for leased prekindergarten facilities. 
 
AACPS needs 23 additional classrooms to meet the Tier 1 enrollment requirements. 
Playgrounds need to be installed at these sites, if they have not been already, to meet 
EXCELS requirements. ACCPS estimates those costs to be $11.3 million in fiscal 2025 
and $6.2 million annually thereafter; however, ACCPS would have costs for space for 
prekindergarten regardless of the bill. The bill simply allows local school systems to meet 
the need by leasing space rather than building the space. 
 
Local school systems can otherwise carry out increased notification requirements with 
existing resources. They also have more time and/or flexibility to meet targets for providing 
preschool slots by private providers. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Private prekindergarten providers (including child care centers) 
many of which are small business, may receive additional funding due to extending the 
grant programs. Further, other provisions of the bill, including establishing the career 
ladder for educators at private prekindergarten providers, likely affect private providers. 
 
Additional Comments:  Currently, MSDE covers the full cost of the CDA through a 
partnership with the Council for Professional Recognition, allowing assistant teachers to 
obtain the credential in less than one year at no cost. However, due to high demand, MSDE 
has faced limitations in accepting more candidates for the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland State Department 
of Education; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Prince George’s County 
Public Schools; Frederick County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 1441/ Page 14 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 14