START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 261

Chapter 261

(House Bill 1440)

AN ACT concerning

Howard County Public Schools – Differences in Capital Budget Proposals –
Report

Ho. Co. 16–24

FOR the purpose of requiring the Howard County Board of Education, under certain
circumstances, to publish on the website of the Howard County public school system
a certain report on the differences between the Howard County Superintendent of
Schools’ proposed capital budget and the capital budget approved by the Howard
County Board of Education; requiring the Howard County Board of Education to
submit a certain report to the General Assembly under certain circumstances;
requiring the Howard County Superintendent, under certain circumstances, to
publish on the website of the Howard County public school system a certain report
on the differences between the capital improvement program approved by the
Howard County Board of Education in the immediately preceding year and the
Howard County Superintendent’s proposed capital improvement program; requiring
the Howard County Superintendent to submit a certain report to the General
Assembly under certain circumstances; and generally relating to the capital budget
of Howard County Public Schools.

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 5–330
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

5–330.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY IN HOWARD COUNTY.

(B) (1) IF THE CAPITAL BUDGET APPROVED BY THE HOWARD COUNTY
BOARD OF EDUCATION HAS DIFFERENCES FROM THE HOWARD COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS’ PROPOSED CAPITAL BUDGET, THE HOWARD
COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL PUBLISH A REPORT ON THE HOWARD
COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM’S WEBSITE WITHIN 30 DAYS THAT INCLUDES:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 261 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE HOWARD COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT’S PROPOSED CAPITAL BUDGET AND THE CAPITAL BUDGET
APPROVED BY THE HOWARD COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION; AND

(II) THE DETAILED RATIONALE FOR EACH DIFFERENCE.

(2) THE HOWARD COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION SHALL SUBMIT
THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE.

(C) (1) IF THE HOWARD COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS’
PROPOSED CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM HAS DIFFERENCES FROM THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM APPROVED BY THE HOWARD COUNTY BOARD OF
EDUCATION IN THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR, THE HOWARD COUNTY
SUPERINTENDENT SHALL PUBLISH A REPORT ON THE HOWARD COUNTY PUBLIC
SCHOOL SYSTEM’S WEBSITE WITHIN 30 DAYS THAT INCLUDES:

(I) THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLAN APPROVED BY THE HOWARD COUNTY BOARD OF EDUCATION IN THE
IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING YEAR AND THE HOWARD COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT’S
PROPOSED CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM; AND

(II) THE DETAILED RATIONALE FOR EACH DIFFERENCE.

(2) THE HOWARD COUNTY SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS SHALL
SUBMIT THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION TO
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–157 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2