START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 857

Chapter 857

(House Bill 1482)

AN ACT concerning

~~Insurance~~ ~~–~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Automobile~~ ~~Insurance~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~–~~ ~~Uninsured~~ ~~Driving~~
~~Penalties~~
Uninsured Driving Penalties – Funding for the Maryland Automobile Insurance
Fund, Driver Education, and Transportation to Field Trips

FOR the purpose of altering ~~penalties~~ the penalty for failing to maintain certain required
security for certain motor vehicles and the distribution of the revenue derived from
the penalties; altering the amount of the penalties that are required to be paid for a
certain fiscal year to the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund and the base amount
used to calculate the amount paid in subsequent fiscal years; establishing the Driver
Education in Public High Schools Grant Program to provide grants to public high
schools and nonprofit organizations to assist public high schools in offering driver
education courses to students; establishing the State–Aided Institutions Field Trip
Grant Program to assist public schools in transporting students to field trips at
State–aided educational institutions; establishing the Driver Education in Public
High Schools Fund and the State–Aided Institutions Field Trip Fund as special,
nonlapsing funds; and generally relating to ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Automobile~~ ~~Insurance~~
~~Fund~~ ~~and~~ penalties for uninsured driving, the distribution of the revenue derived from
the penalties, driver education, transportation to school field trips, and the Maryland
Automobile Insurance Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–414
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 7–414.1 and 7–810
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 17–106
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 857 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Education

7–414.

(a) (1) Each county board may offer instruction in the safe operation of a motor
vehicle to high school students who are 15 years old or older.

(2) The instruction shall be given as provided by Title 16, Subtitle 5 of the
Transportation Article.

(3) Each county board shall determine whether the course is an elective or
a required course.

(4) The State Board shall determine what credit, if any, is allowed to
successful students of the course.

(b) The principal of each school that offers the driver education course shall
arrange the time set aside for actual driving instruction so that it does not interfere with
other school work.

(c) (1) Each motor vehicle used for instruction shall bear the identification
required by the Motor Vehicle Administration.

(2) If practicable, the actual driving instruction shall be conducted on
private or public property that is removed from State roads.

7–414.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE DRIVER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC HIGH
SCHOOLS FUND.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE DRIVER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC HIGH
SCHOOLS GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A DRIVER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS GRANT
PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO PUBLIC
HIGH SCHOOLS AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS TO ASSIST PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS
IN OFFERING DRIVER EDUCATION COURSES FOR STUDENTS CONSISTENT WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF § 7–414 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 857

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM;

(2) ESTABLISH APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR THE PROGRAM; AND

(3) AWARD GRANTS FROM THE PROGRAM.

(E) (1) SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF MONEY IN THE FUND, A PUBLIC
SCHOOL OR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION MAY APPLY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE
PROGRAM FOR EXPENSES PAID OR INCURRED, OR THAT WILL BE PAID OR INCURRED,
TO OFFER A DRIVER EDUCATION COURSE FOR STUDENTS CONSISTENT WITH THE
REQUIREMENTS OF § 7–414 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) WHEN MAKING GRANTS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PRIORITIZE:

(I) PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS AT WHICH AT LEAST 40% OF THE
REGISTERED STUDENTS ARE ELIGIBLE FOR THE FEDERAL FREE OR REDUCED PRICE
MEAL PROGRAM; AND

(II) NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS WORKING TO OFFER A DRIVER
EDUCATION COURSE IN A SCHOOL AT WHICH AT LEAST 40% OF THE REGISTERED
STUDENTS ARE ELIGIBLE FOR THE FEDERAL FREE OR REDUCED PRICE MEAL
PROGRAM.

(F) (1) THERE IS A DRIVER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS
FUND.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(3) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(4) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY RECEIVED BY THE FUND FROM FINES FOR VEHICLE
SECURITY LAPSES UNDER § 17–106 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE; AND

(II) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 857 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR:

(I) PROVIDING GRANTS UNDER THE PROGRAM; AND

(II) ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF THE PROGRAM.

(6) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(G) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

7–810.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE STATE–AIDED INSTITUTIONS FIELD TRIP
FUND.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE STATE–AIDED INSTITUTIONS FIELD
TRIP GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A STATE–AIDED INSTITUTIONS FIELD TRIP GRANT PROGRAM
IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE GRANTS TO PUBLIC
SCHOOLS TO PROVIDE TRANSPORTATION TO STUDENTS FOR FIELD TRIPS TO
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS THAT ARE QUALIFIED AS STATE–AIDED EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM;

(2) ESTABLISH APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR THE PROGRAM; AND

(3) AWARD GRANTS FROM THE PROGRAM.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 857

(E) (1) SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF MONEY IN THE FUND, A PUBLIC
SCHOOL MAY APPLY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR EXPENSES PAID OR
INCURRED, OR THAT WILL BE PAID OR INCURRED, TO PROVIDE TRANSPORTATION TO
STUDENTS FOR FIELD TRIPS TO EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS THAT ARE QUALIFIED
AS STATE–AIDED EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(2) WHEN MAKING GRANTS, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PRIORITIZE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AT WHICH AT LEAST 40% OF THE REGISTERED STUDENTS ARE
ELIGIBLE FOR THE FEDERAL FREE OR REDUCED PRICE MEAL PROGRAM.

(F) (1) THERE IS A STATE–AIDED INSTITUTIONS FIELD TRIP FUND.

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(3) (I) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(II) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND
SEPARATELY, AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(4) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(I) MONEY RECEIVED BY THE FUND FROM FINES FOR VEHICLE
SECURITY LAPSES UNDER § 17–106 OF THE TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE; AND

(II) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED
FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(5) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR:

(I) PROVIDING GRANTS UNDER THE PROGRAM; AND

(II) ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF THE PROGRAM.

(6) (I) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE
FUND IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(II) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE
CREDITED TO THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(G) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THIS
SECTION.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 857 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Transportation

17–106.

(a) If the required security for any vehicle lapses at any time, the registration of
that vehicle:

(1) Is suspended automatically as of the date of the lapse effective not later
than 60 days after notification to the Administration that the lapse has occurred; and

(2) Remains suspended until:

(i) The required security is replaced and the vehicle owner submits
evidence of replaced security on a form as prescribed by the Administration and certified
by an insurer or insurance producer; and

(ii) Any uninsured motorist penalty fee assessed is paid to the
Administration.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, each insurer or
other provider of required security immediately shall notify the Administration
electronically of those terminations or other lapses that are final.

(2) Each insurer or other provider of required security for a vehicle
registered as a Class B (for hire) vehicle under Title 13 of this article shall notify the
Administration within 45 days [of] AFTER a termination or other lapse that is final and
occurs anytime after the required security is issued or provided.

(c) On receipt of a notice under subsection (b) of this section, the Administration
shall:

(1) Make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the vehicle that his
registration has been suspended; and

(2) Provide electronically the information contained in the notice of the
suspension to the Uninsured Division of the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund.

(d) (1) Within 48 hours after an owner is notified by the Administration of the
suspension of registration, the owner shall surrender all evidences of that registration to
the Administration.

(2) If the owner fails to surrender the evidences of registration within the
48–hour period, the Administration:

(i) Shall attempt to recover from the owner the evidences of
registration; and

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 857

(ii) May suspend his license to drive until he returns to the Motor
Vehicle Administration the evidences of registration.

(3) The Administration may enter into contracts with private parties to
procure the services of independent agents to assist in the recovery of the evidences of
registration as authorized in paragraph (2) of this subsection.

(e) (1) (i) 1. Except as provided in subparagraphs (iv) and (v) of this
paragraph, in addition to any other penalty provided for in the Maryland Vehicle Law, if
the required security for a vehicle terminates or otherwise lapses during its registration
year, the Administration may assess the owner of the vehicle with a penalty of [$150] $200
for each vehicle without the required security for a period of 1 to 30 days.

2. If a fine is assessed, beginning on the 31st day the fine
shall increase by a rate of [$7] $10 for each day.

(ii) Each period during which the required security for a vehicle
terminates or otherwise lapses shall constitute a separate violation.

(iii) The penalty imposed under this subsection may not exceed
[$2,500] $3,500 for each violation in a 12–month period.

(iv) The Administration may not assess a penalty under this
subsection if:

1. The registration plates of the vehicle are returned to the
Administration within 10 days after the termination or lapse of the required security, as
shown by the records of the Administration; and

2. A. The certificate of title for the vehicle has been
transferred to a new owner;

B. The registered owner has moved out–of–state and the
registration plates are returned by mail;

C. A salvage certificate has been issued for the vehicle; or

D. A licensed dealer has taken possession of the vehicle with
an obligation to return the registration plates.

(v) Before the Administration may assess a penalty under this
subsection, the Administration shall first verify that the registration plates for the vehicle
were not returned to the Administration within 10 days after the termination or lapse of
the required security.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 857 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) (i) Except as provided under paragraph (3) of this subsection, a
penalty assessed under this subsection shall be paid as follows:

1. 70% to be allocated as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph; and

2. 30% to the Administration, which may be used by the
Administration, subject to subsection (f) of this section, to provide funding for contracts
with independent agents to assist in the recovery of evidences of registration as authorized
in subsection (d)(3) of this section.

(ii) For each fiscal year beginning on or after July 1, 2014, the
percentage of the penalties specified under subparagraph (i)1 of this paragraph shall be
allocated among the Safe Schools Fund, the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund, the Maryland
Automobile Insurance Fund, THE DRIVER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS
FUND, THE STATE–AIDED INSTITUTIONS FIELD TRIP FUND, and the General Fund as
follows:

1. $600,000 to the Safe Schools Fund;

2. $2,000,000 to the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund;

3. [To] THE AMOUNTS SPECIFIED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (III) OF THIS PARAGRAPH TO the Maryland Automobile Insurance
Fund[:

A. Except for fiscal year 2024 and except as provided under
item C of this item, the amount distributed to the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund
in the prior fiscal year under the provisions of this paragraph adjusted by the change for
the calendar year preceding the fiscal year in the Consumer Price Index – All Urban
Consumers – Medical Care as published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics;

B. For fiscal year 2024, the amount distributed to the
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund in the prior fiscal year under the provisions of this
paragraph adjusted by the change for the calendar year preceding the fiscal year in the
Consumer Price Index – All Urban Consumers – Medical Care as published by the United
States Bureau of Labor Statistics plus an additional $2,000,000; and

C. For fiscal year 2025, the amount distributed to the
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund calculated in accordance with item A of this item
excluding the $2,000,000 distributed to the Fund in fiscal year 2024]; and

4. $2,000,000 TO THE DRIVER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC
HIGH SCHOOLS FUND;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 857

5. $600,000 TO THE STATE–AIDED INSTITUTIONS FIELD
TRIP FUND; AND

4. 6. The balance to the General Fund.

(III) 1. EXCEPT FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024 AND EXCEPT AS
PROVIDED UNDER SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 3 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, THE AMOUNT
DISTRIBUTED TO THE MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (II)3 OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL EQUAL THE AMOUNT
DISTRIBUTED TO THE MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND IN THE PRIOR
FISCAL YEAR UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH ADJUSTED BY THE
CHANGE FOR THE CALENDAR YEAR PRECEDING THE FISCAL YEAR IN THE
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – ALL URBAN CONSUMERS – MEDICAL CARE AS
PUBLISHED BY THE UNITED STATES BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS.

2. FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024, THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED
TO THE MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II)3
OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL EQUAL THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED TO THE MARYLAND
AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND IN THE PRIOR FISCAL YEAR UNDER THE
PROVISIONS OF THIS PARAGRAPH ADJUSTED BY THE CHANGE FOR THE CALENDAR
YEAR PRECEDING THE FISCAL YEAR IN THE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX – ALL URBAN
CONSUMERS – MEDICAL CARE AS PUBLISHED BY THE UNITED STATES BUREAU OF
LABOR STATISTICS PLUS AN ADDITIONAL $2,000,000.

3. FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025, THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED
TO THE MARYLAND AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II)3
OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL EQUAL THE AMOUNT DISTRIBUTED TO THE MARYLAND
AUTOMOBILE INSURANCE FUND CALCULATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH:

A. PLUS AN ADDITIONAL $2,500,000 $3,000,000
DEDICATED TO THE EXCLUSIVE USE OF THE UNINSURED DIVISION, WHICH SHALL
BECOME PART OF THE BASE AMOUNT USED TO CALCULATE THE AMOUNT
DISTRIBUTED UNDER SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH IN
SUBSEQUENT FISCAL YEARS; BUT

B. EXCLUDING THE $2,000,000 DISTRIBUTED TO THE
FUND IN FISCAL YEAR 2024.

(3) Beginning July 1, 2018, any uninsured motorist penalties the
Administration receives under the Program to Incentivize and Enable Uninsured Vehicle
Owners to Be Insured established under § 20–612 of the Insurance Article shall be paid to
the Uninsured Division of the Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 857 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) If the Administration assesses a vehicle owner, co–owner, or lessee with
a penalty under this subsection, the Administration may not take any of the following
actions until the penalty is paid:

(i) Reinstate a registration suspended under this subsection;

(ii) Except for a temporary registration as provided under §
13–602(a)(2) of this article, issue a new registration for any vehicle that is owned,
co–owned, or leased by that person and is titled after the violation date; or

(iii) Renew a registration for a vehicle that is owned, co–owned, or
leased by that person.

(5) (i) In this paragraph, “family member” means any individual whose
relationship to the vehicle owner is one of those listed under § 13–810(c)(1) of this article
as being exempt from paying the excise tax imposed on the transfer of a vehicle.

(ii) The monetary penalties provided in this subsection may not be
avoided by transferring title to the vehicle.

(iii) Except as provided in paragraph (1)(iv) and (v) of this subsection,
regardless of whether money or other valuable consideration is involved in the transfer, if
title to a vehicle is transferred by an individual who has violated this subtitle to a family
member, any suspension of the vehicle’s registration that occurred before the transfer shall
continue as if no transfer had occurred and a new registration may not be issued until the
penalty fee is paid.

(6) An amount equal to the monetary penalties paid to the Administration
under paragraph (2) of this subsection may be used by the Administration only for the
enforcement of this subtitle.

(f) From the amount distributed to the Administration under subsection (e)(2)(i)2
of this section, expenditures to fund contracts entered into under subsection (d)(3) of this
section:

(1) May not exceed $1,000,000 in any fiscal year; and

(2) May be made only:

(i) Pursuant to an appropriation approved by the General Assembly
in the annual State budget; or

(ii) Through the budget amendment procedure provided for in §
7–209 of the State Finance and Procurement Article, provided that:

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 857

1. The budget amendment and supporting information have
been submitted to the budget committees for review and comment; and

2. At least 45 days have elapsed from the time the budget
amendment and supporting information were submitted to the budget committees.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11