START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1450 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1450 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Howard County Task Force to Study Revenue Options for School Capital Needs  
Ho. Co. 18-24 
 
    
This bill establishes the Howard County Task Force to Study Revenue Options for School 
Capital Needs. The Howard County Executive must provide staff for the task force and 
members of the task force serve without compensation. The task force must report its 
findings and recommendations to the Howard County Executive, the Howard County 
Council, and the Howard County Delegation to the General Assembly by October 31, 2024. 
If the Howard County Council determines that a recommendation included in the final task 
force report should be enacted but the county council or county lack the authority to enact 
the recommendation, the county council must submit a resolution to the delegation 
requesting that it authorize the county council to enact the specified recommendation. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025.  
    
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The Howard County government may face operational difficulties and 
require indeterminate expenditures associated with staffing the task force and completing 
the report in the time span required by the bill. Local revenues are not affected. This bill 
imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1450/ Page 2 
Analysis 
  
Bill Summary:  In consultation with Howard County Public Schools (HCPS), the 
Howard County Department of Finance, and the Howard County Budget Office, the task 
force must: 
 
 
identify the capital needs, including deferred maintenance, of HCPS through 2035; 
 
determine the projected funding expected to be allocated to HCPS capital projects 
through 2035; 
 
identify the anticipated funding gaps for HCPS capital projections under current 
revenue projections through 2035; and 
 
study options for closing any identified funding gaps for HCPS capital projects 
under current revenue projections through 2035, including (1) allocating a higher 
percentage of revenue from the transfer tax to HCPS capital projects; (2) enacting a 
commercial excise tax; (3) exercising existing authority that Howard County may 
use to generate additional revenue; and (4) any other potential revenue sources the 
task force determines appropriate. 
 
Current Law:  The Howard County approved fiscal 2024 capital budget includes 
approximately $109.1 million in funds for school construction and renovation, including 
$51.6 million from local bonds, and remaining coming from a variety of State funding 
streams. For an overview of State support for public school construction, please see the 
Appendix – State Funding for Public School Construction. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The final task force report must be published within five months of 
the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date. Howard County advises that the mandates of the 
task force are extensive and complex such that an October 31, 2024 report deadline does 
not provide adequate time to perform the level of analysis required with adequate input 
from all stakeholders. As a result, Howard County may need to dedicate meaningful 
additional resources to the task force to be able to generate a final report within the 
five-month time span. The exact level of expenditures or scale of operational impact is 
unknown, but may involve retaining temporary contractual support to lead the workgroup 
and assist in writing the final report. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1186 (Howard County Senators) - Budget and Taxation. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1450/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Interagency Commission on School 
Construction; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader – March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) – March 25, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1450/ Page 4 
Appendix – State Funding for Public School Construction 
 
 
School Construction Review and Approval Process 
 
The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) manages State review and 
approval of local school construction projects. Each year, local systems develop and submit 
to IAC a facilities master plan that includes an analysis of future school facility needs based 
on the current condition of school buildings and projected enrollment. The master plan 
must be approved by the local school board. Subsequently, each local school system 
submits a capital improvement plan to IAC that includes projects for which it seeks 
planning and/or funding approval for the upcoming fiscal year, which may include projects 
that the local system has forward funded. In addition to approval from the local school 
board, the request for the upcoming fiscal year must be approved by the county’s governing 
body. Typically, the submission letter to IAC contains signatures of both the school board 
president and either the county executive and county council president or chair of the board 
of county commissioners. 
 
Based on its assessment of the relative merit of all the project proposals it receives, and 
subject to the projected level of school construction funds available, IAC determines which 
projects to fund through the Public School Construction Program (PSCP). By December 31 
of each year, IAC must approve projects comprising 75% of the preliminary school 
construction allocation projected to be available by the Governor for the upcoming 
fiscal year. Local school systems may appeal these preliminary decisions by IAC. By 
March 1 of each year, IAC must recommend to the General Assembly projects comprising 
90% of the allocation for school construction submitted in the Governor’s capital budget. 
Following the legislative session, IAC approves projects comprising the remaining school 
construction funds included in the enacted capital budget, no earlier than May 1. The final 
allocations are not subject to appeal. 
 
Built to Learn Act 
 
The Built to Learn Act was enacted as Chapter 20 of 2020, but it was contingent on the 
enactment of House Bill 1300 of 2020 (Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation). 
As House Bill 1300 was vetoed by the Governor, the Built to Learn Act took effect in 
January 2021 when the General Assembly voted to override the Governor’s veto of 
House Bill 1300. 
 
The Built to Learn Act authorizes the Maryland Stadium Authority (MSA) to issue up to 
$2.2 billion in revenue bonds, backed by annual payments from the Education Trust Fund 
beginning in fiscal 2022, for public school construction projects in the State, including to 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1450/ Page 5 
support a public-private partnership agreement to build six new schools in Prince George’s 
County. Proceeds from the revenue bonds are in addition to funding available from PSCP 
and are allocated among local school systems as shown in Exhibit 1 (based on MSA’s 
most recent projection of anticipated revenues of $1.7 billion given increases in interest 
rates since the program’s enactment). Funds must be used to build or renovate schools 
within 10 years. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Allocation of Built to Learn Bond Sale Proceeds 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
Percent of Total 
Proceeds 
Anne Arundel 
12.5% 
$212.5 
Baltimore City 
21.0% 
357.0 
Baltimore 
21.0% 
357.0 
Frederick 
5.1% 
86.7 
Howard 
6.6% 
112.2 
Montgomery 
21.0% 
357.0 
Prince George’s 
* 
* 
All Other Counties 
11.5% 
195.5 
Unallocated/Maryland Stadium Authority 
1.3% 
22.1 
Total 
100.0% 
$1,700.0 
 
* Under Chapter 20 of 2020, as amended by Chapter 679 of 2023, Prince George’s County 
receives $27.0 million annually for up to 30 years to supplement local funds for an 
availability payment if it enters into a public-private partnership agreement, subject to other 
provisions in the Act. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
The Built to Learn Act also (1) extends mandated funding for the Healthy School Facility 
Fund (HSFF) by three years, through fiscal 2024, with at least $30.0 million in fiscal 2022 
and at least $40.0 million in each of fiscal 2023 and 2024; (2) raises the mandated annual 
funding level for the Enrollment Growth or Relocatable Classrooms (EGRC) program from 
$40.0 million to $80.0 million beginning in fiscal 2027; and (3) creates the Public School 
Facilities Priority Fund to provide State funds to address the facility needs of the highest 
priority schools identified by the statewide facilities assessment completed by IAC. In 
fiscal 2025 and 2026, the Governor must appropriate at least $40.0 million to the fund. 
Beginning in fiscal 2027, the mandated annual appropriation increases to at least 
$80.0 million. Although mandated funding levels for fiscal 2022 were not required due to  
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1450/ Page 6 
the delay in Chapter 20 taking effect, the fiscal 2022 capital budget, as enacted, included the 
funding (with EGRC receiving a total of $60.0 million and HSFF receiving a total of 
$70.0 million, including $40.0 million in federal funds from the American Rescue Plan). 
 
Prior to distributing funds under the program, MSA must enter into a program 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with IAC (which is in place), and each county, 
local school board, and MSA must enter into a project MOU for each project seeking 
funding from the program. All projects receiving Built to Learn funds must be approved 
by IAC using the same process it uses for PSCP. As of November 2023, IAC has approved 
37 projects and committed more than $1.0 billion in funding to those projects. 
 
Eligible School Construction Costs 
 
IAC establishes a range of appropriate per-student, square-foot allocations for elementary, 
middle, and high schools as well as for special education students, career and technology 
students, and specialized programs. IAC updated the space allocations in 2019 and 
renamed them gross area baselines. IAC also establishes, on an annual basis, a cost 
per square foot that is applicable to major school construction projects. For fiscal 2025, the 
cost per square foot is $404 for new construction without site development (up from $385 
in fiscal 2024) and $481 for new construction with site development (up from $458 in 
fiscal 2024). In general, multiplying the cost per square foot by the applicable gross area 
baseline for each proposed project (based primarily on the State-rated capacity of a 
building) yields the maximum allowable cost that is subject to the State/local cost-share 
formula. Thus, any portion of a project that exceeds the gross area baseline is not eligible 
for State funding and must be paid for by the local school system. 
 
The cost of acquiring land may not be considered an eligible construction cost and may not 
be paid by the State. Otherwise, regulations specify public school construction-related costs 
that are eligible and ineligible for State funding. Chapter 20 expands the costs eligible for 
State funding. In general, the following costs are now included among eligible expenses: 
 
 
planning and design costs (including architectural and engineering fees); 
 
construction of a new facility, a renovation of a new facility, an addition to an 
existing facility, or a replacement of an existing building or building portion 
(i.e., “bricks and mortar”); 
 
building and site development; 
 
replacement of building systems, including roofs; windows; and heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning (i.e., “systemic renovations”;  
 
modular construction that meets specified standards; 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1450/ Page 7 
 
State-owned relocatable facilities and temporary facilities that are required to be on 
site during construction; and 
 
furniture, fixtures, and equipment with a median useful life of at least 15 years. 
 
Among the major items explicitly not eligible for State funding under current law (besides 
site acquisition) are (1) master plans and feasibility studies; (2) projects or systemic 
renovations for buildings and systems that have been replaced, upgraded, or renovated 
within the last 15 years; and (3) items that do not have a useful life of at least 15 years. 
 
State Share of Eligible Costs 
 
The State pays at least 50% of eligible costs of school construction and renovation projects, 
based on a funding formula that takes into account numerous factors, including each local 
school system’s wealth and ability to pay. The 21st Century School Facilities Act requires 
that the cost-share formula be recalculated every two years (previously, statute required 
recalculation every three years). Exhibit 2 shows the State share of eligible school 
construction costs for all Maryland jurisdictions for fiscal 2023 and 2024; fiscal 2025; and 
fiscal 2026, as approved by IAC. Counties whose calculated State share would have been 
lower in fiscal 2023 than in fiscal 2022 were held harmless by Chapter 698 of 2021; 
Garrett County’s State share was adjusted in accordance with provisions of Chapter 698. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
State Share of Eligible School Construction Costs 
Fiscal 2023-2026 
 
County 
FY 2023 and 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Allegany  
90% 
89% 
89% 
Anne Arundel  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Baltimore City  
96% 
94% 
91% 
Baltimore  
61% 
59% 
57% 
Calvert  
56% 
56% 
56% 
Caroline  
88% 
94% 
94% 
Carroll  
59% 
57% 
54% 
Cecil  
66% 
64% 
61% 
Charles  
65% 
64% 
64% 
Dorchester  
93% 
98% 
98% 
Frederick  
65% 
67% 
67% 
Garrett  
90% 
89% 
89% 
Harford  
63% 
61% 
58% 
Howard  
56% 
54% 
51% 
Kent  
50% 
50% 
50% 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1450/ Page 8 
County 
FY 2023 and 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
Montgomery  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Prince George’s  
73% 
71% 
68% 
Queen Anne’s  
51% 
50% 
50% 
St. Mary’s  
58% 
58% 
58% 
Somerset  
100% 
100% 
100% 
Talbot  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Washington  
79% 
78% 
78% 
Wicomico  
100% 
98% 
95% 
Worcester  
50% 
50% 
50% 
Maryland School for the Blind 
93% 
89% 
89% 
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction 
 
 
State Funding Levels 
 
Chapter 14 of 2018, the 21st Century School Facilities Act, established the State’s intent 
to provide at least $400.0 million annually, within current debt affordability guidelines. 
The State surpassed the $400.0 million threshold in fiscal 2019, 2021, 2022, 2023, and 
2024; the State would have surpassed $400.0 million in fiscal 2020, but the $10.0 million 
allocation for the School Safety Grant Program (SSGP) was canceled by the Board of 
Public Works for cost containment reasons. Chapter 679 of 2023 repeals both SSGP and 
the Aging Schools Program beginning in fiscal 2027 with the intent that funding for those 
programs be transferred to the Priority Fund, which takes effect that year. Exhibit 3 shows 
annual State public school construction funding from fiscal 2020 through 2024, by county. 
 
The fiscal 2025 operating and capital budgets, as passed by the General Assembly, provide 
more than $900 million in funding for public school construction projects in the State, 
divided among general obligation (GO) bond funding, revenue bonds, special funds, and a 
limited amount of general funds. The total includes: 
 
 
$425.4 million in MSA revenue bonds for Built to Learn; 
 
$313.9 million in GO bonds for PSCP; 
 
$40.0 million in GO bonds for EGRC; 
 
$90.0 million in GO bonds for HSFF;  
 
$6.1 million in GO bonds for the Aging Schools Program; and  
 
$29.0 million in special and general funds for public-private partnerships for school 
construction in Prince George’s County under Built to Learn. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1450/ Page 9 
 
Exhibit 3 
State Public School Construction Funding 
Fiscal 2020-2024 
($ in Thousands) 
 
County 
FY 2020 
FY 2021 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
FY 2024 
Allegany 
$2,846 
$2,080 
$2,515 
$4,116 
$5,742 
Anne Arundel 
36,422 
38,053 
148,762 
105,008 
58,141 
Baltimore City 
51,304 
69,479 
81,905 
304,638 
154,841 
Baltimore 
58,936 
53,015 
257,425 
118,800 
75,823 
Calvert 
2,227 
4,141 
13,416 
8,678 
5,171 
Caroline 
11,603 
13,713 
4,741 
2,257 
4,469 
Carroll 
7,604 
10,312 
38,693 
20,955 
16,609 
Cecil 
4,046 
3,856 
5,412 
6,865 
42,912 
Charles 
13,938 
12,455 
32,131 
35,237 
21,031 
Dorchester 
4,068 
5,955 
6,578 
4,670 
6,114 
Frederick 
16,636 
22,832 
55,009 
48,808 
43,608 
Garrett 
443 
1,795 
12,147 
11,061 
15,316 
Harford 
12,975 
12,964 
47,235 
12,680 
33,455 
Howard 
6,494 
32,508 
63,374 
71,539 
26,993 
Kent 
1,389 
3,193 
119 
2,331 
1,672 
Montgomery 
59,107 
55,710 
190,879 
43,540 
110,357 
Prince George’s 
52,276 
47,065 
42,153 
124,264 
76,967 
Queen Anne’s 
667 
1,248 
2,318 
4,526 
6,934 
St. Mary’s 
4,762 
5,530 
5,723 
7,878 
15,951 
Somerset 
3,161 
3,100 
776 
266 
9,409 
Talbot 
9,000 
3,173 
1,342 
1,129 
2,323 
Washington 
11,687 
8,311 
8,669 
10,413 
14,903 
Wicomico 
11,340 
10,399 
26,062 
33,416 
22,072 
Worcester 
4,336 
1,475 
4,975 
308 
689 
Maryland School for the Blind 
7,401 
6,779 
2,021 
15,209 
13,605 
Statewide 
0 
5,794 
6,500 
44,283 
20,063 
Total 
$394,668 
$434,933 $1,060,882 $1,042,875 
$805,170 
 
Notes:  Includes general obligation bonds, Built to Learn revenue bonds, pay-as-you-go funds, and reallocated funds 
that were previously authorized. Allocated funds include the Enrollment Growth or Relocatable Classroom program, 
School Safety grants, and Healthy School Facility grants. Statewide funds include unallocated discretionary funds, 
contractual costs for external reviews, and funds reserved for unforeseen contingencies. Columns may not sum to total 
due to rounding.  
 
Source:  Interagency Commission on School Construction; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9