START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 613

Chapter 613

(House Bill 1451)

AN ACT concerning

~~Arts~~ ~~Incubator~~ ~~The~~ ~~Jumpstarting~~ ~~Every~~ ~~Artist~~ ~~and~~ ~~Really~~ ~~Emphasizing~~
~~Monetary~~ ~~Support~~ ~~Yielding~~ ~~More~~ ~~Art~~ Arts Incubator Workgroup – Established

FOR the purpose of establishing the ~~Arts~~ ~~Incubator~~ ~~Jumpstarting~~ ~~Every~~ ~~Artist~~ ~~and~~ ~~Really~~
~~Emphasizing~~ ~~Monetary~~ ~~Support~~ ~~Yielding~~ ~~More~~ ~~Art~~ Arts Incubator Workgroup to
study how arts and cultural institutions can support local artists; and generally
relating to the ~~Arts~~ ~~Incubator~~ ~~Jumpstarting~~ ~~Every~~ ~~Artist~~ ~~and~~ ~~Really~~ ~~Emphasizing~~
~~Monetary~~ ~~Support~~ ~~Yielding~~ ~~More~~ ~~Art~~ Arts Incubator Workgroup.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is ~~an~~ ~~Arts~~ ~~Incubator~~ ~~The~~ ~~Jumpstarting~~ ~~Every~~ ~~Artist~~ ~~and~~ ~~Really~~
~~Emphasizing~~ ~~Monetary~~ ~~Support~~ ~~Yielding~~ ~~More~~ ~~Art~~ an Arts Incubator Workgroup.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

(1) one individual, appointed by the President of the Senate;

(2) one individual, appointed by the Speaker of the House; and

(3) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

(i) ~~two~~ three artists;

(ii) one artist who is an arts educator;

(iii) one representative of an arts entity that can accommodate an
audience of at least 50 people but not more than 250 people;

(iv) two members of local arts councils;

(v) one member of the Maryland State Arts Council;

(vi) two members of local arts districts, each from a different
geographical area of the State;

(vii) one representative of an arts entity that can accommodate an
audience of more than 250 people; and

~~(vi)~~ ~~(vii)~~ (viii) two members of the public who support the arts.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 613 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(c) The Chair of the Workgroup shall be selected by the Governor from among the
members of the Workgroup.

(d) The Maryland State Arts Council shall provide staff for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall study how arts and cultural institutions can support
local artists.

(g) (1) On or before ~~October~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ January 1, 2025, the Workgroup shall
submit a preliminary report on its ~~recommendations,~~ ~~including~~ ~~any~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~budget,~~
~~facilities,~~ ~~or~~ ~~in–kind~~ ~~services~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~needed~~ ~~or~~ ~~could~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ ~~local~~ ~~artists~~
findings, including research, case studies, and examples of approaches used to support
artists in other areas to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

(2) On or before October 1, 2025, the Workgroup shall submit a final report
on its recommendations, including any necessary budget, facilities, or in–kind services that
are needed or could be used to support local artists to the Governor and, in accordance with
§ 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 6 months and, at the end of
December 31, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall
be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2