START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1497 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1497 
(Delegate Pena-Melnyk, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners - Scope of Practice, Reinstatements, 
and Examinations by Health Care Providers 
 
 
This bill alters the definition of “practice massage therapy” to include certain techniques. 
A former licensee seeking to reinstate a license must, in addition to other requirements, 
submit evidence of having completed a State and national criminal history records check 
(CHRC). The State Board of Massage Therapy Examiners must require any applicant 
whose application the board is reviewing or licensee whose license the board is 
investigating to submit to an appropriate examination by a health care provider (designated 
and paid for by the board) if the board has reason to believe and objective evidence that 
the applicant or licensee may cause harm to individuals affected by the applicant’s or 
licensee’s practice of massage therapy. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The board can implement the bill with existing resources. Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals the existing definition of “massage therapy” and instead 
adapts the definition of “practice massage therapy” to include language previously 
applicable to the definition of “massage therapy.” The bill also expands the definition of 
“practice massage therapy” to include, subject to additional education and training 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1497/ Page 2 
requirements as determined by the board in regulations, instrument-assisted soft tissue 
manipulation techniques that enhance or imitate manual techniques, including muscle 
scraping and vibration therapy. 
 
In return for the privilege to practice massage therapy in the State, the applicant or licensee 
is deemed to have consented to submit to an examination when required and waived any 
claim of privilege as to the testimony or examination reports of the examining health care 
professional. The failure or refusal of the applicant or licensee to submit to an examination 
as required by the board is prima facie evidence of the applicant’s or licensee’s inability to 
practice massage therapy competently unless the board finds that the failure or refusal was 
beyond the control of the licensee. 
 
Current Law: 
 
Licensure 
 
Chapters 705 and 706 of 2022 phase out the registered massage practitioner credential. 
Until October 31, 2026, an individual may practice massage therapy in the State if the 
individual is either (1) licensed by the board or (2) registered by the board to practice 
massage therapy in a nonhealth care setting. Beginning November 1, 2026, an individual 
must be licensed by the board to practice massage therapy in the State. By 
October 31, 2026, the board must convert the registration of an individual registered as a 
massage practitioner to a license to practice massage therapy if the individual complies 
with regulations adopted by the board. An individual registered by the board on 
October 1, 2024, must be considered, in all respects, registered as a registered massage 
practitioner by the board for the remainder of the individual’s registration. 
 
Qualifications 
 
To qualify as a licensed massage therapist, an individual must (1) be of good moral 
character; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) graduate from an institution of postsecondary 
education approved by the Maryland Higher Education Commission with at least  
750 contact hours of education in a curriculum endorsed by the Commission on Massage 
Therapy Accreditation (COMTA) or an equivalent entity and approved by the board; 
(4) complete 750 contact hours of education in a board-approved program with specified 
areas of content; (5) pass a board-approved examination; and (6) submit to a CHRC. 
 
On or before September 30, 2024, to qualify as a registered massage therapy practitioner, 
an individual must (1) be of good moral character; (2) be at least 18 years old; (3) graduate 
from a program for the study of massage therapy that has a curriculum endorsed by the 
board and COMTA or an equivalent entity and accredited by an institutional accreditation 
agency recognized by the U.S. Department of Education with at least 600 contact hours of 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1497/ Page 3 
classroom instruction in specified areas of content; (4) pass an examination approved by 
the board; and (5) submit to a CHRC. 
 
Definitions 
 
“Massage therapy” means the use of manual techniques on soft tissues of the human body 
including stroking, kneading, tapping, stretching, compression, vibration, and friction, with 
or without the aid of heat limited to hot packs and heating pads, cold water, or nonlegend 
topical applications, for the purpose of improving circulation, enhancing muscle relaxation, 
relieving muscular pain, reducing stress, or promoting health and well-being. 
 
“Massage therapy” includes hands-on application, consisting of pressure or movement on 
an individual, to specifically affect the electromagnetic energy or energetic field of the 
human body if this practice includes use of specified manual techniques. 
 
“Massage therapy” does not include (1) the diagnosis of illness, disease, or injury; (2) the 
adjustment, manipulation, or mobilization of any of the articulations of the osseous 
structures of the human body or spine; or (3) except as otherwise provided, the laying on 
of hands, consisting of pressure or movement on an individual who is fully clothed, except 
for footwear, to specifically affect the electromagnetic energy or energetic field of the 
human body. 
 
“Practice massage therapy” means to engage professionally and for compensation in 
massage therapy. 
 
Licensure Reinstatement 
 
If a licensed massage therapist or registered massage practitioner fails for any reason to 
renew a license or registration, the board must reinstate the licensure or registration if the 
former licensed massage therapist or former registered massage practitioner (1) applies to 
the board for reinstatement within five years after the license or registration expires; 
(2) meets the licensure renewal requirements in current law; and (3) pays the reinstatement 
fee set by the board. 
 
State Expenditures:  The board can adopt regulations to alter definitions as specified with 
existing resources. The number of examinations by a health care provider designated by 
the board is assumed to be minimal and, therefore, the cost of such examinations is likely 
absorbable by the board with existing resources. Further, requiring applicants for renewal 
to resubmit evidence of having completed a State and national CHRC for licensure 
reinstatement is assumed to have no impact on State finances as applicants are already 
required to obtain a CHRC as part of an initial application for a license. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1497/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4