START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1487 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1487 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Commerce) 
Ways and Means 
Finance 
 
Maryland Entertainment Council - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill codifies the Maryland Entertainment Industry Council as the 
successor to the uncodified Maryland Entertainment Council, with specified changes to 
council membership, appointments, powers, and reporting requirements. The council is 
made permanent, instead of terminating June 30, 2025. Under current law, only the 
Maryland Department of Commerce must staff the council; under the bill, Commerce and 
any other agency designated by the Governor must staff the council. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Commerce can continue to staff the council with existing budgeted 
resources. Any additional expense reimbursements for additional council members through 
FY 2025 and for all council members beginning in FY 2026 are assumed to be minimal 
and likewise absorbable. While not required by the bill, general fund expenditures for 
Commerce may increase should the council use its new authority to engage consultants in 
the performance of its duties. Should other agencies (most likely the Maryland Department 
of Labor and/or the Department of Housing and Community Development) be designated 
to assist with staffing, they realize operational, and potentially fiscal, impacts; however, 
the bill does not limit such designation to the agencies represented on the council. Revenues 
are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Commerce has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact 
on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1487/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Maryland Entertainment Industry Council is established as the 
permanent successor to the uncodified Maryland Entertainment Council, which was of 
limited duration but is repealed. Additional members are added to the council, as specified, 
and provisions are established for member terms and reappointments. As under current 
law, a member of the council may not receive compensation as a member of the council 
but is entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. The council is also provided express 
powers to adopt regulations, enter into contracts and agreements, obtain services, ask other 
units of the State for assistance and data, accept federal money, and accept gifts, donations, 
or bequests. Under current law, only Commerce must staff the council; under the bill, 
Commerce and any other agency designated by the Governor must staff the council. By  
January 1, 2026, and each January 1 thereafter, the council must submit an annual report 
to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
General activities that the council must undertake (detailed below) are unchanged. The 
information required in the existing final report is likewise unchanged, although the date 
by which that report must be submitted is delayed from September 1, 2024, to 
December 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 452 of 2023 established the Maryland Entertainment Council, 
consisting of specified membership, and staffed by Commerce. A member of the council 
may not receive compensation as a member of the council but is entitled to reimbursement 
for travel expenses. The council must: 
 
 
assess Maryland’s existing assets, opportunities, and competitive position within the 
film, television, and entertainment industry; 
 
study State, local, and private assets that currently support Maryland’s film, 
television, and entertainment industry, including key infrastructure, existing 
workforce, workforce pipelines, scenic profile, emerging specialties, and 
independent creative communities; 
 
study existing State programs, agencies, offices, grant programs, and commissions 
across State agencies that support the film, television, and entertainment industry; 
 
study models, competitive profiles, methods, and legislation that states have utilized 
to incentivize necessary infrastructure and workforce to support the film, television, 
and entertainment industry; 
 
study industry needs, disruptive trends, and emerging technologies within the film, 
television, and entertainment industry; 
 
study complementary industries, aligned businesses, and potential corporate, 
philanthropic, and other partners for the film, television, and entertainment industry; 
and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1487/ Page 3 
 
make recommendations on the development of a coordinated, comprehensive 
strategic plan to position Maryland as an emerging leader in the film, television, and 
entertainment industry. 
 
The council was required to submit a preliminary report by December 1, 2023, to the 
Governor, the Secretary of Commerce, and the General Assembly that included specified 
information and recommendations. By September 1, 2024, the council must submit its final 
report to the Governor, the Secretary of Commerce, and the General Assembly on the 
matters included in the council’s preliminary report plus additional recommendations, 
including for additional State investment in the film, television, and entertainment industry. 
 
The council was established in uncodified language. Provisions related to the council 
terminate June 30, 2025. 
 
Background:  Commerce advises that, due to ongoing labor negotiations in 2023, the 
Maryland Entertainment Council was not appointed and, therefore, not able to begin its 
work, until early 2024. The delay has caused the need for an extension on the deadline to 
submit the council’s final report. Additionally, codifying the council and expanding its 
membership allows it to continue evaluating and making recommendations regarding the 
State’s competitiveness in the film, television, and entertainment industry, with added 
expertise. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Housing and 
Community Development; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1487/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Maryland Entertainment Council – Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  HB1487 
 
PREPARED BY:  Jennifer LaHatte 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal will codify and alter the existing Maryland Entertainment Council, 
renaming it to the Maryland Entertainment Industry Council. It will expand the size and 
breadth of expertise on the Council, and will allow them to continue to evaluate and make 
recommendations regarding Maryland's competitiveness in the film, television and 
entertainment industry. While the recommendations made by the Council may have an 
impact on small businesses, the creation of this council specifically will not have an 
impact on Maryland Small Businesses. 

END OF PAGE 4