START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 321

Chapter 321

(House Bill 1492)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery – Student Information

FOR the purpose of requiring public schools in the State to notify students taking the
Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) and parents or guardians of
students taking the ASVAB of the option to prohibit the release of a student’s ASVAB
test scores to military recruiters; repealing the requirement that certain schools
provide certain notice to certain individuals regarding the release of student
information and ASVAB test scores; and generally relating to public schools and the
availability of student information and ASVAB test scores.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 7–111
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

7–111.

(a) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, each public school under the
jurisdiction of a county board that provides access to its buildings and grounds or its
student information directory to any person or group which makes students aware of
occupational or educational options shall provide access on the same basis to official
recruiting representatives of the military forces of this State and the United States for the
purpose of informing students of educational and career opportunities available in the
military.

(b) (1) A public school subject to this section shall provide notice to each
student and to the parent or guardian of each student enrolled at the school that, in
accordance with federal law, the student or the parent or guardian of the student may
request that the student’s name, address, and telephone number not be released to military
recruiters.

(2) The notice described under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall:

(i) Be included in a clear and conspicuous manner and in the same
size type as the other statements on the card requesting emergency contact information
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 321 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

that is distributed by the public school to each student or parent or guardian of the student;
and

(ii) Request that the student or the parent or guardian of the student
indicate if the student’s name, address, and telephone number are not to be released to
military recruiters by checking the box “Do not release contact information”.

(3) On or before October 1 and March 1 of each school year, the principal
of each public school in a county shall submit a list to the county board that includes the
name, address, and telephone number of each student whose contact information is not
released to military recruiters as directed under paragraph (2)(ii) of this subsection.

(c) (1) In this subsection, “ASVAB” means the Armed Services Vocational
Aptitude Battery.

(2) Each public school in the State that administers the ASVAB shall, 2
WEEKS BEFORE ADMINISTERING THE EXAM, NOTIFY STUDENTS TAKING THE ASVAB
AND THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OF STUDENTS TAKING THE ASVAB OF THE OPTION
TO choose “Option 8” as the score reporting option for military recruiter contact to prohibit
the general release of any student information to military recruiters.

(3) Each public school that administers the ASVAB shall[:

(i) Send a written notice to the ASVAB representative coordinating
the school’s administration of the ASVAB of the requirement set forth in paragraph (2) of
this subsection; and

(ii) Notify] NOTIFY students taking the ASVAB and the parent or
guardian of students taking the ASVAB of the release of student information requirements
set forth in [paragraphs (2) and] PARAGRAPH (4) of this subsection.

(4) A student or a student’s parent or guardian WHO CHOOSES “OPTION
8” AS THE SCORE REPORTING OPTION OR FOR WHOM “OPTION 8” IS CHOSEN BY THE
COUNTY BOARD may choose to LATER release the student’s personal information and
ASVAB scores by individually submitting the required forms to the military services
authorizing the release of the information to:

(i) Recruiting representatives of the military services;

(ii) Registered apprenticeship programs;

(iii) Youth apprenticeship programs under Title 18, Subtitle 18 of
this article; and

(iv) Employers registered with:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 321

1. The Maryland Department of Labor; or

2. Local Workforce Development Boards.

(5) NOTHING IN THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE CONSTRUED TO LIMIT A
COUNTY BOARD’S ABILITY TO CHOOSE “OPTION 8” AS THE SCORE REPORTING
OPTION FOR MILITARY RECRUITER CONTACT TO PROHIBIT THE GENERAL RELEASE
OF ANY STUDENT INFORMATION TO MILITARY RECRUITERS FOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS
THAT ADMINISTER THE ASVAB IN THE COUNTY.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3