START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1482 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1482 
(Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo) 
Economic Matters 
Finance 
 
Uninsured Driving Penalties - Funding for the Maryland Automobile Insurance 
Fund, Driver Education, and Transportation to Field Trips 
 
 
This bill establishes the Driver Education in Public High Schools Grant Program (and a 
corresponding special fund) to provide grants to public schools and nonprofit organizations 
to assist public schools in offering driver education courses to students. Likewise, the bill 
establishes the State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Grant Program (and a corresponding 
special fund) to assist public schools in transporting students to field trips at State-aided 
educational institutions. The bill also increases the uninsured motorist penalties that apply 
when required security (i.e., insurance) on a motor vehicle registered in the State terminates 
or otherwise lapses during its registration period and alters the distribution of the penalty 
revenues to include funding for the two new programs and to increase funding for the 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund (MAIF). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues to the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) and two new 
special funds increase by a total of $3.5 million in FY 2025, while general fund revenues 
correspondingly decrease, as discussed below. Future years reflect additional distributions 
to MAIF (due to a required inflation adjustment) with lesser revenues accruing to the 
general fund. It is assumed that the two new special funds expend all new revenues 
annually; therefore, special fund expenditures for the two new special funds increase by 
$2.6 million annually beginning in FY 2025. This bill increases a mandated distribution 
and establishes additional mandated distributions beginning in FY 2025. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($3.5) 
($3.5) 
($3.6) 
($3.7) 
($3.8) 
SF Revenue 
$3.5 
$3.5 
$3.5 
$3.5 
$3.5 
SF Expenditure 
$2.6 
$2.6 
$2.6 
$2.6 
$2.6 
Net Effect 
($2.6) 
($2.6) 
($2.7) 
($2.8) 
($2.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1482/ Page 2 
 MAIF Effect:  Nonbudgeted revenues for MAIF increase by $3.0 million in FY 2025; 
future years reflect required adjustments for inflation. Nonbudgeted expenditures may 
increase correspondingly as the additional revenues are for the exclusive use of MAIF’s 
Uninsured Division; however, the bill itself does not require additional spending. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
NonBud Rev. 
$3.0 
$3.1 
$3.1 
$3.2 
$3.3 
NonBud Exp. 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
$3.0 
$3.1 
$3.1 
$3.2 
$3.3  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems benefit from the availability of grants to defray certain 
expenditures. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Driver Education in Public High Schools Grant Program and Fund  
 
The bill establishes a Driver Education in Public High Schools Grant Program in the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to provide grants to public high schools 
and nonprofit organizations to assist public high schools in offering driver education 
courses for students, as specified. MSDE must (1) administer the program; (2) establish 
application procedures for the program; and (3) award grants from the program.  
 
Subject to the availability of money in the fund, a public school or nonprofit organization 
may apply for a grant for expenses paid or incurred (or that will be paid or incurred) to 
offer a driver education course for students, as specified. When making grants, MSDE must 
prioritize (1) public schools at which at least 40% of the registered students are eligible for 
the federal free or reduced-price meal program and (2) nonprofit organizations working to 
offer a driver education course in a school at which at least 40% of the registered students 
are eligible for the federal free or reduced-price meal program.  
 
The Driver Education in Public High Schools Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund not subject 
to reversion to the general fund. The fund consists of money received from fines for vehicle 
security lapses under specified provisions of the Transportation Article and any other 
money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used 
only for providing grants under the program and administrative costs of the program. Any 
interest earnings accrue to the general fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1482/ Page 3 
MSDE must adopt regulations to carry out these provisions. 
 
State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Program and Fund 
 
The bill establishes a State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Grant Program in MSDE to 
provide grants to public schools to provide transportation to students for field trips to 
educational institutions that are qualified as State-aided educational institutions. MSDE 
must (1) administer the program; (2) establish application procedures for the program; and 
(3) award grants from the program. 
 
Subject to the availability of money in the fund, a public school may apply for a grant for 
expenses paid or incurred (or that will be paid or incurred) to provide transportation to 
students for field trips to educational institutions that are qualified as State-aided 
educational institutions. When making grants, MSDE must prioritize public schools at 
which at least 40% of the registered students are eligible for the federal free or 
reduced-price meal program. 
 
The State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund not subject to 
reversion to the general fund. The fund consists of money received from fines for vehicle 
security lapses under specified provisions of the Transportation Article and any other 
money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used 
only for providing grants under the program and administrative costs of the program. Any 
interest earnings accrue to the general fund. 
 
MSDE must adopt regulations to carry out these provisions. 
 
Uninsured Motorist Penalties and Penalty Distribution 
 
The bill modifies the escalating penalty structure for lapsed security on a motor vehicle 
registered in the State (commonly referred to as uninsured motorist penalties) by:   
 
 
authorizing the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) to assess the owner of a 
vehicle a penalty of $200, instead of $150, for each vehicle without the required 
security for the first 30 days; and 
 
increasing the maximum fine that may be imposed in a 12-month period from 
$2,500 to $3,500. 
 
The bill also modifies the annual distribution of the uninsured motorist penalties, beginning 
in fiscal 2025, by:   
 
 
requiring that $2.0 million be allocated to the Drivers Education in Public High 
Schools Fund; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1482/ Page 4 
 
requiring that $600,000 be allocated to the State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Fund; 
and 
 
increasing MAIF’s share of the penalty revenues collected by $3.0 million and 
requiring this additional revenue to be included in the calculation when determining 
MAIF’s share of penalty revenues in future years (while retaining the required 
annual adjustment for inflation); however, this additional revenue for MAIF must 
be dedicated to the exclusive use of MAIF’s Uninsured Division. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Driver Education Schools 
 
MVA is required to, in consultation with MSDE, adopt and enforce regulations to 
implement a standardized driver education program conducted by driver education schools. 
The regulations must include curriculum, equipment, and facility standards for classroom, 
laboratory, and on-road instruction phases, as well as minimum student performance 
standards for an approved driver education program consisting of at least 30 hours of 
classroom instruction and at least 6 hours of highway driving instruction. Regulations must 
also include standards for the certification of schools and instructors; a system to evaluate 
the effectiveness of the driver education program; standards governing the required 
offering of the driver education program (based on the capacity, enrollment, staff, and 
facilities of the schools); and standards for the eligibility of individuals to enroll in the 
program. 
 
Driver Education Programs 
 
Each local board of education may offer instruction in the safe operation of a motor vehicle 
to high school students who are age 15 or older. The instruction must be given as provided 
by specified provisions of the Transportation Article related to driver education schools 
(described above). Each local board must determine whether the course is an elective or 
required course. The State Board of Education must determine what credit, if any, is 
allowed to successful students of the course. The principal of each school that offers the 
driver education course must arrange the time set aside for actual driving instruction so that 
it does not interfere with other work. Each motor vehicle used for instruction must bear the 
identification required by MVA. If practicable, the actual driving instruction must be 
conducted on private or public property that is removed from State roads. 
 
However, in February 2017, due to unsustainable costs, including vehicle, insurance, 
instructor, course material, and maintenance expenses, the State Board of Education 
repealed the regulations for driver education programs in public schools. Currently, no 
local school systems are certified by MVA to provide driver’s education. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1482/ Page 5 
Required Security 
 
Maryland law requires an owner of a motor vehicle that is required to be registered in the 
State to maintain insurance for the vehicle during the registration period. MVA may not 
issue or transfer the registration of a motor vehicle unless the owner or prospective owner 
of the vehicle provides satisfactory evidence to MVA that the required security is in effect. 
 
If the required security for a vehicle lapses at any time, the registration of that vehicle is 
suspended automatically as of the date of the lapse, effective within 60 days after 
notification to MVA. After receiving this notice, MVA must make a reasonable effort to 
notify the owner of the vehicle that registration on the vehicle has been suspended. The 
registration remains suspended until the vehicle owner submits evidence of replaced 
security on a designated MVA form, certified by the insurance provider, along with the 
uninsured motorist penalty. Additionally, Chapter 549 of 2022 prohibits MVA from 
assessing a penalty for a vehicle if the vehicle’s registration plates are returned within 
10 days after the termination or lapse and other specified conditions are met. 
 
Uninsured Motorist Penalties and Revenue Distributions 
 
MVA may assess the owner of the vehicle a penalty of $150 for each vehicle without the 
required security for the first 30 days. Beginning on the 31st day, the fine increases by a 
rate of $7 per day, but the total fine may not exceed $2,500 in a 12-month period, not 
including the additional misdemeanor penalty of up to $500, which may be prepaid with a 
fine of $290. Knowingly operating a vehicle without adequate security is a misdemeanor, 
subject to a fine of up to $1,000 and/or one year imprisonment for a first offense and a fine 
of up to $1,000 and/or two years imprisonment for a subsequent offense. The violation 
requires a court appearance, results in the imposition of five points on the driver’s record, 
and subjects the driver to participation in the Driver Improvement Program. 
 
A portion of the fines collected under the escalating penalty structure for lapsed security 
(uninsured motorist penalties) is retained by MVA (30%) for specified purposes; the 
remainder (70%) is directed under the following allocation formula:   
 
 
$600,000 to the Safe Schools Fund; 
 
$2.0 million to the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund; 
 
a specified amount to MAIF based on the amount provided in the prior fiscal year 
adjusted for inflation, with specified calculations for fiscal 2024; and 
 
the balance to the general fund. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1482/ Page 6 
Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund 
 
Created by the General Assembly in 1972, MAIF is an independent nonbudgeted State 
agency. Through its Insured Division, MAIF provides automobile liability insurance to 
residents of the State who are unable to obtain policies in the private insurance market. As 
the insurer of last resort, MAIF is not in direct competition with the private insurance 
industry because a customer must generally have been turned down by other insurers (and 
meet other requirements) in order to obtain a policy with MAIF. 
 
Like other insurers, MAIF’s Insured Division is primarily funded through premiums on the 
insurance policies it issues; however, MAIF is authorized to issue an assessment paid by 
other motor vehicle insurers in the State if it experiences a significant operating loss (as 
defined by State law) and meets other specified conditions. This is to ensure MAIF’s 
continued viability as the insurer of last resort. The assessment is grouped and paid 
separately by private passenger auto insurers and commercial auto insurers. Once an 
insurer pays the assessment, they are authorized to recoup the cost from their policyholders. 
 
Through its Uninsured Division, which is separate and distinct from the Insured Division, 
MAIF provides payments to qualified State residents who incurred damages (bodily injury, 
death, or property damage) in accidents with motor vehicles; however, to be eligible, a 
resident must have no other form of collectible automobile insurance. The 
Uninsured Division is primarily funded through the uninsured motorist penalties being 
increased by bill. The Uninsured Division has recently experienced financial difficulties, 
as discussed below in Additional Comments. 
 
State/MAIF Fiscal Effect:  Beginning in fiscal 2025, the bill (1) increases penalties for 
uninsured motorists; (2) increases the share of the penalties that accrue to MAIF; and 
(3) establishes two additional mandated distributions for the penalties that accrue to the 
two new special funds established by the bill. Of the uninsured motorist penalties, 30% are 
retained by TTF and the remaining 70% of revenues (after required distributions to the 
Safe Schools Fund and the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund, which are unchanged by the 
bill, and required distributions under the bill to the two new special funds and to MAIF) 
are remitted to the general fund. 
 
Based on payment patterns in fiscal 2023, as reported by MVA, total penalty revenues 
increase by an estimated $3.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025, as shown in  
Exhibit 1. However, the additional distributions required by the bill are anticipated to 
annually exceed additional revenues. Consequently, revenues for TTF, the new Driver 
Education in Public High Schools Fund, the new State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Fund, 
and MAIF increase due to the mandatory distributions, while general fund revenues 
decrease. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1482/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
Effect of the Bill on State Revenues and Related Distributions 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
 
FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 
Total Additional Revenues 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
$3.0 
 
 
 
 
 
30% Retained by TTF 
$0.9 
$0.9 
$0.9 
$0.9 
$0.9 
70% Available for Distribution 
$2.1 
$2.1 
$2.1 
$2.1 
$2.1 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPS Fund 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
$2.0 
SIFT Fund 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
0.6 
MAIF (nonbudgeted) 
3.0 
3.1 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
 
Total Additional Distributions 
$5.6 
$5.7 
$5.7 
$5.8 
$5.9 
 
 
 
 
 
Net Effect on General Fund  
($3.5) 
($3.5) 
($3.6) 
($3.7) 
($3.8) 
 
DEPS:  Driver Education in Public High Schools 
MAIF:  Maryland Automobile Insurance Fund 
SIFT:  State-Aided Institutions Field Trip 
TTF:  Transportation Trust Fund 
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. Existing annual distributions to the Safe Schools 
Fund ($600,000) and the Vehicle Theft Prevention Fund ($2.0 million) are not affected and, thus, not shown 
above. 
 
Source:  Motor Vehicle Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
This estimate assumes that:   
 
 
under current law, projected uninsured motorist penalty revenues of $97.5 million 
for fiscal 2025 would otherwise be maintained at that level through fiscal 2029; 
 
changes to the penalty structure result in uninsured motorist penalty revenues 
collected by MVA increasing to $100.5 million annually through fiscal 2029; 
 
the higher penalty structure does not have a significant deterrent effect; and 
 
an inflation rate of approximately 2.5% beginning in fiscal 2026 is used for 
calculating the required adjustment to the allocation that accrues to MAIF. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1482/ Page 8 
This analysis assumes that revenues for the new Driver Education in Public High Schools 
Fund and the new State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Fund are fully expended each year, 
for grants and for additional staff needed to administer the programs. Although the bill also 
results in additional revenues for TTF, it does not require additional expenditures for the 
Maryland Department of Transportation. Likewise, while the bill requires MAIF to use the 
additional revenues exclusively for its Uninsured Division, the bill itself does not require 
additional spending by MAIF. Nevertheless, at least $3.0 million each year becomes 
available for MAIF’s Uninsured Division, and, given current funding projections, most of 
that amount is likely expended each year; the balance may be retained so that the 
Uninsured Division can accrue a small cushion. 
 
Maryland State Department of Education Staffing 
 
MSDE requires one new grant manager to manage the two new grant programs and 
associated special funds established by the bill. As both new special funds can be used for 
administrative expenses, this analysis assumes that any staffing and related operating costs 
are paid by some combination of the two special funds. Annual administrative costs of 
between $85,000 and $120,000, beginning in fiscal 2025, reduce the amount of funding 
available for grants to schools and/or nonprofit organizations. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Beginning in fiscal 2025, both the Driver Education in Public Schools 
Grant Program and State-Aided Institutions Field Trip Grant Program may distribute funds 
to qualified local school systems. Thus, for any public school that applies to the programs 
and receives funding, local school system revenues and expenditures increase 
correspondingly to complete the relevant activities authorized under each program. 
 
Additional Comments:  MAIF advises that the calendar 2023 year-end audited surplus 
for its Uninsured Division is significantly lower than expected at negative $1.4 million. 
Moreover, MAIF advises that, without additional funding, the Uninsured Division may fail 
to meet its statutory obligation to pay claims. While the uninsured penalty distribution 
under current law provides an additional $2.0 million to MAIF in fiscal 2024 only, which, 
although not statutorily required, is – according to MAIF – intended for use by the 
Insured Division. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1482/ Page 9 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Automobile 
Insurance Fund; Maryland State Department of Education; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 8, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 9