START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1439 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1439 
(Delegate Shetty, et al.) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Emergency Services - Funding 
 
 
This bill (1) alters the purpose, funding sources, and reimbursement methodologies of the 
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund (MTPSF); (2) increases the annual vehicle 
registration surcharge for the Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund 
(MEMSOF) and MTPSF and allocates a portion of the higher surcharge elsewhere – to the 
State primary adult resource center (PARC, known as the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma 
Center); (3) increases the maximum fines for specified drunk and drugged driving offenses, 
with at least 20% of the fines collected going to MTPSF; and (4) requires the Governor to 
include $16.5 million in the annual budget bill for the Senator William H. Amoss Fire, 
Rescue, and Ambulance Fund beginning in fiscal 2026. The bill also makes clarifying and 
technical changes. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase by $104.8 million annually beginning in 
FY 2025 due to the higher surcharge, with as much as $45.6 million for MEMSOF, at least 
$41.0 million for Shock Trauma, and $18.2 million for MTPSF. Special fund expenditures 
increase by $3.4 million in FY 2025 and $4.9 million annually thereafter, reflecting a 
combination of higher costs for the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF), earmarked grants 
provided through MTPSF, and a mandated appropriation paid from MEMSOF. 
Minimal decrease in general fund revenues, with a minimal further increase in MTPSF 
revenues beginning in FY 2025 (not quantified but discussed below); minimal increase in 
general fund expenditures in FY 2025 only. This bill establishes mandated distributions 
beginning in FY 2025 and a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
SF Revenue 
$104.78 
$104.78 
$104.78 
$104.78 
$104.78 
GF Expenditure 
$0.02 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$3.41 
$4.91 
$4.91 
$4.91 
$4.91 
Net Effect 
$101.35 
$99.87 
$99.87 
$99.87 
$99.87  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1439/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local governments benefit from the availability of more funding from the 
Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund; this additional funding is 
partially offset by a minimal decrease in fine revenues, as discussed below. Expenditures 
are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Definitions  
 
The bill adds new definitions. “Reasonable compensation equivalent” means the limitation 
on the cost established by the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services that a 
provider may claim for compensation of services. “Trauma health care practitioner” means 
a health care practitioner licensed under the Health Occupations Article who provides care 
in a trauma center or in a rehabilitation hospital to trauma patients on the State trauma 
registry as defined by the Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems 
(MIEMSS). 
 
The bill alters the definition of “uncompensated care” to mean care provided by a trauma 
physician or a trauma health care practitioner to a trauma patient on the State trauma 
registry who (1) has no health insurance, including Medicare Part B coverage; (2) is not 
eligible for Medicaid; and (3) has not paid the trauma physician or trauma health care 
practitioner for care provided by the trauma physician or trauma health care practitioner, 
after documented attempts by the trauma physician or trauma health care practitioner to 
collect payment. 
 
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund 
 
Purpose:  Under current law, the purpose of MTPSF is to subsidize the documented costs 
(1) of uncompensated care incurred by a trauma physician in providing trauma care to a 
trauma patient on the State trauma registry; (2) of undercompensated care incurred by a 
trauma physician in providing trauma care to a Medicaid enrollee who is a trauma patient 
on the State trauma registry; (3) incurred by a trauma center to maintain trauma physicians 
on-call as required by MIEMSS; (4) incurred by the State PARC (the R Adams Cowley 
Shock Trauma Center) to maintain specified physicians on-call and on standby as required 
by MIEMSS; and (5) incurred by the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) and the 
Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC) to administer the fund.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1439/ Page 3 
The bill expands the purpose of the fund to include subsidizing the documented costs of 
trauma health care practitioners (in addition to trauma physicians under current law).  
 
Funding Sources:  Under current law, MTPSF consists of motor vehicle registration 
surcharges paid into the fund in accordance with the Transportation Article. The current 
annual surcharge is $17.00 for each vehicle registered, of which $2.50 must be paid into 
MTPSF. The remainder of the surcharge accrues to MEMSOF.  
 
The bill increases the annual vehicle surcharge from $17.00 to $40.00 (an increase of 
$23.00 annually) for each vehicle registered and requires that $4.00 of that increase also 
be paid into MTPSF, such that a total of $6.50 for each vehicle subject to the surcharge is 
paid into MTPSF. Additionally, the bill requires the Governor to annually allocate at least 
$9.00 of the $40.00 annual surcharge to the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center. The 
balance of the surcharge collected (as much as $24.50) must be paid to MEMSOF. 
 
The bill also expands the funding sources for MTPSF to include (1) at least 20% of the 
fines collected for penalties for specified alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offenses and 
(2) any other money transferred from the general fund. 
 
Annual Grant Requirements:  Under the bill, MHCC must award an annual grant from 
MTPSF of up to $1.8 million to Level I pediatric trauma centers as follows:  (1) up to 
$900,000 to Johns Hopkins Children’s Center and (2) up to $900,000 to Children’s 
National Medical Center. 
 
Trauma Center Reimbursement Rate Methodology  
 
Under current law, the methodology for reimbursing costs incurred by trauma physicians 
and trauma centers must include an incentive to encourage hospitals to continue to 
subsidize trauma-related costs not otherwise included in hospital rates. The methodology 
must also take into account (1) the amount of uncompensated care provided by trauma 
physicians; (2) the amount of undercompensated care attributable to the treatment of 
Medicaid enrollees in trauma centers; (3) the cost of maintaining trauma physicians on-call; 
(4) the number of patients served by trauma physicians in trauma centers; (5) the number 
of Maryland residents served by trauma physicians in trauma centers; and (6) the extent to 
which trauma-related costs are otherwise subsidized by hospitals, the federal government, 
and other sources. 
 
The bill alters key components of the reimbursement methodology. It specifies that a 
Level II trauma center is eligible for a maximum of 26,280 hours of trauma on-call per year 
(rather than 24,500 under current law). The bill also alters the maximum reimbursement 
rates for specified on-call costs. Exhibit 1 compares the reimbursement rates for trauma 
centers for specified on-call costs under current law with those under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1439/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Reimbursement Rate by Trauma Center Type for Specified On-call Providers  
 
Cost Incurred by 
Under Current Law 
Under the Bill 
Level I trauma center, Level II 
trauma center, pediatric trauma 
center, or Maryland Trauma 
Specialty Referral Center must 
be reimbursed at a rate of: 
Up to 30% of the reasonable 
cost equivalents hourly rate for 
the specialty, inflated to the 
current year, as specified. 
Up to 60% of the reasonable 
compensation 
equivalent 
hourly rate for the specialty, 
inflated to the current year, as 
specified. 
Level III trauma center must 
be reimbursed at a rate of: 
Up to 35% of the reasonable 
cost equivalents hourly rate for 
the specialty, inflated to the 
current year, as specified. 
Up to 60% of the reasonable 
compensation 
equivalent 
hourly rate for the specialty, 
inflated to the current year, as 
specified. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Under current law, the reimbursement made to trauma physicians and trauma centers is 
also subject to additional parameters. For example, the total reimbursement to emergency 
physicians from MTPSF may not exceed $300,000 annually.  
 
The bill adds the following additional parameters: 
 
 
MHCC, in consultation with HSCRC, may change the percentage of the reasonable 
compensation equivalent paid to trauma hospitals under specified circumstances 
and with specified notice;  
 
MHCC, in consultation with HSCRC, may change the number of allowable hours 
of trauma on-call each year with specified notice; and 
 
MHCC may modify the percentage paid of the reasonable compensation equivalent 
for on-call hours no more than once each year. 
 
The bill specifies that, in order to receive reimbursement, a trauma physician or a trauma 
health care practitioner in the case of costs of uncompensated care, or a trauma center in 
the case of on-call costs, must apply to MTPSF on a form and in a manner approved by 
MHCC and HSCRC. MHCC and HSCRC must adopt regulations that specify information 
that trauma physicians, trauma health care practitioners, and trauma centers must submit 
to receive funds from MTPSF. MHCC, in consultation with HSCRC and MIEMSS, must 
develop a process for the award of grants to Level I, Level II, and Level III trauma centers 
in the delivery of trauma care (moreover, grants no longer need to be used for equipment). 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1439/ Page 5 
Under current law, MHCC must issue grants from any balance carried over to MTPSF from 
prior fiscal years. The total amount of grants awarded pursuant to these requirements may 
not exceed 10% of the balance remaining in MTPSF at the end of the fiscal year 
immediately prior to the fiscal year in which grants are awarded. The bill repeals this 
requirement and instead specifies that the total amount of grants awarded in a fiscal year 
may not reduce the balance remaining in MTPSF at the end of the fiscal year to less than 
15% of the revenue collected in that fiscal year. 
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
Under current law, by November 1 each year, MHCC and HSCRC must report to the 
General Assembly on the fund, as specified, including the amount of money in the fund, 
the amount applied for and distributed, and recommendations for altering reimbursement 
methodologies. 
 
The bill clarifies that the report must include the amount of money applied for by or 
distributed to trauma health care practitioner reimbursement, and any recommendations 
for altering the manner in which trauma health care practitioners are reimbursed. The bill 
also requires the annual report to include the costs that hospitals reported to HSCRC and 
are accounted for in the global budgets of the hospitals for each of the following:  
(1) trauma standby; (2) allowable trauma center costs for reimbursing the trauma director 
and trauma staff; (3) maintaining MIEMSS trauma protocols; (4) maintaining specialized 
trauma staff; (5) procuring specialized trauma equipment; and (6) providing trauma 
education and training. Finally, MHCC and HSCRC must report on any improvements 
made by trauma centers as a result of an increase in funding. 
 
Penalties for Alcohol- and/or Drug-related Driving Offenses 
 
Under the Transportation Article, a person may not drive or attempt to drive any vehicle 
while (1) under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; 
(2) impaired by alcohol; (3) impaired by a drug, any combination of drugs, or any 
combination of drugs and alcohol; or (4) impaired by a controlled dangerous substance 
(CDS). Additionally, a person may not commit any of these offenses while transporting a 
minor. In addition to or in lieu of imposing a fine, a term of imprisonment may be imposed. 
Penalties collected from these cases heard in the District Court accrue to the general fund, 
while penalties from cases heard in the circuit courts accrue to the county. 
 
Under the bill, the maximum fine for a first offense for the following violations is increased 
from $1,000 to $1,200, and the maximum fine for a second offense is increased from $2,000 
to $2,400:   
 
 
driving or attempting to drive while under the influence of alcohol; 
 
driving or attempting to drive while under the influence of alcohol per se; 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1439/ Page 6 
 
driving or attempting to drive while impaired by alcohol, while transporting a minor; 
 
driving or attempting to drive while so far impaired by any drug, any combination 
of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol that the person cannot 
drive a vehicle safely, while transporting a minor; and 
 
driving or attempting to drive while impaired by any CDS if not entitled to use the 
CDS under the laws of Maryland. 
 
The bill does not affect the terms of imprisonment for these offenses (a maximum of 
one year for a first offense and a maximum of two years for a second offense) or the ability 
to impose a fine and/or a term of imprisonment. However, when a fine is imposed, the bill 
requires that at least 20% of the fines collected for these violations be distributed to 
MTPSF. 
 
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund 
 
Under current law, MEMSOF consists of (1) annual vehicle registration surcharges; 
(2) all funds, including charges for accident scene transports and interhospital transfers of 
patients, generated by specified units of State government; and (3) revenue distributed from 
a $7.50 moving violation surcharge under § 7-301(f) of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article. Money in the fund must be used solely for (1) medically oriented functions of the 
Maryland State Police Aviation Command; (2) MIEMSS; (3) the R Adams Cowley Shock 
Trauma Center; (4) the Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute; (5) the provision of grants 
under the Senator Willam H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund; and (6) the 
Volunteer Company Assistance Fund. 
 
The bill does not modify the uses of MEMSOF. However, as noted above, the bill increases 
funding for MEMSOF. The annual vehicle surcharge increases by $23.00 to a total of 
$40.00. The surcharge is allocated as follows:  $6.50 (an increase of $4.00) to MTPSF; at 
least $9.00 to be allocated annually by the Governor to the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma 
Center; and the balance – at most $24.50 (an increase of up to $10.00) – to MEMSOF. 
 
Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund 
 
The Amoss Fund provides grants to local jurisdictions for the purchase of fire and rescue 
equipment and building rehabilitation. These grants are administered by the 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM). Beginning in fiscal 2026, the 
Governor must include an annual appropriation to the fund of at least $16.5 million. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1439/ Page 7 
State Fiscal Effect: 
 
Increase in the Vehicle Registration Surcharge 
 
The Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) advises that approximately 4.6 million vehicles 
are subject to the annual emergency medical services (EMS) surcharge. Under the bill, the 
annual surcharge increases by $23.00 (from $17.00 to $40.00). Thus, assuming the number 
of registrations subject to the annual EMS surcharge remains constant and that 
approximately one-half of owners who pay their registrations biennially (most of them do 
so, although some register on an annual basis) are evenly distributed across two years, 
special fund revenues increase by a total of $104.8 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025, which is distributed as shown in Exhibit 2. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Revenue Distribution of Increase in Annual Emergency Medical Services Surcharge 
Beginning in Fiscal 2025 
 
Share of 
Surcharge 
Increase 
Annual 
Additional 
Funding 
Total Increase 
$23.00 
$104,781,905 
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund 
4.00 
18,222,940 
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center 
9.00 
41,001,615 
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund 
10.00 
45,557,350 
 
Note:  The share for the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center reflects the lowest allocation required (at 
least $9.00), whereas the share for the Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund reflects the 
maximum allocation authorized – the balance after the Shock Trauma allocation. 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Under the bill’s distribution of the surcharge, special fund revenues for MEMSOF increase 
by, at most, $45.6 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025 (reflecting the entirety of the 
$10.00 portion of the surcharge which may be made available to MEMSOF). 
 
The bill requires the Governor to allocate at least $9.00 of the surcharge to the 
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center. Thus, revenues for Shock Trauma increase by  
at least $41.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. If more than that amount is 
allocated to Shock Trauma, MEMSOF revenues decrease correspondingly. In most recent 
years, the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center has received a set level of funding from 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1439/ Page 8 
MEMSOF (consistent with intent language in the Transportation Infrastructure Investment 
Act of 2013 (Chapter 429 of 2013)). This analysis assumes the direct allocation under the 
bill is supplementary to the budgeted amount of $3.7 million in fiscal 2025 and would 
continue to be supplementary in the out-years. (Generally, that funding has been set at 
$3.2 million, but in fiscal 2024 and 2025, additional funding has been provided, for a total 
of $3.7 million from MEMSOF each year. While not required, the Department of Budget 
and Management assumes that the higher level of funding ($3.7 million from MEMSOF) 
would continue in fiscal 2026 and subsequent years; under the bill, Shock Trauma remains 
an eligible use of funding from MEMSOF.) 
 
Also under the bill, the portion of the total surcharge reserved for MTPSF increases by 
$4.00 (from $2.50 to $6.50). Thus, MTPSF special fund revenues from this source increase 
by $18.2 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services advises that, given the higher surcharge paid with 
each registration, TTF expenditures increase due to fees associated with credit card 
processing. This analysis assumes 70% of transactions are subject to a 3% processing fee; 
accordingly, TTF expenditures increase by approximately $2.2 million annually. This fee 
is not passed on to the fund receiving the surcharge revenues but is covered by TTF. 
 
Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund – Mandated Funding 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2026, the bill requires the Governor to include in the annual budget  
$16.5 million for the Amoss Fund. Chapter 429 of 2013 expressed the intent of the 
General Assembly that the Amoss Fund receive varying amounts of funding from 
fiscal 2015 through 2017, with $15.0 million of intended funding in fiscal 2017. Since 
fiscal 2017, the fund has received an ongoing appropriation of $15.0 million annually from 
MEMSOF. This analysis assumes the required $16.5 million appropriation under the bill 
is entirely from MEMSOF; thus, MEMSOF expenditures increase by $1.5 million  
annually. 
 
Mandated Grants  
 
The bill requires that MHCC annually award up to $1.8 million in grants to Level I pediatric 
trauma centers from MTPSF. As $590,000 is already provided to one of the grantees, this 
bill assumes MTPSF expenditures increase by more than $1.2 million for this purpose, 
beginning in fiscal 2025, which reflects the maximum in awards under the bill. 
 
Increased Penalties for Alcohol- and/or Drug-related Driving Offenses 
 
The bill increases the maximum fine that may be imposed on conviction for a first or 
second offense of specified alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offenses by $200 and 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1439/ Page 9 
$400, respectively, and directs at least 20% of the fines collected for guilty dispositions to 
MTPSF. 
 
The Judiciary advises that, in fiscal 2022 and 2023, there were an average of 1,485 guilty 
dispositions for these violations for cases heard in the District Court and 1,362 guilty 
dispositions for cases heard in the circuit courts. Judges have discretion as to whether to 
impose a term of imprisonment, a fine, or both on conviction; moreover, if a fine is 
imposed, it may be for less than the maximum allowed. It is not known whether fines were 
imposed in those cases, much less whether the maximum fine was imposed. Nevertheless, 
assuming a stable number of guilty dispositions in future years, that all of them are 
first offenses (as the distribution between first and second offenses is not known), and that 
the new maximum fine of $1,200 is generally imposed, then at least $240 per guilty 
disposition would be distributed to MTPSF. For illustrative purposes only, under those 
assumptions, MTPSF revenues would increase by at least $683,280 in fiscal 2025 and the 
general fund would lose $40 for each case in the District Court – or $59,400 (or more if an 
amount greater than 20% is distributed to MTPSF). However, to the extent the maximum 
fine is not imposed, then revenues distributed to the general fund decrease by at least 20% 
of fine revenues collected, which could be a greater amount. For example, at an average 
fine of $750 for those cases heard in the District Court, $1.1 million would be collected; 
under current law, the general fund would receive that fine revenue, but under the bill, at 
least $222,750 from the cases heard in District Court would instead be distributed to 
MTPSF. 
 
The Judiciary advises that additional programming is necessary to implement changes to 
the maximum fine amounts at an estimated one-time cost of $18,543 in fiscal 2025 only.  
 
Alterations to Reimbursement Methodology  
 
The bill makes several changes to the methodology and parameters that must be used to 
determine reimbursements from MTPSF. For example, the bill specifies that certain on-call 
costs must be reimbursed at a rate of up to 60% (including up to 60% for Level III trauma 
centers) of the reasonable compensation equivalent hourly rate for the specialty, inflated to 
the current year, as specified. The bill also specifies that a Level II trauma center is eligible 
for a maximum of 26,280 hours of on-call per year and authorizes MHCC to increase the 
current percentage of reasonable compensation, change the number of allowable hours, or 
modify the percentage paid for on-call out of the maximum hours allowed, as specified. 
The impact of these changes on MTPSF special fund expenditures cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time and, thus, is not reflected in this analysis. Any additional workload 
on MHCC and HSCRC as a result of the bill can be handled within existing budgeted 
resources.  
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1439/ Page 10 
Local Revenues:   
 
Fine Revenues 
 
The bill increases the maximum fine that may be imposed for a first or second offense of 
specified alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offenses by $200 and $400, respectively. The 
Judiciary advises that, in fiscal 2022 and 2023, there were an average of 1,362 guilty 
dispositions for cases heard in the circuit courts. As noted above, judges have discretion as 
to whether to impose a term of imprisonment, a fine, or both on conviction; moreover, if a 
fine is imposed, it may be less than the maximum allowed. It is not known whether fines 
were imposed in those cases, much less whether the maximum fine was imposed. 
Nevertheless, assuming a stable number of guilty dispositions in future years, that all of 
them are first offenses (as the distribution between first and second offenses is not known), 
and that the new maximum fine of $1,200 is generally imposed, then at least $240 per 
guilty disposition would be distributed to MTPSF. Local revenues from the fines would 
decrease minimally – by $40 for each such case, or $54,480 (or more if an amount greater 
than 20% is distributed to MTPSF). However, to the extent the maximum fine is not 
imposed, then local revenues decrease by at least 20% of fine revenues collected, which 
could be a greater amount. For example, at an average fine of $750 for cases heard in the 
circuit courts, $1.0 million would be collected; under current law, all of that revenue would 
accrue to the counties in which the cases were heard, but under the bill, at least $204,300 
would instead be distributed to MTPSF.  
 
Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund – Mandated Funding 
 
The Amoss Fund provides funding for counties and Baltimore City, distributed by MDEM, 
to purchase fire and rescue equipment and for capital building improvements. Distributions 
are made according to each county’s percentage of total property tax accounts. Qualified 
municipalities in a county receive a percentage of the funds received by a county equal to 
one-half of the proportion that the municipality’s expenditures bear to the county’s 
expenditures. All counties receive a minimum 2% of the annual appropriation in addition 
to the amounts distributed to qualified municipalities. Thus, under the bill, counties and 
Baltimore City benefit from the additional funding according to current distribution 
requirements. For example, based on current maintenance of effort requirements and other 
related funding provisions, the estimated increase due to the additional $1.5 million in 
funding through the Amoss Fund varies from $197,452 for Montgomery County to $10,860 
for Calvert County beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Additional Comments:  Senate Bill 362 of 2024 (the Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act (BRFA) of 2024) and Senate Bill 1092 of 2024 contain provisions identical to those in 
this bill. However, the BRFA encompasses additional provisions related to fees paid at 
vehicle registration, including a requirement for MVA to allow vehicle owners to pay 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1439/ Page 11 
registration fees, as specified in Title 13, Subtitle 9 of the Transportation Article, in 
installments throughout the registration period (which for most vehicle owners is for 
two years, with both years of annual fees paid biennially), as determined by MVA. As the 
surcharges under this bill are established in the same subtitle as the other fees paid at 
registration, they may be construed as also being eligible for payment through an 
installment plan – but under the BRFA only. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb, 
Eric F. Pierce, and Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11