START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1440 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1440 
(Howard County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Howard County Public Schools - Differences in Capital Budget Proposals - 
Report  
Ho. Co. 16-24 
 
 
This bill requires the Howard County Board of Education, if it approves a capital budget 
that is different from the proposed capital budget submitted by the Howard County 
Superintendent of Schools, to publish a report on the Howard County Public Schools’ 
(HCPS) website within 30 days that includes (1) the differences between the approved and 
proposed capital budgets and (2) the detailed rationale for each difference. Similarly, if the 
superintendent of HCPS proposes a capital improvement plan (CIP) that differs from the 
CIP approved by the board in the immediately preceding year, the superintendent must 
publish a report on the HCPS website within 30 days that includes (1) the differences 
between the CIP approved in the prior year and the proposed CIP and (2) the detailed 
rational for each difference. Any report made by the board or superintendent under the bill 
must also be submitted to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The Howard County Board of Education and Superintendent of Schools can 
publish the required reports using existing resources. Local revenues are not affected.        
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1440/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Interagency Commission on School Construction (IAC) manages State 
review and approval of local school construction projects. Each year, local school systems 
develop and submit to IAC a facilities master plan that includes an analysis of future school 
facility needs based on the current condition of school buildings and projected enrollment. 
The master plan must be approved by the local school board. Subsequently, each local 
school system submits a CIP to IAC that includes projects for which it seeks planning 
and/or funding approval for the upcoming fiscal year, which may include projects that the 
local school system has forward funded. In addition to approval from the local school 
board, the request for the upcoming fiscal year must be approved by the county’s governing 
body. Typically, the submission letter to IAC contains signatures of both the school board 
president and either the county executive and county council president or chair of the board 
of county commissioners. 
 
Based on its assessment of the relative merit of all the project proposals it receives, and 
subject to the projected level of school construction funds available, IAC determines which 
projects to fund through the Public School Construction Program. By December 31 of each 
year, IAC must approve projects comprising 75% of the preliminary school construction 
allocation projected to be available by the Governor for the upcoming fiscal year. Local 
school systems may appeal these preliminary decisions by IAC. By March 1 of each year, 
IAC must recommend to the General Assembly projects comprising 90% of the allocation 
for school construction submitted in the Governor’s capital budget. Following the 
legislative session, IAC approves projects comprising the remaining school construction 
funds included in the enacted capital budget, no earlier than May 1. The final allocations 
are not subject to appeal. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1132 (Howard County Senators) - Rules. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard County; Interagency Commission on School 
Construction; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1440/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3