START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 909

Chapter 909

(House Bill 1476)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers,
Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists – Appointment of
Members

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to appoint licensed audiologist members to the
State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers,
Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists from a list submitted by a
certain professional organization rather than by the Board; and generally relating to
the appointment of members to the State Board of Examiners for Audiologists,
Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech–Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 2–202(a)(1) and (2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 2–202(a)(5)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

2–202.

(a) (1) The Board consists of 15 members.

(2) Of the 15 Board members:

(i) 3 shall be licensed audiologists who have at least 5 years’ paid
work experience in audiology and are currently practicing audiology in the State;

(5) (i) Subject to subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, the Governor
shall appoint the audiologist members, with the advice of the Secretary, from a list
submitted to the Secretary and the Governor by the [Board] MARYLAND ACADEMY OF

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 909 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

AUDIOLOGY.

(ii) The number of names on the list shall be at least 3 times the
number of vacancies.

(iii) For each audiologist vacancy, the Board shall notify all licensed
audiologists in the State of the vacancy to solicit nominations to fill the vacancy.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2