START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1451 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1451 
(Delegate Embry) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Arts Incubator Workgroup - Established 
 
   
This bill establishes the Arts Incubator Workgroup to study how arts and cultural 
institutions can support local artists. The Maryland State Arts Council (MSAC) must 
provide staff for the workgroup. Workgroup members may not receive compensation but 
are entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. The workgroup must submit a 
preliminary report on its findings, as specified, and a final report on its recommendations 
to the Governor and the General Assembly by January 1, 2025, and October 1, 2025, 
respectively. The recommendations in the final report must include any necessary budget, 
facilities, or in-kind services that are needed or could be used to support local artists. The 
bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates December 31, 2025.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. MSAC can staff the 
workgroup with existing budgeted resources.        
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MSAC is a 17-member State agency established in 1967. The council’s 
mission is to encourage and invest in the advancement of the arts for the people of the 
State, which the council accomplishes largely through grants to arts organizations and local 
arts agencies. The council also makes grants to enhance the availability of artists in public 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1451/ Page 2 
schools, further the creative work of individual artists, and support the preservation of folk 
and traditional arts.  
 
Chapters 394 and 395 of 2021 established the Maryland Arts Capital Grant Program, 
administered by MSAC, with a mandated annual appropriation of $3.0 million from 
fiscal 2024 through 2029. The program provides grants to certain arts organizations that 
have operating budgets of less than $3.0 million. A grant may be awarded for the 
acquisition of, expansion of, renovation of, or major repairs to a facility or other 
infrastructure that is operated by an eligible recipient.   
 
Several tax benefits are also available in arts and entertainment districts, which are 
designated by the Department of Commerce at the request of local governments, subject to 
specified requirements:  
 
 
qualifying residing artists (a defined term) may claim a subtraction modification on 
State and local income taxes for the income derived within any district from the 
publication, production, or sale of artistic work created, written, composed, or 
executed by the qualifying artist;  
 
a county or municipality may grant, by law, a property tax credit for up to 10 years 
against the property tax imposed on a manufacturing, commercial, or industrial 
building that is located in an arts and entertainment district and is wholly or partially 
renovated to be capable for use by a qualifying artist or an arts and entertainment 
enterprise; and  
 
a county or municipality may exempt from the admissions and amusement tax gross 
receipts from any admissions or amusement charge levied by an arts and 
entertainment enterprise or qualified residing artist in an arts and entertainment 
district.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 764 (Senators Hayes and Kagan) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1451/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3