START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 992

Chapter 992

(House Bill 1450)

AN ACT concerning

Howard County Task Force to Study Revenue Options for School Capital Needs

Ho. Co. 18–24

FOR the purpose of establishing the Howard County Task Force to Study Revenue Options
for School Capital Needs to identify capital needs of Howard County Public Schools
and study options for closing any identified funding gaps; requiring the Howard
County Council to submit a resolution to the Howard County Delegation if the
Howard County Council determines a recommendation from the Task Force should
be enacted but the Council lacks the authority to enact the recommendation; and
generally relating to a Howard County Task Force to Study Revenue Options for
School Capital Needs.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Howard County Task Force to Study Revenue Options for School
Capital Needs.

(b) The Task Force consists of the following members:

(1) one member of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the Chair of the
Howard County Senate Delegation;

(2) one member of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Chair of the
Howard County House Delegation;

(3) the Howard County Executive, or the County Executive’s designee;

(4) two members of the Howard County Council, appointed by the Howard
County Council;

(5) two members of the Howard County Board of Education, appointed by
the Howard County Board of Education;

(6) the Howard County Public School System Superintendent, or the
Superintendent’s designee;

(7) one member of the Howard County PTA Council, appointed by the
Council;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 992 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(8) two residents of Howard County, appointed by the Howard County
Council;

(9) one voting member of the Howard County Spending Affordability
Advisory Committee, appointed by the Howard County Executive;

(10) one voting member of the Howard County Spending Affordability
Advisory Committee, appointed by the Howard County Council;

(11) the Howard County Director of Finance, or the Director’s designee;

(12) the Howard County Budget Director, or the Director’s designee;

(13) the Chair of the Howard County Agricultural Preservation Board, or
the Chair’s designee;

(14) the President of the Howard County Farm Bureau, or the President’s
designee;

(15) the Chief of the Howard County Department of Fire and Rescue
Services, or the Chief’s designee;

(16) the President of IAFF 2000, or the President’s designee;

(17) the Director of the Howard County Department of Housing and
Community Development, or the Director’s designee;

(18) the Chair of the Howard County Housing and Community
Development Board, or the Chair’s designee;

(19) the Director of the Howard County Department of Recreation and
Parks, or the Director’s designee; and

(20) the Chair of the Howard County Recreation and Parks Advisory Board,
or the Chair’s designee.

(c) The County Executive shall designate the chair of the Task Force.

(d) The County Executive shall provide staff for the Task Force.

(e) A member of the Task Force may not receive compensation as a member of the
Task Force.

(f) In consultation with Howard County Public Schools, the Howard County
Department of Finance, and the Howard County Budget Office, the Task Force shall:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 992

(1) identify the capital needs, including deferred maintenance, of Howard
County Public Schools through 2035;

(2) determine the projected funding expected to be allocated to Howard
County Public Schools capital projects through 2035;

(3) identify the anticipated funding gaps for Howard County Public Schools
capital projections under current revenue projections through 2035; and

(4) study options for closing any identified funding gaps for Howard County
Public Schools capital projects under current revenue projections through 2035, including:

(i) allocating a higher percentage of revenue from the transfer tax
to Howard County Public Schools capital projects;

(ii) enacting a commercial excise tax;

(iii) exercising existing authority the County may use to generate
additional revenue; and

(iv) ~~studying~~ any other potential revenue sources the Task Force
determines appropriate.

(g) On or before ~~December~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025~~ October 31, 2024, the Task Force shall report
its findings and recommendations to:

(1) the Howard County Executive;

(2) the Howard County Council; and

(3) the Howard County members of the House of Delegates and the Senate
in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article.

(h) If the Howard County Council determines a recommendation included in the
report submitted under subsection (g) of this section should be enacted but the Council or
County lack the authority to enact the recommendation, the Howard County Council shall
submit a resolution requesting the Howard County Delegation to the General Assembly
authorize the Howard County Council to enact the specified recommendation.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and 1 month and, at the end of June
30, 2025, this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be
abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3