START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1472 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1472 
(Delegate D. Jones, et al.) 
Health and Government Operations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Professional and Volunteer Firefighter Innovative Cancer Screening 
Technologies Program - Funding 
 
 
This bill repeals the current $100,000 annual mandated appropriation for the Professional 
and Volunteer Firefighter Innovative Cancer Screening Technologies Program. Instead, 
beginning in fiscal 2025, the bill authorizes the Governor to include at least $500,000 in 
the annual budget for the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming discretionary funding is provided in FY 2025 and subsequent 
years, general fund expenditures increase by $400,000 beginning in FY 2025, as discussed 
below. The FY 2025 budget includes $400,000 for the program ($100,000 under the 
existing mandated appropriation and an additional $300,000 contingent upon the 
enactment of this bill or its cross file). Revenues are not affected. This bill eliminates a 
mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2025.   
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
400,000 
400,000 
400,000 
400,000 
400,000 
Net Effect 
($400,000) 
($400,000) 
($400,000) 
($400,000) 
($400,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase to the extent that (1) more funding 
is available for the program and (2) a local fire department applies for and receives a grant 
from the program. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1472/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 219 of 2019 established the program, administered by the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH), to provide grants to local fire departments and 
volunteer fire companies and departments to procure innovative cancer screening tests that 
are not otherwise conducted during routine physical examinations or not covered by 
insurance. The goal of the program is to reduce cancer mortality among firefighters while 
advancing the adoption of novel technologies that may also benefit the health of 
Marylanders and the economy of the State. 
 
Each year, MDH must issue a request for applications from local fire departments and 
volunteer fire companies or departments (the only entities eligible to apply for grants). The 
county where the department or company is located must assist the department or company 
with filing applications. Several criteria must be included in an application, including the 
number of firefighters proposed to be screened and a description of each test proposed. 
MDH must develop a weighting formula to rate each application and must prioritize 
applicants based on the quality of the application and the degree to which the proposed 
tests meet specified criteria. If MDH receives applications for grants totaling more than the 
amount of funds available for the program, MDH must award the grants on a pro rata basis.  
 
The program’s appropriations and expenditures (including funds received as grants) are 
subject to audit by the Office of Legislative Audits. By December 1 each year, MDH must 
submit a report to specified committees of the General Assembly concerning the program’s 
activities.  
 
State Expenditures:  Although discretionary, the bill specifies an intended funding level 
of at least $500,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025, a $400,000 increase over the 
$100,000 mandated funding repealed under the bill. Thus, this analysis assumes that the 
full amount of discretionary funding is provided and MDH general fund expenditures 
increase by $400,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2025 to issue grants. Otherwise, funding 
may increase to a lesser extent or even decrease in the absence of a mandated appropriation.  
 
The fiscal 2025 budget includes a total of $400,000 for the program (1) $100,000 under 
the current mandated appropriation (that is repealed under the bill) and (2) an additional 
$300,000 contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file).  
 
Additional Comments:  While MDH is required to annually report on the program’s 
activities, including providing information on grants awarded, a report has yet to be 
submitted since the program was established. MDH advises that, to date, the program has 
not issued any grants; however, in January 2024, the program did receive applications for 
grants that are currently under review. The program anticipates issuing awards to 
successful applicants in fiscal 2024. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1472/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 578 (Senator Guzzone, et al.) - Budget and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 17, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3