START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  HB 1402 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1402 
(Montgomery County Delegation) 
Appropriations 
Finance 
 
Montgomery County – State’s Attorney’s Office Personnel – Application of 
County Personnel Laws and Collective Bargaining MC 12–24 
 
 
This bill generally establishes the right of nonprobationary employees of the 
Montgomery County State’s Attorney’s Office (SAO), including nonsupervisory assistant 
State’s Attorneys, to organize and bargain collectively in accordance with specified 
provisions of the county code with regard to compensation, pension (for active employees), 
fringe benefits, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment, including 
performance evaluation procedures. The bill further (1) specifies that employees of the 
Montgomery County SAO are subject to the county’s merit system law and personnel 
regulations and may be excluded from those provisions only to the extent that such 
applicability is made the subject of collective bargaining and (2) establishes additional 
requirements related to the collective bargaining process. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Montgomery County expenditures increase to facilitate the collective 
bargaining authorized in the bill and may increase, potentially significantly, to the extent 
personnel costs increase as a result of a bargained agreement. Revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1402/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill expresses the intent of the General Assembly to (1) protect the 
right of the Montgomery County Executive and the State’s Attorney to bargain; 
(2) preserve a single master collective bargaining agreement to the extent that a 
single exclusive bargaining representative represents multiple units of employees covered 
under the county’s collective bargaining law; and (3) streamline and facilitate the collective 
bargaining process, as specified. 
 
The County Executive is considered the employer of nonprobationary employees of SAO, 
including nonsupervisory assistant State’s Attorneys, only for the purpose of collective 
bargaining for hours and compensation (including pension and fringe benefits). The 
State’s Attorney is considered the employer for all other purposes, including those related 
to collective bargaining for all other terms and conditions of employment. 
 
If a single exclusive representative represents both county government employees and 
employees of SAO, the terms and conditions of employment of any current and subsequent 
collective bargaining agreement between the county government and the representative are 
applicable to SAO employees, unless different terms and conditions are negotiated by the 
State’s Attorney, as specified. If a single exclusive bargaining representative represents 
both county government employees and SAO employees, the State’s Attorney must 
bargain only over particular matters applicable to SAO employees not related to 
compensation, pension, fringe benefits, and hours. 
 
In case of a disagreement between the State’s Attorney and the exclusive bargaining 
representative regarding whether a matter applies to SAO employees, the dispute must be 
resolved by the Labor Relations Administrator appointed under the Montgomery County 
Code, as specified. If the parties are unable to reach agreement during negotiations, they 
must follow the procedures for declaring an impasse and submitting a dispute to binding 
arbitration in accordance with county code. 
 
There must be only one collective bargaining agreement covering both county government 
employees and employees of SAO. Any agreements reached under the bill’s provisions 
must be included in an appendix or addendum to the agreement between the county 
government and the exclusive bargaining representative. Further, any required funding for 
the terms of an agreement negotiated by the State’s Attorney is subject to the budget and 
fiscal policies of the county. 
 
Except as provided in the county merit system law and personnel regulations, the 
provisions of the bill (including any agreement made in accordance with its provisions), 
may not impair the right and responsibility of the State’s Attorney to perform various 
functions, as specified, generally related to the operations of SAO. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1402/ Page 3 
If contracting out work will result in the displacement of employees, the State’s Attorney 
may not enter into the contract unless prior written notice of at least 90 days (unless 
otherwise agreed) has been given to the exclusive bargaining representative. Additionally, 
the contract must be consistent with any applicable provisions of the Montgomery County 
Code. Further, any displacement of bargaining unit members must adhere to any applicable 
provisions in the county code and any applicable collective bargaining agreement. Any 
action to suspend, discharge, or otherwise discipline a civilian employee may be subject to 
the grievance procedure established in the collective bargaining agreement, subject to 
specified provisions in the Montgomery County Charter. 
 
Current Law:  There is no explicit provision in statute in regard to collective bargaining 
for employees of the Montgomery County SAO. 
 
Subject to approval by the County Council, the Montgomery County State’s Attorney is 
entitled to a reasonable expense allowance for the operation of the office and performance 
of the duties of the State’s Attorney. Generally, the State’s Attorney may appoint the 
number of staff, as specified, that the County Council approves; the employees are subject 
to the exclusive control of the State’s Attorney and entitled to the same benefits as county 
employees under the merit system. 
 
In general, Chapter 33, Article VII of the Montgomery County Code includes various 
provisions in regard to collective bargaining, including those that (1) declare it in the public 
interest for employees to have the opportunity to bargain collectively over wages, hours, 
and other terms and conditions of employment, as specified; (2) require the appointment 
of a Labor Relations Administrator to effectively administer specified provisions of the 
relevant county code in regard to the collective bargaining process; (3) set forth procedures 
for the selection, certification, and decertification of an employee organization as the 
representative of a unit for collective bargaining; and (4) specify certain subject matters 
over which an employer and certified representative must bargain collectively. Chapter 33, 
Article VII of the Montgomery County Code also includes explicit provisions regarding 
impasse and binding arbitration procedures.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Montgomery County advises the bill increases the expenditures of 
SAO. Initially, costs are anticipated for bargaining unit employees who are involved in the 
bargaining process. According to the county, additional positions may be required within 
SAO to ensure that caseloads are maintained as employees are involved in the collective 
bargaining process. Furthermore, county personnel costs increase, potentially significantly, 
to the extent salaries and benefits under a negotiated agreement are higher than they would 
have otherwise been. The magnitude of any such impact cannot be reliably predicted in 
advance, and any funding required for the terms of an agreement negotiated by the State’s 
Attorney under the bill’s provisions is subject to the budget and fiscal policies of the 
county. However, for illustrative purposes only, the county advises that for every 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1402/ Page 4 
1% increase in personnel costs for nonsenior positions within SAO, county expenditures 
increase by $183,000 per year. According to the county, a negotiated agreement that 
included provisions for traditional overtime (which SAO positions do not currently earn), 
would increase expenditures by over $2.0 million annually. 
 
The Montgomery County Department of Finance and Office of Labor Relations may 
experience additional operational and/or fiscal impacts, potentially including minimal 
overtime costs and/or additional personnel resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - June 11, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4