START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1476 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1476 
(Delegate Kerr) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
State Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Hearing Aid Dispensers, Speech-
Language Pathologists, and Music Therapists - Appointment of Members 
 
 
This bill specifies that the Governor must appoint the audiologist members of the State 
Board of Examiners for Audiologists, Speech-Language Pathologists, and Music 
Therapists, with the advice of the Secretary of Health, from a list submitted by the 
Maryland Academy of Audiology rather than the board. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and does not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed by the board to provide hearing 
aid services, practice audiology, practice speech-language pathology, or practice music 
therapy in Maryland. 
 
The board comprises 15 members:  (1) 3 licensed audiologists; (2) 3 licensed 
speech-language pathologists; (3) 2 physicians; (4) 2 consumer members; (5) 3 licensed 
hearing aid dispensers; and (6) 2 licensed music therapists. Professional members are 
appointed by the Governor, with the advice of the Secretary; consumer members are 
appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Secretary and the advice and consent of 
the Senate. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1476/ Page 2 
Several professional associations currently submit nominations for board members, 
including the Maryland Society of Otolaryngology, the Hearing Society of Maryland, 
Washington, DC, and Delaware, and the Maryland Association for Music Therapy. The 
board itself submits nominations for speech-language pathologist and audiologist members 
of the board. 
 
The number of names on each list submitted to the Governor and Secretary of Health for 
the professional members of the board must be three times the number of vacancies. For 
professional members, the board must notify the relevant licensed professionals of the 
vacancy as a means of soliciting nominations. For consumer members, the board must 
notify organizations representing patients or family members of patients served by 
individuals licensed by the board. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 714 (Senators Kramer and Hershey) - Finance. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2