START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1426 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
House Bill 1426 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee) 
Ways and Means and Appropriations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Education - Blueprint for Maryland's Future - Alterations 
 
 
This bill makes alterations to numerous education-related programs in the State including 
prekindergarten, early childhood, professional development, and dual enrollment 
programs. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount, beginning 
as early as FY 2024 to provide funds to certain eligible nonclassroom teachers, as defined 
by the bill. Under one set of estimates, these costs may total less than $300,000 annually. 
Special fund expenditures are not directly affected by the extension of the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Grant programs, but cause indeterminate secondary effects on State funding, as 
discussed below. This bill increases a mandated appropriation. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school system expenditures increase by approximately $140,000 as 
early as FY 2024 to provide funds to certain eligible nonclassroom teachers. If 
dual enrollment courses are limited, as specified, local school system expenditures may 
decrease. Potential significant impact on State funding and local effort requirements due to 
the extension of the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant, as explained below. This bill may 
impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1426/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Geographic Cost of Education Index 
 
The bill repeals the requirements that the Geographic Cost of Education Index (GCEI), a 
funding mechanism for a program that was repealed by Chapter 36 of 2021, be updated 
every three years and that the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) take 
various actions with respect to GCEI. 
 
Dual Enrollment and the Post-college and Career Ready Pathway 
 
To phase in expansion of dual enrollment to maximize the number of students who can 
earn the maximum number of dual enrollment credits consistent with the phased increases 
in school funding, the State Board of Education (SBE) and the Accountability and 
Implementation Board (AIB) ), in consultation with each local education agency, may, for 
fiscal 2025 through 2027, limit the number and types of courses that a student dually 
enrolled at a public high school and at an institution of higher education may enroll in 
during the school year at the institution of higher education as part of the post-college and 
career ready (CCR) pathway. 
 
National Board Certification Payments for Nonclassroom Teachers 
 
Nonclassroom teachers, including administrators, assistant principals, instructional 
specialists, and principals, who earn National Board Certification (NBC) must receive from 
the State an amount equal to the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards 
(NBPTS) fees associated with the initial completion and renewal of NBC; payments, which 
include a one-third county match, are received for no more than one retake of each 
assessment on the NBPTS. Nonclassroom teachers who do not complete all the 
requirements for assessment by the NBPTS must reimburse the State for the full amount 
of State funds received. The State, in turn, must reimburse the county for its 
one-third match. 
 
Specifications and Approval of Career Ladder Minimum Classroom Time for Educators 
 
SBE, instead of AIB under current law, approves the eight-year phase-in of the minimum 
percentage of worktime that teachers funded through the career ladder program must be 
devoted to classroom teaching time, as specified by each local board in its career ladder. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1426/ Page 3 
Judy Centers and Patty Centers  
 
Funds allocated to the Judith P. Hoyer Early Childhood Education Enhancement Program 
may be used for planning and development of a Judy Center in the first year of a 
multi-year funding award. A Patty Center may receive multi-year funding; in this case, 
funding may be used for planning and development in the first year of funding of the center. 
 
Prekindergarten and Kindergarten Readiness Assessment Provisions 
 
Before being approved for a Prekindergarten Expansion Grant, a qualified prekindergarten 
provider must certify, among other things, that they will provide in each classroom at least 
one teacher and at least one teacher’s aide who meet specified high staff qualifications. The 
bill also extends the fiscal year by which funds appropriated to the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Grant Program must be consolidated into the publicly funded 
full-day prekindergarten program by four fiscal years, from fiscal 2026 to 2030. To that 
end, the Governor must, through fiscal 2029, annually appropriate to the fund an amount 
that is at least equal to the total amount of all funds received by the Expansion Grant 
Program in the prior fiscal year. 
 
For the 2024-2025 school year only, administration of the Kindergarten Readiness 
Assessment to all kindergartners may be completed after October 10, and the results may 
be made available more than 45 days after the administration has been completed. Each 
local department of social services or a local health department must provide to each local 
school system the name and contact information for each parent provided notice that their 
child may be eligible for publicly funded prekindergarten programs.  
 
Career and Technical Education Committee Goals and Report  
 
The date by which the Career and Technical Education (CTE) Committee must establish 
statewide goals for certain student outcomes is altered from December 1, 2022, to 
June 1, 2024. The date by which annual reports by the CTE Committee to the 
General Assembly and the AIB on progress toward attaining those goals must commence 
is altered from December 1, 2022, to December 1, 2024. The bill also clarifies that 
completion of the high school level of a registered apprenticeship is an industry-recognized 
occupational credential. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Geographic Cost of Education Index/Comparable Wage Index 
 
Chapter 36 repealed the GCEI funding after fiscal 2023 and established Comparable Wage 
Index (CWI) funding beginning in fiscal 2024 and increases both State and local funding 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1426/ Page 4 
for public schools in 11 counties. CWI is calculated by measuring variation in the wages 
of workers similar to teachers and examining costs outside of a school district’s control, 
and unlike the GCEI, isolates only wage costs. 
 
Post-college and Career Ready Pathways 
 
Beginning with the 2023-2024 school year, each local board of education must provide all 
students who meet the CCR standard with access to specific post-CCR pathways at no cost 
(including fees) to them or their parents. These pathways include (1) a competitive entry 
college preparatory program chosen by the local board of education, as specified; 
(2) a program that allows a student, through an early college program or dual enrollment 
at a student’s high school and an institution of higher education to earn an associate degree 
or at least 60 credits toward a bachelor’s degree; and (3) a robust set of career and 
technology education programs, as specified, that allow a student to complete specified 
credentials or apprenticeships. 
 
A public high school must provide access to these programs directly or through another 
public school in the county. A student meeting the CCR standard must enroll in at least 
one post-CCR pathway, with counseling and advising services offered to help each student 
choose at least one pathway aligning with the student’s goals. SBE must adopt regulations 
that guarantee, to the extent practicable, statewide uniformity in the quality of the 
post-CCR pathways, meet the specified CCR pathway requirements, and grant high school 
graduation credit for the CCR pathway programs. 
 
College and Career Ready Funding 
 
In addition to funding for non-CCR and CCR students provided within the foundation 
formula, funding is provided for students who have met the CCR standard adopted by SBE. 
Per pupil funding, covered by both State and local shares, begins at $517 in fiscal 2022 and 
is inflation adjusted each subsequent year. Post-CCR funding is based on the number of 
students in grades 9 through 12 who have met the post-CCR standard. Specifically, the 
fiscal 2025 funding is $595 for each student in grades 9 through 12 meeting the interim 
CCR standard in spring 2023. For fiscal 2025, this per pupil funding is providing local 
school systems with an estimated total of $11.6 million in State funds and $11.6 million in 
local funding to facilitate provision of post-CCR pathways to students through the 
Blueprint funding formula. Fiscal 2026 funding will be $625 for each student in 
grades 9 through 12 meeting the CCR standard, adopted January 2024, in spring 2024. 
 
Each fiscal year, the State must distribute the State share of the CCR program amount to 
each local board of education. The local board of education must distribute to each school 
the minimum school funding amount for CCR, which is 75% of the per-pupil amount. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1426/ Page 5 
Dual Enrollment 
 
A public institution of higher education may not charge tuition to a dually enrolled student. 
A public school system must pay 75% of the cost of tuition for a public institution of higher 
education for its students. If there is an agreement before July 1, 2020, between a 
public school and a public institution of higher education in which the public institution 
charges less than 75% of tuition to a dually enrolled student, the local board must pay the 
cost of tuition under the existing agreement. The Blueprint for Maryland’s 
Future – Revisions (Chapter 55 of 2021) expanded dual enrollment to include noncredit 
courses leading to an industry-recognized certificate or license. 
 
National Board Certification Payments 
 
A certified public school employee who is primarily responsible and accountable for 
teaching the students in the class (classroom teacher) who earns an NBC must receive from 
the State an amount equal to the NBPTS fees associated with the initial completion and 
renewal of an NBC; payments, which include a one-third county match, are received for 
no more than one retake of each assessment on the NBPTS. Classroom teachers who do 
not complete all the requirements for assessment by the NBPTS must reimburse the State 
for the full amount of State funds received. The State, in turn, must reimburse the county 
for its one-third match. 
 
Specifications and Approval of Career Ladder Minimum Classroom Time for Teachers 
 
By July 1, 2024, each local board must implement a specified career ladder. AIB approves 
the eight-year phase-in of the minimum percentage of worktime that teachers funded 
through the career ladder program must be devoted to classroom teaching time, as specified 
by each local board in its career ladder. SBE under current law, specifies how a licensed 
principal, distinguished principal, assistant principal, lead teacher, distinguished teacher, 
and professor distinguished teachers may meet classroom time percentages under the career 
ladder. 
 
Judy Centers and Patty Centers 
 
Judy Centers provide early childhood education programs and comprehensive support 
services for children, from birth through kindergarten, and their families who reside in 
specific low-income school districts. Under Chapter 36, funding is provided for 
9 additional Judy Centers annually in each of fiscal 2021 through 2025, and for 
18 additional centers annually in fiscal 2026 through 2030, culminating in 135 new 
Judy Centers by fiscal 2030. The State must prioritize increasing the number of 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1426/ Page 6 
Judy Centers in Title I communities. MSDE may distribute a Judy Center Grant to a local 
board of education if the local board submits a specified application. 
 
Family Support Centers provide parents and their children with a hospitable and 
constructive environment and services that (1) improve parenting skills; (2) develop the 
family as a functioning unit; and (3) promote the growth and development of their children. 
Chapter 36 provides for 30 additional centers, including $330,000 for each additional 
center, and designates the centers (including existing centers) as Patty Centers, after 
Patricia H. Kirwan. 
 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grants Program and Publicly Funded Prekindergarten  
 
The Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program, administered by MSDE, is intended to 
broaden the availability of high-quality prekindergarten and school readiness services 
throughout the State for children and their families in coordination with the expansion of 
publicly funded full-day prekindergarten under the Blueprint. Before approving qualified 
providers for prekindergarten services to receive a grant, a qualified provider must certify 
to MSDE that for each classroom funded by Prekindergarten Expansion Grants the 
provider will meet specified conditions. The Governor must annually appropriate to the 
Prekindergarten Expansion Fund an amount that is at least equal to the total amount of all 
funds received by the program in the prior fiscal year. Beginning in fiscal 2026, funds 
appropriated to the Prekindergarten Expansion Fund must be consolidated into the publicly 
funded full-day prekindergarten program. 
 
A local department of social services or a local health department must notify a parent that 
their child may be eligible for publicly funded prekindergarten programs if the parent 
(1) applied for economic services with the local department of social services or the local 
health department and (2) has a child who will be three or four years old by September 1 
of the next academic year. By December 1 of each year, each local department of social 
services and each local health department must report to the General Assembly on the 
number of parents who were given a notification and subsequently enrolled their child in a 
publicly funded prekindergarten program. 
 
Beginning in the 2027-2028 school year, under the full-day prekindergarten program, 
eligible prekindergarten providers must meet high staff qualification, including 
(1) teachers who, at a minimum, hold (a) State certification for teaching in early childhood 
education or (b) a bachelor’s degree in any field and are pursuing residency through the 
Maryland Approved Alternative Preparation Program and (2) teaching assistants who have 
at least (a) a Child Development Associate certificate or (b) an associate’s degree. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1426/ Page 7 
Kindergarten Readiness Assessment  
 
A racially and culturally unbiased statewide kindergarten assessment that is administered 
with the purpose of measuring school readiness to be used for diagnostic purposes, 
curriculum development, and early detection of learning challenges must annually be given 
to all incoming kindergarten students in the State. The assessment must be completed by 
October 10 with the aggregate results returned within 45 days after administration of the 
assessment. A local department of social services or a local health department must notify 
a parent that their child may be eligible for publicly funded prekindergarten programs if 
the parent (1) applied for economic services with the local department of social services or 
the local health department and (2) has a child who will be three or four years old by 
September 1 of the next academic year. 
 
Career and Technical Education Committee Goals and Report 
 
By December 1, 2022, the CTE Committee must establish, for each school year between 
the 2023-2024 school year and the 2030-2031 school year, inclusive, statewide goals that 
reach 45% by the 2030-2031 school year, for the percentage of high school students who, 
prior to graduation, complete the high school level of a registered apprenticeship or an 
industry-recognized occupational credential. To the extent practicable, the CTE Committee 
must ensure that the largest number of students achieve a complete high school level of a 
registered apprenticeship program approved by the Division of Workforce Development 
and Adult Learning within the Maryland Department of Labor. By December 1 each year, 
beginning in 2022, the CTE Committee must report to the Governor, the 
General Assembly, and AIB on the progress, by high school, toward attaining the goals 
established by the CTE Committee. 
 
Independent Evaluation, Accountability and Implementation Board Report, and Funding 
Implications  
 
In addition to its own assessments and tracking of progress, AIB must as soon as practicable 
contract with a public or private entity to conduct an independent evaluation of the State’s 
progress in implementing the Blueprint and achieving expected outcomes during the 
implementation period. The entity must report its results to AIB by October 1, 2024, and 
October 1, 2030. By December 1, 2024, AIB must, using the first independent evaluation 
and its own judgment, report to the Governor and the General Assembly on whether the 
Blueprint is being implemented as intended and achieving the expected outcomes. 
 
If AIB does not report that the Blueprint is being implemented as intended and is achieving 
expected outcomes, then:   
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1426/ Page 8 
 
per pupil increases in major education aid, and any additional funding increases 
required under the Blueprint, for fiscal 2026 and each year thereafter must be limited 
to the specified rate of inflation; 
 
local school systems are not required to meet the additional requirements of the 
Blueprint that begin in fiscal year 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, but must 
continue to fund the requirements of the Blueprint prior to fiscal 2026; and 
 
it is the intent of the General Assembly to take immediate action to adjust the 
formula and policies under the Blueprint in order to fulfill its commitment to provide 
the resources, supports, and funding to fully implement the Blueprint. 
 
Maintenance of Effort and Local Share  
 
Each year, the county government (including Baltimore City) is required to appropriate 
funds to the local board of education equivalent to the greater of the maintenance of effort 
(MOE) requirement or the local share amount of all wealth-equalized formulas. The 
per-pupil MOE amount is based upon the greater of (1) the prior year full-time equivalent 
(FTE) enrollment and (2) the three-year moving average of FTE enrollment. The local 
share amount equals the local share of the foundation formula, compensatory education, 
English language learner, special education, CWI, full-day prekindergarten, college and 
career ready, transitional supplemental instruction (through fiscal 2026), and career ladder 
grant programs. Also, counties that benefit from the compensatory education State funding 
floor are required to fund the local share of the concentration of poverty grant programs. 
However, for some counties, the combined local share across these several programs is 
subject to adjustments described below. 
 
Education Effort Adjustment to Local Share Requirement 
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of the foundation program and the 
required local shares for several existing and new funding formula programs. The law also 
includes a mechanism for establishing a maximum local share that a county must fund 
each year. This involves “local education effort,” which is determined for each county by 
dividing the county’s local share of major education aid by the county’s wealth. An 
“education effort index,” which is the local education effort divided by the “State average 
education effort,” is then determined. A “maximum local share” is calculated for each 
county, which is the county’s local wealth multiplied by the State average education effort. 
 
Each county with an education effort above 1.0 for two consecutive years receives relief 
based upon its “education effort adjustment,” which is the amount by which the calculated 
local share exceeds the maximum local share. This relief (which results in increases to 
State aid) is provided to counties within one of three tiers, based on whether the education 
effort is (1) greater than 1.0 but less than 1.15; (2) at least 1.15 but less than 1.27; or (3) at 
least 1.27. State relief for the first tier is phased up from 15% of the education effort 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1426/ Page 9 
adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 50% by fiscal 2030. State relief for the second tier is phased 
up from 20% of the education effort adjustment in fiscal 2023 to 100% by fiscal 2030. 
State relief for the third tier is 100% beginning in fiscal 2023. However, the education 
effort adjustment for a county is only allowed to the degree that per-pupil MOE is met 
each year. 
 
Additional Reductions to Local Share 
 
A county may be eligible for a reduction in the required local share of major aid formulas 
in three additional ways:  (1) if a county receives State funds from the Guaranteed Tax 
Base (GTB) program, the local share may be reduced by the amount of GTB funds, except 
that for Baltimore City only the amount above $10.0 million may be reduced from the local 
share; (2) if a county receives State funds to support the minimum funding floors of 15% 
for the foundation and 40% for the targeted programs; and (3) if a county has a CWI of at 
least 0.13, the local share of CWI may be reduced by 50%. However, in all of these cases, 
the local share may not be reduced below the required per-pupil MOE amount. 
 
Guaranteed Tax Base 
 
The GTB program is intended to encourage less wealthy jurisdictions to maintain or 
increase local education tax effort (i.e., local education appropriation as a percent of local 
tax base). The program provides additional State education aid to counties that have less 
than 80% of the statewide average wealth per pupil and provide local education funding 
above the minimum local share required by the foundation program. The program uses 
local education tax effort and wealth to determine State aid amounts for each eligible 
school system. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
National Board Certification Payments 
 
MSDE advises that there are approximately 3,800 individuals meeting the definition of 
“nonclassroom teacher” under the bill, including noninstructional principals, 
assistant principals and other school administrators, and that the NBC incentive program 
provides $1,900 for each participant during the first three years of candidacy. Given that 
the State covers two-thirds of the cost to reimburse nonclassroom teachers for NBPTS, this 
would amount to, at full participation, about $4.8 million annually, beginning as early as 
fiscal 2024, given the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date. 
 
However, MSDE advises that for teachers eligible for funding under current law, 
participation among eligible educators was 1.7% in fiscal 2022, 5.7% in fiscal 2023, and 
5.8% in fiscal 2024. Assuming a similar trajectory for nonclassroom teacher participation, 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1426/ Page 10 
this would amount to State expenditures of approximately $82,000 in the first year, and 
approximately $280,000 in subsequent years. However, the participation rate, and thus 
State costs cannot be reliably estimated.  
 
Prekindergarten Provisions 
 
The Prekindergarten Expansion Grant is extended by four years to fiscal 2029, which is 
assumed to be offset by equivalent reductions in State funding under the 
full-day prekindergarten funding program. Current law requires the Prekindergarten 
Expansion Grant to be funded at a level that is at least as much as the prior fiscal year. 
Thus, it is assumed that the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant is funded at $26.6 million in 
each of fiscal 2026 to 2029, and thus State funding under the full-day prekindergarten 
program is reduced by the same amounts in these years. 
 
Unlike the Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program, the full-day prekindergarten 
program entails a local share component. Reduced State funding of the full-day 
prekindergarten program under the bill will result in reduced local share of major education 
aid, which in turn will (1) reduce State funding under the education effort adjustment, 
beginning in fiscal 2026, (2) alter required local effort beginning as early as fiscal 2026, 
and (3) likely alter State funding and associated local share relief under GTB, as soon as 
fiscal 2027. While these impacts may be significant, they cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
Other Provisions 
 
The Department of Human Services advises that its mailing costs increase to provide 
additional notifications to parents under the bill, however, the Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) assumes that these costs can be met with existing resources. The bill makes 
technical changes that improve alignment of cross-references among provisions of current 
law. DLS finds these changes to be clarifying in nature with no effect on State or local 
operations or finances. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local school systems must provide for one-third of the costs 
associated with qualifying nonclassroom teachers receiving NBPTS under the bill (or 
one-half of what the State provides annually). Thus, per discussion above, local school 
systems statewide incur costs amounting to as much as $2.4 million annually but 
potentially closer to about $140,000 annually. However, the participation rate, and thus 
statewide local school system costs cannot be reliably estimated. Local school system 
revenues are not materially affected due to reimbursed NBPTS fees. 
 
It is assumed that if specified entities exercise authority to limit the number and types of 
courses that a dually enrolled student may take, the number of students taking advantage 
of dual enrollment courses increases, but there is no determinate impact on the number of 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1426/ Page 11 
courses for public institutions of higher education to provide to dual enrollment students. 
Therefore, the effect on local board of education payments for dual enrollment is 
indeterminate but assumed to be minimal on a statewide basis. Increased flexibility 
regarding the timing of kindergarten readiness assessments and relaying of results in the 
2024-2025 school year is not anticipated to substantially effect local board finances. 
 
State funding of, and local effort on behalf of, public schools will be altered by the offset 
of full-day prekindergarten State funding assumed to occur as a result of extending 
Prekindergarten Expansion Grant Program State funding through fiscal 2029. While these 
impacts may be significant, they cannot be reliably estimated. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1102 (The President)(By Request - Accountability and 
Implementation Board) - Education, Energy, and the Environment and Budget and 
Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel County Public Schools; St. Mary’s County Public 
Schools; Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education 
Commission; Department of Human Services; Accountability and Implementation Board; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 11