START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1492 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1492 
(Delegate Rogers) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Education - Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery - Student Information 
 
 
This bill alters the requirement that each public school that administers the Armed Services 
Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) select “Option 8” as the score reporting 
requirement to prohibit the general release of student information to military recruiters, and 
instead requires local school systems to notify students (and their parents or guardians) 
two weeks before administering the ASVAB of the option to withhold the release of a 
student’s personal information and ASVAB test scores to military recruiters. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is directed at local school systems. 
  
Local Effect:  Local school systems can notify students and their parents or guardians 
two weeks before administering ASVAB of the option to withhold the release of a student’s 
personal information and ASVAB test scores to military recruiters using existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill specifies that a student or a student’s parent or guardian who 
chooses “Option 8” as the score reporting option or for whom “Option 8” is chosen by 
the local board of education may choose to later release the student’s personal information 
and ASVAB scores by individually submitting the required forms to the military services. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1492/ Page 2 
The bill does not limit a local board of education’s ability to choose “Option 8” as the score 
reporting option for military recruiter contact to prohibit the general release of any student 
information to military recruiters for public schools that administer the ASVAB in the 
county. 
 
The bill also repeals the requirement for a public school to send a written notice to an 
ASVAB representative of the statutory requirement for school systems to choose 
“Option 8,” which is no longer mandated under the bill. 
 
Current Law:  Each public school that provides access to its buildings and ground or 
student information directory to any person or group that makes students aware of 
occupational or educational options must provide access on the same basis to official 
recruiting representatives of the military forces of Maryland and the United States for the 
purpose of informing students of education and career opportunities available in the 
military. 
 
A public school must provide notice in a specified manner to each student and to their 
parent or guardian that, in accordance with federal law, they may request that the student’s 
name, address, and telephone number not be released to military recruiters. 
Twice each year, as specified, the principal of each public school must submit a list to the 
county board of education that includes the name, address, and telephone number of each 
student whose contact information is not released to military recruiters. 
 
Each public school must choose “Option 8” as the score reporting option for military 
recruiter contact to prohibit the general release of any student information to military 
recruiters. Each public school that administers the ASVAB must (1) send a written notice 
to the ASVAB representative coordinating the school’s administration of the ASVAB of 
this requirement and (2) notify students taking the ASVAB and the parent or guardian of 
students taking the ASVAB of the release of student information requirements. 
 
A student or their parent or guardian may choose to release the student’s personal 
information and ASVAB scores by individually submitting the required forms to the 
military services authorizing the release of the information to recruiting representatives of 
the military services, registered apprenticeship programs, youth apprenticeship programs, 
and employers registered with the Maryland Department of Labor or local Workforce 
Development Boards. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1492/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1042 (Senator Gile) - Education, Energy, and the 
Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 15, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 5, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3