START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1521 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1521 
(Chair, Health and Government Operations 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Health) 
Health and Government Operations 
Finance 
 
Maryland Children's Health Program - Eligibility and Administration 
 
   
This emergency departmental bill repeals the requirement that the Maryland Children’s 
Health Program (MCHP) be administered in a specified manner. As a result, the bill 
eliminates the MCHP premium plan and the requirement that families with income above 
200% of federal poverty guidelines (FPG) pay a family contribution for MCHP coverage. 
The bill also makes conforming changes.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Minimal decrease in MCHP general/federal fund expenditures and federal 
fund revenues in FY 2024. MCHP expenditures (65% federal funds, 35% general funds) 
decrease by an estimated $100,000 annually beginning in FY 2025, as discussed below. 
Federal fund revenues decrease correspondingly. This bill decreases the cost of an 
entitlement program beginning in FY 2024.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FF Revenue 
(-) 
($65,000) 
($65,000) 
($65,000) 
($65,000) 
GF Expenditure 
(-) 
($35,000) 
($35,000) 
($35,000) 
($35,000) 
FF Expenditure 
(-) 
($65,000) 
($65,000) 
($65,000) 
($65,000) 
Net Effect 
$- 
$35,000 
$35,000 
$35,000 
$35,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1521/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill repeals the requirement that MCHP be administered (1) for 
individuals whose family income is at or below 200% FPG, through the Medicaid 
HealthChoice Program or (2) for eligible individuals whose family income is between 
201% FPG and 300% FPG, through the MCHP premium plan. Instead, the bill clarifies 
that MCHP must provide coverage to an individual who does not qualify for Medicaid and 
has a family income at or below 300% FPG and who is younger than age 19.  
 
The bill also repeals outdated language from the Insurance Article to remove references to 
legacy coverage groups for the MCHP private option plan, which sunset in 2003.  
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Children’s Health Program  
 
MCHP provides medical assistance for low-income children with household incomes that 
exceed income eligibility for Medicaid. MCHP covers the same services as Medicaid. The 
MCHP premium plan provides coverage for children with family incomes between 201% 
and 300% FPG. MCHP premium plan enrollees pay a monthly premium based on income. 
For families with incomes between 201% and 250% FPG, the monthly premium amount 
is 2% of the annual income of a family of two at 200% FPG (about $68 per month). For 
families with incomes between 251% and 300% FPG, the monthly premium amount is 2% 
of the annual income of a family of two at 250% FPG (about $85 per month). The family 
contribution amounts apply on a per-family basis regardless of the number of eligible 
individuals each family has enrolled in the MCHP premium plan. As of January 2024, there 
were 33,582 children enrolled in the MCHP premium plan. 
 
MCHP premium plan payments were suspended during the COVID-19 public health 
emergency effective March 1, 2020. However, MDH has since further extended the pause 
on premiums through April 30, 2024.  
 
Implementation of Continuous Eligibility 
 
The federal Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2023 requires that all states provide 
continuous eligibility to children enrolled in Medicaid or MCHP for 12 months, beginning  
January 1, 2024. MDH implemented this requirement effective September 1, 2023. As a 
result, eligibility for children enrolled in the MCHP premium plan is no longer contingent 
on timely payment of a monthly premium and MDH cannot enforce collection of premium 
payments throughout the year.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1521/ Page 3 
Historically, annual MCHP premium plan revenues totaled $10.4 million. Although 
premiums have not been collected since February 2020, MDH estimates that, due to 
implementation of continuous eligibility, annual MCHP premium plan revenues (when, 
and if, collection resumes) would substantially decrease to $866,167.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill results in the loss of remaining MCHP premium plan 
revenues of $866,167 annually (the estimated amount anticipated to be collected annually 
once the current pause on premium collection ends April 30, 2024). However, this 
reduction in premium revenues is offset by savings associated with discontinuing the 
infrastructure needed to collect premiums. Elimination of the MCHP premium plan 
collection system and related mailings is estimated to reduce MCHP expenditures by 
$966,132 annually.  
 
In total, the overall effect of the bill is a net reduction in MCHP expenditures of $99,965 
on an annualized basis (65% federal funds, 35% general funds). Thus, MCHP expenditures 
decrease by a minimal amount in fiscal 2024 (as the bill is an emergency bill), and by an 
estimated $99,965 in fiscal 2025 and annually thereafter. Federal fund revenues decrease 
correspondingly (by an estimated $64,977 on an annualized basis).  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1521/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
BILL TITLE:   
Maryland Children’s Health Program - Eligibility and Administration 
 
BILL NUMBER:  
HB 1521 
 
PREPARED BY:  
Maryland Department of Health 
 
 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
 
OR 
 
 
_____ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 4