START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 660

Chapter 660

(House Bill 1501)

AN ACT concerning

State Government – Office of Legislative Audits – Performance Audits

FOR the purpose of altering the frequency of certain performance audits of the Board of
Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore City and the Board of License
Commissioners for Prince George’s County that are required to be conducted by the
Office of Legislative Audits; and generally relating to performance audit reports.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 2–1220(f) and (g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

2–1220.

(f) (1) At least once every [4] 6 years, the Office of Legislative Audits shall
conduct a performance audit of the Board of Liquor License Commissioners for Baltimore
City to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the management practices of the Board
and of the economy with which the Board uses resources.

(2) At any time on request of the President and the Speaker, the Office
shall conduct a performance audit of the local licensing board, as defined in § 1–101 of the
Alcoholic Beverages Article, for a county or for the City of Annapolis to evaluate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the management practices of the board and of the economy
with which the board uses resources.

(3) The performance audit shall focus on operations relating to liquor
inspections, licensing, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight.

(g) (1) [Beginning on July 1, 2017, and at least once every 3 years thereafter]
AT LEAST ONCE EVERY 6 YEARS, the Office of Legislative Audits shall conduct a
performance audit of the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County to
evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the management practices of the Board and of
the economy with which the Board uses resources.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 660 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The performance audit shall focus on operations relating to liquor
inspections, licensing, disciplinary procedures, and management oversight.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2