START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1501 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1501 
(Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee) 
Health and Government Operations 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
State Government - Office of Legislative Audits - Performance Audits 
 
 
This bill reduces the frequency of performance audits of the Board of Liquor License 
Commissioners for Baltimore City and the Board of License Commissioners for 
Prince George’s County that are required to be conducted by the Office of Legislative 
Audits (OLA). Specifically, the bill requires a performance audit of each board every 
six years (rather than every four and three years, respectively). 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations; however, 
OLA may realize administrative efficiencies. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners 
 
Chapter 263 of 2011 requires OLA to conduct a performance audit of the Baltimore City 
Board of Liquor License Commissioners at least once every four years to evaluate the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the management practices of the board and of the economy 
with which the board uses resources. Under the bill, OLA must conduct a performance 
audit at least once every six (rather than four) years. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1501/ Page 2 
Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners  
 
Chapter 811 of 2017 requires OLA to conduct a performance audit of the Prince George’s 
County Board of License Commissioners beginning on July 1, 2017, and at least once every 
three years thereafter to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the management 
practices of the board and of the economy with which the board uses resources. The 
performance audit must focus on operations relating to liquor inspections, licensing, 
disciplinary procedures, and management oversight, and be distributed as specified. Under 
the bill, the audit must be conducted at least once every six (rather than three) years. 
 
Office of Legislative Audits 
 
Generally, OLA must conduct a fiscal/compliance audit of each unit of the State 
government (except for units of the Legislative Branch) at an interval ranging from  
three to four years, unless the Legislative Auditor determines, on a case-by-case basis, that 
more frequent audits are required. Each agency or program may be audited separately or 
as part of a larger organizational unit of State government. OLA must also conduct 
performance audits or financial statement audits when authorized by the Legislative 
Auditor, directed by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee, or the Executive Director 
of the Department of Legislative Services, or otherwise required by law. 
 
At any time, the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House may request OLA to 
conduct a performance audit of the local licensing board for a county or the City of 
Annapolis to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of the management practices of the 
board and of the economy with which the board uses resources. 
 
Additional Comments:  OLA advises that the most recent audits for the boards affected 
by the bill had fewer findings than the previous audits. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 150 (Chair, Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee) - 
Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Prince George’s County; Department of 
Legislative Services - Office of Legislative Audits 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1501/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3