START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1526 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1526 
(Delegate Clippinger, et al.) 
Economic Matters and Appropriations 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Protecting Opportunities and Regional Trade (PORT) Act 
 
 
This emergency bill requires the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) and the 
Department of Commerce to establish temporary relief programs to provide assistance to 
specified individuals and businesses affected by the reduced operations of the Port of 
Baltimore. Following Legislative Policy Committee (LPC) review and comment, and 
subject to various other requirements, the Governor may transfer by budget amendment 
increments of up to $25.0 million to fund and administer the programs from existing MDL 
and Commerce fund balances or from the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day 
Fund). The bill includes a number of other measures relating to the March 2024 collapse 
of the Francis Scott Key Bridge, including the establishment of the Fallen Transportation 
Workers Scholarship Program and related special fund; the waiver of unemployment 
insurance (UI) benefits charges and exemption from work search requirements in specified 
circumstances; a $1.0 billion increase in Maryland Transportation Authority (MDTA) debt 
capacity, subject to existing bond issuance requirements; and specified personal income 
tax subtraction modifications.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures for MDL and Commerce increase by at least 
$75.0 million in FY 2024, reflecting the transfer of $60.0 million from the Rainy Day Fund 
and use of $15.0 million of existing Commerce special fund balances as anticipated by 
budget amendments submitted to date. Special fund expenditures increase further to the 
extent additional funds are made available in fiscal 2024 and/or 2025. MDTA nonbudgeted 
revenues increase significantly, potentially within the five-year estimate period of this 
analysis, to the extent MDTA issues additional bonds; MDTA nonbudgeted expenditures 
increase for related debt service. Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) 
general fund expenditures and related special fund revenues and expenditures increase for 
scholarship awards. Nonbudgeted Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) revenues 
decrease in FY 2025 through 2029; nonbudgeted UITF expenditures may also be affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1526/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local tax revenues may be positively affected, as discussed below. Local 
expenditures are not directly affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Temporary Relief Programs 
 
For purposes of the bill’s temporary relief program provisions, “reduced operations of the 
port” means either the suspension of vessel traffic or the inability of vessels to access the 
Port of Baltimore due to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge on March 26, 2024.  
 
 
Maryland Department of Labor 
 
Individual Assistance:  If the President of the United States does not declare a major 
disaster as a result of the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge (and, consequently, 
Maryland is ineligible for federal Disaster Unemployment Assistance (DUA) benefits) 
MDL must, as soon as practicable, establish a temporary relief program to provide 
assistance to individuals who (1) are Maryland-based and regularly performed paid work 
at the Port of Baltimore; (2) are unable to perform the work through no fault of their own 
due to the reduced operations of the port; (3) are able to work and available for work, but 
unable to find suitable work; and (4) either do not qualify for UI benefits under Title 8 of 
the Labor and Employment Article or any similar employer-provided benefit or qualify for 
an amount of UI benefits that is less than the individual’s earnings attributable to the 
individual’s employment at the port at the time the reduced operations of the port began. 
A payment made to an individual under the bill’s individual assistance provisions may not 
be subtracted from an eligible UI claimant’s weekly UI benefit amount as computed under 
§ 8-803 of the Labor and Employment Article, as specified.  
 
Assistance to Small Businesses, Labor Unions, Trade Associations, and Specified 
Companies:  MDL must, as soon as practicable, establish a grant program to provide 
assistance to small businesses, labor unions, trade associations, or companies that contract 
with or are members of a trade association (1) the operations of which rely on access to or 
the operation of the port and are hindered or halted entirely due to the reduced operations 
of the port; (2) that, without the return to full operations of the port, are unable to retain 
their Maryland-based workforce at the same hours, rates of pay, and benefits in effect 
before the reduced operations of the port; (3) that are committed to continuing operations, 
to the fullest extent practicable, at the port once it resumes full operations; and (4) that have 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1526/ Page 3 
principal business operations located in the State or will use any relief under the program 
for workforce or operations within the State. A small business, labor union, trade 
association, or company that receives relief under the program must, to the fullest extent 
practicable, use the relief to avoid layoffs and maintain its workforce at the same hours, 
rates of pay, and benefits in effect before the reduced operations of the port.  
 
The bill further requires MDL, to the extent practicable, to (1) incorporate the State’s work 
sharing UI program in conjunction with, or as a condition or an extension of, the 
above-specified temporary relief program or (2) substitute the State’s work sharing 
UI program for the temporary relief program. The temporary relief program may use State 
funds to supplement federal funding for worker retention grants to small businesses, labor 
unions, or trade associations and may use federal funds only for worker retention grants to 
entities that do not qualify as a small business, labor union, or trade association.  
 
 
Department of Commerce 
 
Assistance to Businesses with Diverted Operations:  Commerce must, as soon as 
practicable, establish a temporary relief program to provide assistance to businesses (1) the 
operations or shipments of which rely on the use of or access to the port, are hindered or 
halted entirely due to the reduced operations of the port, and are subsequently diverted to 
other regional ports; (2) that are committed to continuing operations or shipments, to the 
fullest extent practicable, at the port once it resumes full operations; and (3) that have 
principal business operations located in the State or will use any relief under the program 
for their operations within the State. (As authorized by Executive Order 01.01.2024.12, the 
Secretary of Commerce has suspended the requirement that the operations or shipments of 
a business be diverted to another regional port in order to be eligible for assistance under 
this provision.)  
 
 
Procedures and Eligibility Criteria 
 
MDL and Commerce must establish procedures and eligibility criteria for the temporary 
relief programs and may require individuals, businesses, labor unions, trade associations, 
or specified companies to provide information to determine eligibility under the programs. 
On request and subject to applicable law, a unit of State or local government must provide 
to MDL and Commerce information relevant to determining the identity and eligibility of 
an applicant of a program for the purpose of preventing and combating fraud. Any funds 
distributed to individuals or businesses under the bill must be distributed on or before 
June 30, 2025.  
 
The bill also authorizes the disclosure of certain tax information to MDL and Commerce 
to the extent necessary to administer the temporary relief programs established under the 
bill and detect and prevent fraudulent claims for relief or avoidance of required repayment.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1526/ Page 4 
 
Insurance Claims and Recapture of Payments 
 
MDL and Commerce must also establish requirements regarding the prompt filing of 
insurance claims related to the reduced operations of the port and notifications of payments 
agreed to be made or made as a result of an insurance claim. In accordance with program 
requirements, a business, labor union, trade association, or company that receives relief 
from an assistance program established under the bill must reimburse MDL or Commerce 
(as applicable) for monetary assistance received under the applicable relief program within 
six months after receipt of the proceeds from an insurance claim or other funds. MDL and 
Commerce must (1) be subrogated to specified causes of action of any business, labor 
union, trade association, or company arising out of reduced operations of the port to the 
extent of any monetary assistance received under the applicable relief program; (2) have a 
lien on the proceeds of any insurance claim filed in relation to the reduced operations of 
the port from the time that the business, labor union, trade association, or company receives 
monetary assistance from the applicable relief program; and (3) be entitled to advise any 
carrier with which the insurance claim has been filed of the rights and interest in the 
insurance proceeds. 
 
In addition to the above-specified rights, MDL and Commerce may make an assessment or 
use other reasonable means of collection against an individual, business, labor union, trade 
association, or company to recapture any amounts owed, as specified.  
 
 
Transfer of Funds by Budget Amendment; Use of Rainy Day Fund, Federal Funds 
 
After providing LPC at least seven days to review and comment, the Governor may transfer 
by budget amendment increments of up to $25.0 million to fund and administer the 
temporary relief programs from the existing fund balances within MDL and Commerce or 
the Rainy Day Fund to the expenditure accounts of MDL and Commerce (as applicable). 
A copy of the budget amendment must be provided to the Senate Finance Committee and 
House Economic Matters Committee. The Governor must provide specified monthly 
reports to LPC on funds distributed from the Rainy Day Fund in accordance with the bill 
and funds distributed under Executive Order 01.01.2024.11 (as discussed in the 
Current Law/Background section of this fiscal and policy note). On request of LPC, the 
Governor must provide a briefing to LPC on funds distributed from the Rainy Day Fund 
under the bill.  
 
Except as otherwise specified, federal funds made available for any purpose for which a 
temporary relief program is established under the bill must be used to (1) supplant, rather 
than supplement, any funds otherwise used for the programs established under the bill and 
(2) to the extent authorized by federal law, reimburse the Rainy Day Fund for any funds 
transferred in accordance with the bill. MDL and Commerce must prioritize the use of 
existing and available budgetary resources before requesting funds be transferred from the 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1526/ Page 5 
Rainy Day Fund. Unspent funds distributed from the Rainy Day Fund under the bill must 
revert back to the Rainy Day Fund. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, MDL and 
Commerce may transfer available funding from their existing programs and special funds 
to support the temporary relief programs established under the bill. 
 
 
Pursuit and Disposition of Economic Damages  
 
Funds received by the State from a lawsuit or, in the instance of a subrogation claim, that 
are related to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge must be deposited in the Rainy 
Day Fund. The Attorney General must (1) pursue all available options, including filing 
actions against the applicable parties, to recover for the State all possible economic 
damages arising from the closure of the port and the collapse of the Francis Scott Key 
Bridge and (2) beginning July 1, 2024, and each month thereafter until all available options 
are exhausted or resolved, report to the General Assembly on the status of pursuing and 
recovering economic damages.  
 
Income Tax Subtraction Modifications for Specified Benefit Payments, Tuition Assistance 
 
For tax years 2024 and 2025, the bill establishes a personal income tax subtraction 
modification for the amount of any benefit payment (defined as a payment that is provided 
to an individual or the family member of an individual as a result of the individual being 
injured or killed in the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge on March 26, 2024) 
received by an individual to the extent the payment is included in federal adjusted gross 
income. The bill also establishes, for tax year 2025 and beyond, a personal income tax 
subtraction modification for the amount of tuition assistance provided to eligible 
dependents and surviving spouses under the Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship 
Program.  
 
Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship Program 
 
The bill establishes the Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship Program to provide 
tuition assistance to students who were dependents of or are surviving spouses of a fallen 
transportation worker. The program is generally modeled on the existing Edward T. and 
Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship and Jean B. Cryor Memorial Scholarship 
programs. However, scholarship awards under the bill are capped at a higher level since 
they may reflect nonresident undergraduate tuition and mandatory fees.  
 
“Fallen transportation worker” means an individual whose occupation is in the 
construction, rehabilitation, or operation of a transportation facility or transportation 
facilities project (as defined under existing provisions of the Transportation Article) in the 
State and who died on or after January 1, 2022, as a result of an accident occurring while 
the individual was performing any job duty necessary for the construction, maintenance, 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1526/ Page 6 
rehabilitation, or operation of a transportation facility or transportation facilities project in 
the State. To the extent practicable, the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT), 
a local department of transportation, or a contractor that employed fallen transportation 
workers must provide to MHEC the names and contact information for the families of the 
fallen transportation workers.  
 
 
Eligibility 
 
An individual who was a dependent of or is the surviving spouse of a fallen transportation 
worker may apply for a scholarship at an institution of postsecondary education. To apply, 
an individual must be (1) accepted for admission or enrolled in an undergraduate, graduate, 
or professional program at an institution of postsecondary education; (2) at least 
16 years old; and (3) the child, stepchild, or surviving spouse of a fallen transportation 
worker. Each institution of postsecondary education must determine the eligibility of 
individuals who apply to the institution for the Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship 
Program. 
 
 
Scholarship Awards 
 
Scholarship awards may be used to cover tuition and mandatory fees at any institution of 
postsecondary education, but they may not exceed the equivalent annual tuition and 
mandatory fees of an undergraduate student at a four-year institution within the University 
System of Maryland (USM) (other than the University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus 
(UMB) and the University of Maryland Global Campus (UMGC)) with the highest annual 
expenses for a full-time undergraduate. Also, scholarship awards may not be less than the 
lesser of $3,000 or the equivalent tuition and mandatory fees of the institution attended by 
the scholarship recipient. Each scholarship recipient may hold the award for five years of 
full-time study or eight years of part-time study. 
 
Subject to the availability of funds, funds for scholarship awards must be allocated by 
MHEC to each institution of postsecondary education based on the number of eligible 
recipients attending each institution, as reported semi-annually by each institution and 
verified by MHEC. If funds cannot be allocated in the fiscal year in which awards are 
made, priority must be given to allocating funds for those awards in the immediately 
following fiscal year. 
 
 
Special Fund 
 
The Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship Fund is established as a special, 
nonlapsing fund administered by MHEC. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in 
the State budget to the fund; (2) interest earnings of the fund; and (3) any other money from 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
HB 1526/ Page 7 
any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. Funding for the program is as 
provided in the State budget.  
 
Unemployment Insurance  
 
 
Waiver of Benefit Charges 
 
The Secretary of Labor must waive the charge of benefits paid to a claimant against the 
earned rating record of an employer for any claim of benefits if (1) the claim is determined 
by the Secretary to be related to the reduced operations of the Port of Baltimore due to the 
collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge and (2) the employer had no direct or indirect 
control over the actions leading to the disruption in employment.  
 
 
Exemption from Work Search Requirements 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of Title 8 of the Labor and Employment Article, the 
Secretary of Labor may exempt an individual from the general UI eligibility requirement 
to be actively seeking work if the individual (1) is laid off from work as a direct result of 
the event or occurrence that led to the Governor declaring a state of emergency via  
Executive Order 01.01.2024.09 (relating to the Key Bridge collapse) and (2) remains able 
to work and available for work in accordance with current law and work-attached. 
 
Current Law/Background:  On March 26, 2024, the Francis Scott Key Bridge collapsed 
after being struck by a container vessel. In response to the incident, the Governor declared 
a state of emergency via Executive Order 01.01.2024.09. As of the publication of this 
fiscal and policy note, efforts by the multi-agency Key Bridge Response 2024 Unified 
Command to clear the Fort McHenry channel are ongoing, and multiple temporary 
alternate channels are facilitating limited vessel traffic.  
 
Federal Relief  
 
In addition to ongoing federal assistance with the salvage effort, the following federal relief 
has been made available to the State in response to the Key Bridge incident:  
 
 
Federal Highway Administration Emergency Relief:  To date, MDOT has received 
an initial $60.0 million in federal “quick release” Emergency Relief funds through 
the Federal Highway Administration’s Emergency Relief program for eligible costs 
associated with debris removal, demolition, detours, emergency repairs, and design 
and reconstruction on Interstate 695 and the Francis Scott Key Bridge.  
 
Economic Injury Disaster Loans:  The U.S. Small Business Administration has 
issued an Economic Injury Disaster Loan (EIDL) declaration for Maryland and 
specified surrounding areas in response to the Francis Scott Key Bridge collapse. 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
HB 1526/ Page 8 
Small businesses in the State and specified surrounding areas that are affected by 
the disaster may apply for federal low-interest EIDLs of up to $2.0 million to help 
meet financial obligations and operating expenses that could have been met had the 
disaster not occurred. 
 
Worker Dislocation Grants:  Maryland has received an initial $3.5 million in 
emergency dislocated worker grant funding.  
 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.11 
 
Following the declaration of a state of emergency, the Governor issued 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.11, which establishes the following temporary economic and 
financial relief programs for workers and businesses impacted by the Key Bridge collapse 
and disruption of operations to the Port of Baltimore: 
 
 
Port of Baltimore Emergency Business Assistance Program:  This program, 
administered by Commerce, is to provide grants of up to $100,000 to eligible 
businesses, as defined in this bill or its cross file, whose operations or shipments 
rely on the use of or access to the port and are hindered or halted entirely due to the 
reduced operations of the port. The Secretary of Commerce must allocate 
$15.0 million from existing Commerce funds to this program.  
 
Port of Baltimore Worker Retention Program:  This program, administered by 
MDL, is to provide grants of up to $200,000 to eligible businesses, as defined in 
this bill or its cross file, who have demonstrated economic and financial injury and 
risk layoffs to employees resulting from the disruption to the operations to the port. 
The Secretary of Labor must dedicate $2.5 million in specified federal Workforce 
Innovation and Opportunity Act funds for this program. Additionally, $10.0 million 
in funds made available from the Rainy Day Fund are to be allocated to this 
program.  
 
Port of Baltimore Worker Support Program:  This program, administered by MDL, 
is to provide temporary support to eligible workers impacted by the disruption of 
operations to the Port of Baltimore, as defined in this bill or its cross file. 
$15.0 million in funds made available from the Rainy Day Fund are to be allocated 
to this program.  
 
The executive order further requires the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD) to dedicate (1) up to $15.0 million from the department’s 
fiscal 2024 Neighborhood BusinessWorks program appropriations to provide grants and 
loans to impacted small businesses and (2) $2.5 million in fiscal 2025 State Revitalization 
Program funds for the Dundalk Renaissance Corporation and Greater Baybrook Alliance 
to provide community development support for the two areas most proximate to the 
Key Bridge.  
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
HB 1526/ Page 9 
The executive order requires that an initial $25.0 million be made available from the 
Rainy Day Fund for purposes outlined in the executive order (of which $10.0 million must 
be allocated to the Worker Retention Program and the remaining $15.0 million to the 
Worker Support Program, as noted above) in accordance with the requirements of this bill 
or its cross file. All Executive Branch units must cooperate with Commerce, MDL, and 
DHCD by sharing information, expertise, and staff resources to implement the temporary 
relief programs. As discussed further in the State Fiscal Effect section of this fiscal and 
policy note, the Administration has subsequently notified the General Assembly of its 
intent to transfer a total of $60.0 million from the Rainy Day Fund to support the 
Worker Retention Program ($25.0 million) and Worker Support Program ($35.0 million).  
 
Port of Baltimore 
 
The Port of Baltimore is a vast industrial complex that encompasses 45 miles of shoreline 
and more than 3,000 waterfront acres. It includes 7 public terminals owned by the State, as 
well as 35 private terminals and marine facilities. In 2023, the Port of Baltimore ranked 
ninth among the nation’s ports for tonnage and value of foreign cargo handled 
(52.3 million tons worth $80.8 billion) and ranked first in the nation for volume of autos 
and light trucks (over 847,000 vehicles), roll-on, roll-off heavy farm and construction 
machinery (1.3 million tons), and imported sugar and gypsum.  
 
According to a March 2024 report on the economic impact of the Port of Baltimore, in 
2023, cargo and cruise activity at the State-owned and private marine terminals generated 
approximately 20,000 direct jobs, 31,000 induced and indirect jobs, $5.3 billion in personal 
wage and salary income for Maryland residents, $3.9 billion in business revenue, and 
$647.1 million in State and local taxes. 
 
Rainy Day Fund 
 
The Rainy Day Fund (the common name for the Revenue Stabilization Account within the 
State Reserve Fund) was established for the purpose of retaining State revenues for future 
needs and reducing the need for future tax increases by moderating revenue growth. It is 
the goal of the State that 10% of estimated general fund revenues in each fiscal year be 
retained in the Rainy Day Fund.  
 
In general, for each fiscal year, if the Rainy Day Fund’s balance is below 3.0% of the 
estimated general fund revenues for that fiscal year, the Governor must include in the State 
budget bill an appropriation to the fund equal to at least $100.0 million. If the fund’s 
balance is at least 3.0% but less than 7.5% of estimated general fund revenues for that 
fiscal year, the Governor must include an appropriation to the fund equal to the lesser of 
$50.0 million or whatever amount is required for the balance to exceed 7.5% of estimated 
general fund revenues for that fiscal year.  
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
HB 1526/ Page 10 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly leaves a Rainy Day Fund 
balance of $2.3 billion (9.4% of estimated general fund revenues) and authorizes the use 
of up to $275.0 million from the Rainy Day Fund, contingent on the enactment of this bill 
or its cross file.  
 
Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship Program and Jean B. Cryor 
Memorial Scholarship Program 
 
The Edward T. and Mary A. Conroy Memorial Scholarship Program makes awards to 
specified military and public safety personnel and their eligible dependents to attend an 
eligible postsecondary institution in the State for five years of full-time study or eight years 
of part-time study. Likewise, the Jean B. Cryor Memorial Scholarship Program makes the 
same type of financial assistance available to the child or surviving spouse of a public or 
nonpublic school employee who, as a result of an act of violence, died in the line of duty 
or is 100% disabled due to an injury sustained in the line of duty. There is one special fund 
– the Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund – from which awards are 
made for both programs. Chapter 23 of 2022 mandates at least $4.0 million in annual 
funding for the Edward T. Conroy and Jean B. Cryor Scholarship Fund beginning in 
fiscal 2024. 
 
Scholarships may be used at private or public four-year institutions, community colleges, 
or private career schools, and they may be used for undergraduate or graduate study. To 
apply for a Conroy or a Cryor scholarship, certain individuals must be a resident of 
Maryland at the time of application or the disabling or fatal event. Other eligible individuals 
are not required to be a resident of Maryland at the time of application or the disabling or 
fatal event. Awards are subject to both a ceiling and a floor. They may not exceed the 
equivalent annual tuition and mandatory fees of a full-time undergraduate Maryland 
resident at a four-year institution within USM – other than UMB and UMGC – with the 
highest annual expenses for a full-time resident undergraduate. They may not be less than 
either $3,000 or the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory fees, for a resident, of the 
institution attended by the recipient of the scholarship, whichever is the least.  
 
Unemployment Insurance 
 
UI provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of up to $430 per week to eligible 
unemployed individuals. Generally, to be eligible for UI benefits, an individual must be 
able to work, available for work, and actively seeking work. For a general overview of the 
State UI program, see the Appendix – Unemployment Insurance.  
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
HB 1526/ Page 11 
Exemption from Actively Seeking Work Requirement 
 
Section 8-903 of the Labor and Employment Article requires the Secretary of Labor, in 
determining whether an individual is actively seeking work, to consider (1) whether the 
individual has made an effort that is reasonable and that would be expected of an 
unemployed individual who honestly is looking for work and (2) the extent of the effort in 
relation to the labor market conditions in the area in which the individual is seeking work.  
 
Section 8-904 of the Labor and Employment Article authorizes the Secretary to exempt 
employees of a particular employer from the work search requirement when the employer 
closes its entire plant, business operation, part of its plant, or part of its business operation:   
 
 
for inventory, vacation, or another purpose that will cause unemployment for a 
definite period of up to 10 weeks, if the Secretary finds that circumstances and labor 
market conditions justify the exemption; or 
 
for a purpose other than inventory or vacation that will cause unemployment for a 
definite period of up to 26 weeks, if (1) the employer and affected employees jointly 
request the exemption; (2) the employer provides that all affected employees must 
return to work for the employer within 26 weeks; and (3) the Secretary determines 
that the exemption will promote productivity and economic stability within the 
State. 
 
An exemption may be granted only with respect to a specific plant or business operation 
closing and does not exempt an individual from the requirement to be able to work and 
otherwise fully available for work. 
 
 
Employer Benefit Charge Waiver 
 
Section 8-611 of the Labor and Employment Article authorizes the Secretary of Labor to 
waive the benefit charges against the earned rating record of an employer if (1) the benefits 
are paid to the claimant during a period in which the claimant is temporarily unemployed 
because the employer shut down due to a natural disaster and (2) the Governor declared a 
state of emergency due to the natural disaster. If the Secretary waives the benefit charges, 
the waiver may be in effect only until four months after the natural disaster or the date the 
employer reopens, whichever is earlier. This provision applies only to employers that pay 
UI taxes and does not apply to employers that reimburse UITF. 
 
Work Sharing  
 
The State’s voluntary work sharing UI program provides an alternative to layoffs for 
employers facing periods of lowered economic activity. Under an approved work sharing 
plan, a participating employer must temporarily reduce the normal weekly work hours of 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
HB 1526/ Page 12 
employees within an affected unit by 10% to 60%; affected employees are eligible to 
receive partial UI benefits based on the percent reduction in normal weekly work hours to 
supplement lost wages.  
 
Federal Disaster Unemployment Assistance 
 
Federal Disaster Unemployment Assistance provides temporary benefits to individuals 
whose employment or self-employment has been lost or interrupted as a direct result of a 
presidentially declared major disaster,  who are ineligible for regular UI benefits, and who 
meet other specified eligibility criteria. The program is funded by the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, overseen by the U.S. Department of Labor, and administered by 
state UI agencies. Generally, benefits are calculated using the same formula used for the 
affected state’s UI benefits, except that the minimum weekly benefit amount is 50% of the 
state’s average weekly benefit amount. Benefits are generally paid for up to 26 weeks, 
provided that an individual meets ongoing eligibility requirements.  
 
Under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, a “major 
disaster” means any natural catastrophe, including any hurricane, storm, earthquake, or 
other similar specified event, or, regardless of cause, any fire, flood, or explosion, in any 
part of the United States, which in the determination of the President causes damage of 
sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant federal assistance under the Act to supplement 
the efforts and available resources of states, local governments, and disaster relief 
organizations in alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering caused by the disaster.  
 
At the time of publication of this fiscal and policy note, the President has not declared the 
collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge to be an eligible “major disaster.”  
 
Maryland Transportation Authority – Revenue Bonds 
 
Revenue bonds may be issued by MDTA without obtaining the consent of any 
instrumentality, agency, or unit of State government and without any proceedings or the 
happening of any conditions or things other than those specifically required by State law. 
Revenue bonds secured by toll revenue may be issued in any amount as long as the 
aggregate outstanding and unpaid principal balance of the revenue bonds secured by toll 
revenue and revenue bonds of prior issues does not exceed $3.0 billion on June 30 of any 
year.  
 
The maximum aggregate amount of revenue bonds that may be outstanding and unpaid 
must be reduced by the amount of (1) any loan extended to the State under the federal 
Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act and (2) any line of credit 
extended to the State under the same Act, to the extent the State draws on the line of credit. 
Generally, MDTA may issue bonds to refinance all or any part of the cost of a 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
HB 1526/ Page 13 
transportation facility project for which MDTA previously issued bonds without the 
approval of the General Assembly.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:   
 
Temporary Relief Programs 
 
As discussed above, the bill (1) requires MDL and Commerce to establish specified 
temporary relief programs for individuals (in the absence of a federal major disaster 
declaration) and businesses and other organizations affected by the reduced operations of 
the Port of Baltimore and (2) subject to review and comment by LPC, authorizes the 
Governor to transfer by budget amendment any amounts necessary to pay for the temporary 
relief programs from the existing fund balances within MDL and Commerce or the 
Rainy Day Fund (in $25.0 million increments). The bill further requires that MDL and 
Commerce prioritize the use of existing and available budgetary resources (after the use of 
any federal funds that become available for any purpose for which a temporary relief 
program is established under the bill) before requesting the transfer of funds from the 
Rainy Day Fund. Any funds distributed under the bill’s temporary relief programs must be 
distributed on or before June 30, 2025.  
 
The bill’s temporary relief program measures are generally implemented by 
Executive Order 01.01.2024.11, which establishes the Commerce-administered Business 
Assistance Program and the MDL-administered Worker Retention and Worker Support 
programs. As of May 1, 2024, the Administration has submitted letters notifying the 
General Assembly of its intent to (1) transfer a total of $60.0 million from the Rainy Day 
Fund to MDL to support the Worker Retention Program ($25.0 million) and Worker 
Support Program ($35.0 million); (2) appropriate $15.0 million in unappropriated special 
funds within Commerce to support the Business Assistance Program; and (3) realign 
$660,000 in general funds and $2.5 million in federal funds within MDL to support the 
Worker Retention Program.  
 
Thus, in fiscal 2024, special fund revenues and expenditures for MDL increase by at least  
$60.0 million as funds are transferred from the Rainy Day Fund to fund the Worker 
Retention and Worker Support programs, and special fund expenditures for Commerce 
increase by at least $15.0 million to implement the Business Assistance Program. 
Commerce advises that $12.0 million and $3.0 million from the unencumbered balances of 
the Maryland Economic Development Assistance Fund (MEDAF) and the Maryland 
Industrial Development Financing Authority (MIDFA), respectively, were identified to 
fund the Business Assistance Program; in future years, MEDAF and MIDFA finances are 
potentially affected to the extent fewer funds are available for regular, existing purposes.  
 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
HB 1526/ Page 14 
To the extent additional funding is made available for temporary relief programs under the 
bill via transfer from the Rainy Day Fund or from other existing fund balances within MDL 
or Commerce, special fund expenditures for MDL and/or Commerce increase further in 
fiscal 2024 and/or 2025. As noted above, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly authorizes the Governor to transfer by budget amendment a combined 
total of up to $275.0 million from the Rainy Day Fund in fiscal 2024 and 2025 for this 
purpose, contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file. The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) does not expect transfers from the Rainy Day Fund sufficient 
to maximize this authorization – nonetheless, given the $275.0 million cap, any Rainy Day 
Fund transfers under the bill do not reduce the fund balance of the Rainy Day Fund by an 
amount sufficient to trigger a required general fund appropriation to the fund in fiscal 2026.  
 
To the extent distributed program funds are recaptured in accordance with the bill, special 
fund revenues increase as such funds are deposited in the originating fund. Any unspent 
program funds similarly revert to the originating fund.  
 
Disposition of Economic Damages  
 
The bill specifies that funds received by the State from a lawsuit or, in the instance of a 
subrogation claim, that are related to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge must be 
deposited in the Rainy Day Fund. To the extent such funds are received by the State and 
would otherwise be deposited in the general fund and/or other fund – Rainy Day Fund 
revenues increase, and general fund revenues and/or other special fund revenues decrease, 
by corresponding amounts. Any such effect cannot be reliably predicted and is not reflected 
in this analysis.  
 
Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship Program 
 
General fund expenditures increase beginning as early as fiscal 2025 as funds are 
appropriated to the Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship Fund to fund scholarship 
awards to eligible students. Special fund revenues to and expenditures from the  
Fallen Transportation Workers Scholarship Fund increase accordingly. The amount of such 
expenditures depends on the number and timing of scholarship awards, which are unknown 
at this time. As discussed above, the maximum amount of each scholarship award is based 
on the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory fees of an undergraduate student at a 
four-year institution within USM (other than UMB or UMGC) with the highest annual 
expenses for a full-time undergraduate at the time the award is made. While a precise 
estimate is not feasible at this time, DLS notes that the scholarship provisions apply to a 
limited number of individuals and, depending on the ages of affected dependents, related 
program expenditures may be delayed for several years and spread over at least 20 years.  
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
HB 1526/ Page 15 
It is assumed that MHEC can administer the scholarship program using existing resources. 
Likewise, it is assumed that public four-year institutions of higher education and  
Baltimore City Community College can identify eligible individuals and distribute 
scholarship awards using existing resources. DLS notes that MHEC will have to establish 
new procedures for out-of-state postsecondary institutions to notify the commission when 
they enroll eligible students, and to provide payments to those institutions.  
 
Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund 
 
 
Waiver of Benefit Charges 
 
The bill requires the Secretary of Labor to waive the charge of UI benefits paid to a 
claimant against the earned rating record of an employer for any claim of benefits if (1) the 
claim is determined by the Secretary to be related to the reduced operations of the  
Port of Baltimore due to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge and (2) the employer 
had no direct or indirect control over the actions leading to the disruption in employment.  
 
For a typical employer, an earned rating record is determined by finding the ratio between 
the benefits charged to the employer’s account and the taxable wages reported in the 
three fiscal years prior to the computation date (July 1 each year). That ratio is then used 
to determine the amount of UI taxes that must be paid in the following calendar year. 
Therefore, if the Secretary waives benefit charges, the benefit ratios of affected employers 
will be lower than they otherwise would have been, which generally, but not always, 
reduces those employers’ UI taxes. The magnitude of the effect on UITF cannot be 
estimated at this time but depends on the number and size of affected employers and the 
nature and duration of the related unemployment. Based on the likely timing of affected 
UI benefits, nonbudgeted revenues for UITF decrease in fiscal 2025 through 2029. Relative 
to overall UITF revenues, the effect is likely modest.  
 
 
Exemption from Requirement to Actively Seek Work  
 
The bill authorizes the Secretary of Labor to exempt an individual from the requirement to 
be actively seeking work for UI benefits eligibility if the individual is laid off from work 
as a direct result of the event or occurrence that led to the Governor declaring a state of 
emergency related to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge. MDL can handle any 
related administrative requirements with existing budgeted resources. MDL advises that 
this flexibility is not anticipated to substantively increase the amount of UI benefits paid, 
presumably as such individuals could comply with the work search requirement and 
receive benefits absent the bill. Accordingly, this analysis assumes that nonbudgeted 
revenues and expenditures for UITF are not materially affected. 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
HB 1526/ Page 16 
 
Incorporation of Work Sharing Program  
 
The bill requires MDL, to the extent practicable, to (1) incorporate the State’s voluntary 
work sharing UI program in conjunction with, or as a condition or an extension of, the 
temporary relief program for small businesses, labor unions, trade associations, and 
specified companies or (2) substitute the work sharing program for the temporary relief 
program. In practice, work sharing is an eligible cost under the Worker Retention Program, 
and funding recipients are required to explore how the program may support their 
employees if they need to reduce working hours.  
 
The effect of this provision on UITF revenues and expenditures cannot be determined at 
this time, as it depends on multiple unknown factors, such as (1) the extent to which the 
bill directly generates increased participation in the work sharing program, which is 
available to affected employers absent the bill; (2) whether participating employers would 
otherwise lay off some or all of their staff; and (3) whether participating employers will 
have the associated benefit charges waived by the Secretary of Labor under the bill. The 
effects on UITF expenditures (increase or decrease) are likely limited to fiscal 2024 and 
2025; the effects on UITF revenues (increase or decrease) are likely limited to fiscal 2025 
through 2029. Relative to overall UITF revenues and expenditures, the effect is likely 
modest. Through April 25, 2024, MDL had not received any requests for working sharing 
participation.  
 
Maryland Transportation Authority – Bond Issuances 
 
Nonbudgeted revenues increase significantly – potentially during the five-year period 
covered by this fiscal and policy note – to the extent that MDTA issues additional bonds 
as a result of the bill. However, the timing and amount of any additional bonds issued by 
MDTA due to the increase in its debt capacity are unknown and depend on numerous 
factors, including:   
 
 
any estimated costs for MDTA capital projects that require the issuance of 
additional bonds in excess of MDTA’s current debt capacity of $3.0 billion 
(including any planning, design, and construction costs to rebuild the Francis Scott 
Key Bridge);  
 
the timing of any such costs; and  
 
the extent to which the federal government contributes to any such efforts; for 
example, MDOT advises that, if the federal government provides a significant 
amount of federal aid to rebuild the Francis Scott Key Bridge, additional bonds may 
not need to be issued in the near term.  
 
MDTA’s current debt outstanding is approximately $2.2 billion. However, based on 
MDTA’s January 2024 Financial Forecast for Fiscal 2023 to 2029, its debt outstanding is 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
HB 1526/ Page 17 
projected to reach nearly $2.9 billion by fiscal 2029; this projection does not reflect any 
additional spending to rebuild the Francis Scott Key Bridge. Accordingly, under current 
law, MDTA has minimal capacity to issue additional debt beyond that anticipated in its 
January 2024 forecast – to rebuild the bridge or for any other purpose.  
 
Nonbudgeted expenditures increase to pay debt service on any additional bonds issued 
under the bill.  
 
State Tax Revenues 
 
State general and special fund tax revenues potentially increase to the extent that assistance 
provided to individuals and businesses under the bill sustains income and business activity 
that would have otherwise been lost in the absence of the bill. Any such effect cannot be 
reliably predicted at this time.  
 
The bill's income tax subtraction modification provisions do not materially affect State 
revenues.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local tax revenues potentially increase to the extent that assistance 
provided to individuals and businesses under the bill sustains income and business activity 
that would have otherwise been lost in the absence of the bill. Any such effect cannot be 
reliably predicted at this time.  
 
The bill's income tax subtraction modification provisions do not materially affect local 
income tax revenues.  
 
It is assumed local community colleges can identify eligible individuals and distribute 
scholarship awards using existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses affected by the reduced operations of the port 
meaningfully benefit from financial assistance provided under the bill, which potentially 
allows these businesses to maintain their workforces and otherwise meet normal financial 
obligations during the period of reduced port operations.  
 
In addition, small businesses potentially benefit from the bill’s requirement that the 
Secretary of Labor waive the charge of UI benefits paid to a claimant against the earned 
rating record of an employer in specified circumstances related to the collapse of the  
Francis Scott Key Bridge and reduced operations of the Port of Baltimore. Generally, but 
not always, additional UI benefits paid to an eligible recipient increase the benefit ratio of 
the former employer, which increases the employer’s UI taxes for three subsequent years. 
Under Table A, which applies in 2024, the per-employee UI tax ranges from $25.50 to 
$637.50.  
 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
HB 1526/ Page 18 
Finally, it is assumed that eligible private career schools, many of which are small 
businesses, can identify eligible individuals and distribute scholarship awards using 
existing resources.  
 
Additional Comments:  Small nonprofits, while not considered small businesses for 
purposes of fiscal and policy notes, reimburse UITF dollar-for-dollar for any UI benefits 
paid on a quarterly basis and are potentially affected by any change in benefit payments 
made under the bill.  
 
It is assumed that private nonprofit institutions of higher education can identify eligible 
individuals and distribute scholarship awards using existing resources.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1188 (Senators Ferguson and Salling) - Finance and Budget 
and Taxation. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Board of Public Works; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Governor’s Office; Comptroller’s Office; Anne Arundel and Baltimore 
counties; Congressional Research Service; U.S. Small Business Administration; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - April 2, 2024 
Third Reader - May 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 13, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
HB 1526/ Page 19 
Appendix – Unemployment Insurance 
 
 
Program Overview 
 
Unemployment Insurance (UI) provides temporary, partial wage replacement benefits of 
up to $430 per week to individuals who are unemployed through no fault of their own and 
who are willing to work, able to work, and actively seeking employment. Both the federal 
and state governments have responsibilities for UI programs. Generally, funding for the 
program is provided by employers through UI taxes paid to both the federal government 
for administrative and other expenses and to the states for deposit in their UI trust funds. 
Using federal tax revenues, the UI program is administered pursuant to state law by state 
employees. The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Unemployment 
Insurance administers the State’s UI program. 
 
Each state law prescribes the tax structure, qualifying requirements, benefit levels, and 
disqualification provisions. These laws must, however, conform to broad federal 
guidelines. 
 
Employer Contributions 
 
Most Maryland employers pay State UI taxes, although State and local governments and 
some nonprofit organizations reimburse the Unemployment Insurance Trust Fund (UITF) 
for claims paid in lieu of paying taxes. Therefore, for most Maryland employers, the State 
UI tax rate is a function of: 
 
 
the employer’s specific unemployment claims history; and 
 
 
the applicable tax table, which is based on the State’s UITF balance and applies to 
most taxable employers. 
 
Exhibit 1 shows the range of State UI taxes a typical employer owes based on the tax table 
in effect; there are other rates for new employers and in other limited circumstances. State 
UI taxes and reimbursements are typically due quarterly; however, Chapter 39 of 2021 
allowed employers with fewer than 50 employees to defer 2021 State UI tax payments or 
reimbursements until January 31, 2022, and authorized the Secretary of Labor to offer a 
similar deferment in 2022. The Act, in conjunction with a 2020 executive order, also 
prevented UI claims made during the COVID-19 pandemic from increasing an employer’s 
taxes, although employers still paid broadly higher rates under Table F in 2021 and Table C 
in 2022 and 2023. With the UITF balance restored, the State is in Table A again in 2024.  
 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
HB 1526/ Page 20 
 
Exhibit 1 
Tax Tables and Applicable Employer Tax Rates 
 
  
As of Sept. 30, if the 
Trust Fund Balance, 
As a Percentage of 
Taxable Wages 
Trust Fund Balance 
($ in Millions) 
Then Next Year’s Tax 
Rates Range from… 
Annual Tax Per Employee  
(Rate x $8,500) 
Tax 
Table Exceeds 
Up to 
Exceeds 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
No 
Claims 
Single 
Claim 
Up to 
A 
5.00% 
N/A 
$1,074.6 
N/A 
0.30% 
0.60% 
7.50% $25.50 
$51.00 
$637.50 
B 
4.50% 
5.00% 
967.2 
$1,074.6 
0.60% 
0.90% 
9.00% 51.00 
76.50 
765.00 
C 
4.00% 
4.50% 
859.7 
967.2 
1.00% 
1.50% 
10.50% 85.00 
127.50 
892.50 
D 
3.50% 
4.00% 
752.2 
859.7 
1.40% 
2.10% 
11.80% 119.00 
178.50 
1,003.00 
E 
3.00% 
3.50% 
644.8 
752.2 
1.80% 
2.60% 
12.90% 153.00 
221.00 
1,096.50 
F 
0.00% 
3.00% 
0.0 
644.8 
2.20% 
3.10% 
13.50% 187.00 
263.50 
1,147.50 
 
Notes:  Fund balance threshold dollar amounts are based on the 2022 taxable wage base and are subject to modest 
changes each year. A “single claim” represents the tax rate applicable to the lowest possible rate associated with 
nonzero (.0001 to .0027) benefit ratios. Taxes are applied to the first $8,500 earned by each employee, each year; 
compensation less than that amount reduces taxes owed accordingly. 
 
Table F was in effect in 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic; prior to that, Table A had been in effect since 2016. 
Table C was in effect in 2022 and 2023 pursuant to Chapter 73 of 2021, which also resulted in an $830 million infusion 
of federal funds into the trust fund in 2021. A preexisting State law requiring a federal solvency goal to be met prior 
to moving to a tax table with lower rates again applies beginning in 2024. The federal solvency goal, which is designed 
to ensure the State’s ability to pay claims during periods of high unemployment, is approximately $1.7 billion and 
varies with the total wages paid in the State and benefits paid during recessions. 
 
As of January 1, 2024, the trust fund balance was $1.9 billion. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Benefit Payments 
 
Generally, the weekly benefit amount a claimant is eligible for is based on the quarterly 
wages that the claimant was paid for covered employment in the calendar quarter of the 
claimant’s base period in which those wages were highest. The base period is the first four 
of the last five completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit 
year, or, if the individual does not qualify under that definition, the four most recently 
completed calendar quarters immediately preceding the start of the benefit year. 
 
Weekly benefit amounts range from $50 to $430 per week, based on earnings in the base 
period. There is also a dependent allowance of $8 per dependent, for up to five dependents, 
although the allowance cannot raise the weekly benefit amount above $430. The first $50 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
HB 1526/ Page 21 
of any wages earned by an individual receiving UI benefits in a given week is disregarded 
for purposes of calculating the weekly benefit amount, after which the benefit payment is 
reduced dollar for dollar. These amounts do not adjust for inflation. Generally, during a 
benefit year, a claimant is entitled to 26 times the claimant’s weekly benefit amount. 
During periods of high unemployment, extended benefits may also be available. 
 
2021 Legislation Enhanced and Required Evaluation of the State Unemployment Insurance 
System 
 
The unprecedented volume of claims and benefit payments due to COVID-19 strained the 
State UI system to its limit, which raised numerous concerns about the system’s ability to 
effectively meet the needs of claimants and employers. Consequently, during the 
2021 legislative session, the General Assembly required several system reforms, including 
an MDL-led study regarding various longer-term reforms. 
 
Broadly, the new laws (1) required Table C to apply in 2022 and 2023; (2) made 
administrative changes to assist employers in paying their taxes, specifically allowing them 
to defer payments under certain circumstances; (3) exempted certain UI benefit payments 
from being subject to the State income tax; (4) temporarily modified benefit calculations 
to assist claimants working on a part-time basis; (5) made system administrative changes 
that must be implemented by MDL; and (6) enhanced the State’s work sharing program, 
which allows an employee to continue working at reduced hours and obtain UI benefits 
under certain circumstances. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 21