START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1525 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1525 
(Chair, Appropriations Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Stadium Authority) 
Appropriations 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Maryland Stadium Authority - Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Special 
Funds - Established 
 
 
This departmental bill establishes two special, nonlapsing funds in the Maryland Stadium 
Authority (MSA) to pay for expenses related to capital improvements, repairs, and 
emergency repairs at the “Camden Yards football sports facility.” In addition to other 
sources, each fund consists of, to the extent considered appropriate by MSA, proceeds from 
the sale of bonds concerning the facility. The bill also requires that $5.0 million of specified 
MSA bond proceeds be transferred to each fund. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Nonbudgeted expenditures for MSA increase by $10.0 million in FY 2025 
to reflect the required bond proceeds transfer. Special fund revenues for MSA increase 
correspondingly. Special fund revenues for MSA increase by $2.0 million annually from 
FY 2026 through 2030 ($1.0 million each from MSA and the Ravens) and by $1.0 million 
annually thereafter through the duration of the lease (at least through FY 2038). Special 
fund expenditures for MSA increase to the extent that spending is required for capital 
and/or emergency purposes. Nonbudgeted expenditures for MSA are also affected by 
ongoing required transfers, although amounts in any particular fiscal year are unknown. 
This bill establishes a mandated distribution for FY 2025. 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MSA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1525/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Capital Works and Emergency Repair Funds 
 
The Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Capital Works Fund and the Camden Yards 
Football Sports Facility Emergency Repair Fund are established in MSA as special, 
nonlapsing funds. MSA must administer each fund. 
 
The purpose of the Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Capital Works Fund is to enable 
MSA to pay all expenses related to capital improvements and repairs at the Camden Yards 
football sports facility. The fund may be used only for (1) capital improvements or capital 
repairs at or for the benefit of the facility and (2) to the extent funds in the Camden Yards 
Football Sports Facility Emergency Repair Fund are insufficient, emergency repairs. The 
purpose of the Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Emergency Repair Fund is to enable 
MSA to pay all expenses related to emergency repairs at the facility. The fund may only 
be used for that purpose. 
 
In addition to money appropriated in the State budget, interest, and any other money from 
any other source, each fund consists of, to the extent considered appropriate by MSA, 
proceeds from the sale of bonds concerning the facility. Neither fund may be (1) pledged 
to or charged with MSA borrowing; (2) used for payment of debt service; or (3) used for 
the associated charges, expenses, or management of MSA obligations related to MSA 
bonds. No part of either fund may revert or be credited to the general fund or any special 
fund. 
 
Required Transfers 
 
The proceeds of bonds issued on July 6, 2023, as the Series 2023B Bonds for the 
Camden Yards football sports facility and currently held by the State Treasurer must be 
transferred as follows: 
 
 
$5.0 million to the Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Capital Works Fund; and 
 
$5.0 million to the Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Emergency Repair Fund. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 60 of 2022 increased the amount of taxable or tax-exempt bonds 
that MSA may issue for sports facilities at Camden Yards from $235.0 million to 
$1.2 billion, split evenly between the baseball and football stadiums (and the sports 
facilities directly related to their operation), and allowed renovation as an additional 
purpose. The Act also required the Comptroller to distribute up to $90.0 million (an 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1525/ Page 3 
increase from $20.0 million) annually from State lottery revenues to the Maryland Stadium 
Facilities Fund (MSFF). 
 
Chapter 112 of 2023 established the Camden Yards Baseball Sports Facility Supplemental 
Financing Fund and the Camden Yards Football Sports Facility Supplemental Financing 
Fund in MSA for the purpose of allocating the above-described lottery revenue 
distributions for debt service between existing Camden Yards facilities bonds and new 
bonds associated with the two stadiums. More specifically, the Act limited transfers to 
MSFF to the amounts necessary to make remaining debt service payments on existing 
bonds and then reallocated remaining available revenues from MSFF to the two new 
facility supplemental financing funds. The reallocation was based on the remaining terms 
of the outstanding bonds and the outstanding debt attributable to each stadium, eventually 
reaching $45.0 million annually for each new fund beginning in fiscal 2040.  
 
Background:  When MSA and the Baltimore Ravens agreed to a new 15-year lease (with 
two optional 5-year extensions) in January 2023, the lease required the creation of  
two funds:  a capital works fund and an emergency repair fund. The two funds must be 
initially capitalized by MSA and have additional ongoing funding requirements, described 
below. The lease requires both funds to bear interest; the types of disbursements from each 
account are defined in the lease and must be mutually agreed to by both MSA and the 
Ravens.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  This analysis assumes that the bill effectuates part of the MSA lease 
with the Baltimore Ravens by creating the capital works fund and the emergency repair 
fund and providing for their initial capitalization. Even so, the bill simply requires certain 
existing nonbudgeted funds to be transferred to special funds at certain times, which may 
alter the timing of the nonbudgeted expenditures (to reflect transfers instead of direct 
spending) and creates special fund revenues and expenditures (as funds are received and 
used for authorized purposes). 
 
More specifically, the lease requires MSA to contribute $5.0 million to both the capital 
works fund and the emergency repair fund by January 31, 2024, with subsequent 
contribution requirements for each fund (this analysis assumes that July 1, 2024, is still an 
acceptable date for the transfers). For the capital works fund, the lease requires MSA to 
contribute $1.0 million annually beginning July 1, 2025. For the emergency repair fund, 
generally, the lease requires the Ravens to contribute $1.0 million annually beginning 
July 1, 2025, until the fund balance reaches $10.0 million. At that point, MSA and the 
Ravens are jointly responsible for reimbursing the fund for the costs of emergency repairs, 
and each must pay up to $1.0 million per calendar year to restore the fund balance to 
$10.0 million. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1525/ Page 4 
The initial $10.0 million capitalization for the funds is provided through the required 
transfer of specified MSA bond proceeds under the bill. MSA advises that nonbudgeted 
revenues generated at Camden Yards will be used to make additional required 
contributions. 
 
Other than the initial required transfer in fiscal 2025, the effect on nonbudgeted 
expenditures for MSA in any particular fiscal year is unknown. As the bill does not create 
new revenues, generally, there is likely no significant overall effect on nonbudgeted 
expenditures, just a potential reallocation between fiscal years. 
 
Accordingly, nonbudgeted expenditures for MSA increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2025 
to reflect the required bond proceed transfer. Special fund revenues for MSA increase 
correspondingly. Special fund revenues for MSA increase by $2.0 million annually from 
fiscal 2026 through 2030 ($1.0 million each from MSA and the Ravens) and by 
$1.0 million annually thereafter through the duration of the lease (at least through 
fiscal 2038). Special fund expenditures for MSA increase to the extent that spending is 
required for capital and/or emergency purposes. Expenditures from the emergency repair 
fund must be reimbursed; MSA is responsible for half of the reimbursement. Nonbudgeted 
expenditures for MSA are also affected by ongoing required transfers, although amounts 
in any particular fiscal year are unknown. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  None. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Stadium Authority; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 19, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1525/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Stadium Authority - Camden Yards Football Sports 
Facility Special Funds - Established 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB 1525 
 
PREPARED BY: 
David Raith 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill:   
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
 
       
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5