START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 655

Chapter 655

(House Bill 1503)

AN ACT concerning

Election Law – Campaign Finance Activities – State Treasurer

FOR the purpose of prohibiting the State Treasurer and a person acting on behalf of the
State Treasurer from participating in certain campaign finance activities during a
regular session of the General Assembly; and generally relating to the campaign
finance activities of the State Treasurer.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 13–235(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 13–235(b), (c), (e), and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

13–235.

(a) This section applies to the following officials:

(1) the Governor;

(2) the Lieutenant Governor;

(3) the Attorney General;

(4) the Comptroller; [and]

(5) THE STATE TREASURER; AND

[(5)] (6) a member of the General Assembly.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 655 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), (d), or (e) of this section, during a regular
session of the General Assembly an official described in subsection (a) of this section, or a
person acting on behalf of the official, may not, as to a candidate for federal, State, or local
office, or a campaign finance entity of the candidate or any other campaign finance entity
organized under this title and operated in coordination with a candidate:

(1) receive a contribution;

(2) conduct a fund–raising event;

(3) solicit a contribution; or

(4) deposit or use any contribution of money that was not deposited prior
to the session.

(c) An official described in subsection (a) of this section, or a person acting on
behalf of the official, is not subject to this section when engaged in activities solely related
to the official’s election to an elective federal or local office for which the official is a filed
candidate.

(e) An official described in subsection (a) of this section, or a person acting on
behalf of the official, may deposit a contribution during the legislative session if the
contribution was made electronically before the start of the session.

(f) (1) As to a violation of this section, the campaign finance entity of the
official in violation is liable for a civil penalty as provided in § 13–604.1 of this title.

(2) A civil penalty imposed under this subsection shall be distributed to the
Fair Campaign Financing Fund established under § 15–103 of this article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2