START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1516 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1516 
(Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Ways and Means 
Budget and Taxation 
 
Real Property Assessments - Notice of Change in Value or Classification - Time 
Period 
 
   
This emergency departmental bill extends the statutory deadline for fiscal 2025 by which 
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) must send out reassessment 
notices to property owners. Under current law, the reassessment notices must be sent out 
within 30 days after January 1 in order for the updated property assessments to be used by 
local governments in preparing the property tax bills for the upcoming fiscal year. Under 
the bill, this deadline is extended until May 1, 2024.     
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill prevents the reduction in State property tax revenues over the next 
three years. Absent the bill, State property tax revenues would decrease by $3.1 million in 
FY 2025 and by $18.4 million over a three-year period. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill prevents the reduction in local property tax revenues over the next 
three years. Absent the bill, county property tax revenues would decrease by $30.1 million 
in FY 2025 and by $180.6 million over a three-year period. Municipal property tax 
revenues would decrease by $2.1 million in FY 2025 and by $12.6 million over a three-year 
period.   
  
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment.  
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1516/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Each year, SDAT is required to value one-third of all real property based 
on an inspection prior to the date of finality. Real property is valued and assessed once 
every three years. Prior to June 1, 2018, statute required that the assessments be based on 
a physical inspection; however, Chapter 651 of 2018 repealed the requirement that the 
department value all real property based on an exterior physical inspection of the real 
property. Instead, the department must value real property based on a review of each 
property in each three-year cycle. The review by the department must include a physical 
inspection of a property if (1) the value of improvements to the property is being initially 
established; (2) the value of substantially completed improvements is being established; 
(3) the property is the subject of a recent sale, and the inspection is deemed necessary by 
the department for purposes of market analysis; (4) the property owner requests a physical 
inspection as part of an active appeal; (5) the department is notified by a county finance 
officer that a substantially completed improvement has been made that adds at least 
$1.0 million in value to the property; or (6) the department determines that a physical 
inspection is appropriate.  
 
In any year of a three-year cycle, real property must be revalued if any of the following 
factors causes a change in the value of the real property:  (1) the zoning classification is 
changed at the initiative of the owner or anyone having an interest in the property; (2) a 
change in use or character occurs; (3) substantially completed improvements are made that 
add at least $100,000 in value to the property; (4) an error in calculation or measurement 
of the real property caused the value to be erroneous; (5) a residential use assessment is 
terminated; or (6) a subdivision occurs. 
 
Any increase in full cash value (market value) is phased in equally over the next 
three years. All property is assessed at 100% of full cash value. 
 
Notification Requirements 
 
When any change in value or classification is determined by the department, SDAT is 
required to notify the owner in writing of the change. For an assessment change resulting 
in an increase or decrease in an existing value, the written notice must include (1) the 
amount of the current value; (2) the amount of the proposed value including a statement 
that the total amount of the proposed value is the value for purposes of appeal; (3) the 
amount of the proposed value that will be the basis for the assessment in each year of the 
three-year cycle; (4) a statement indicating the right to appeal and briefly describing the 
appeal process and the property owner’s Bill of Rights; and (5) a statement regarding the 
availability of valuation records. Generally, these notices must be sent out by January 1.  
  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1516/ Page 3 
A failure to send a notice of any change in value or classification within 30 days after 
January 1 creates an irrebuttable presumption that there has been no change in value or 
classification unless (1) the property has been transferred for consideration to new 
ownership during the previous calendar year; (2) the zoning classification of the property 
changed during the current triennial cycle or the previous calendar year, whichever is 
earlier, resulting in an increased value of the property; (3) a substantial change occurred in 
the use or character of the property during the current triennial cycle or the previous 
calendar year, whichever is earlier; (4) extensive improvements have been made on the 
property during the current triennial cycle or the previous calendar year, whichever is 
earlier; (5) due to an error in calculating or measuring improvements on the property the 
assessment for the previous taxable year was clearly erroneous; or (6) the assessment has 
been decreased. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  SDAT reports that for taxable year beginning July 1, 2024 
(fiscal 2025), 100,009 residential real property reassessment notices were not sent to 
property owners within 30 days after January 1, 2024. As a result, local governments will 
not be able to use the updated property values when preparing the property tax bills for the 
upcoming fiscal year (fiscal 2025). This will also impact property tax revenues for the 
following two fiscal years (fiscal 2026 and 2027).  
 
Exhibit 1 shows the number of affected real property accounts in each county and the 
estimated State and county revenue loss for fiscal 2025 and over the three-year assessment 
cycle (fiscal 2025 through 2027). The potential State revenue loss totals $3.1 million in 
fiscal 2025 and $18.4 million over a three-year period. The potential county revenue loss 
(including Baltimore City) totals $30.1 million in fiscal 2025 and $180.6 million over a 
three-year period. The potential municipal revenue loss totals approximately $2.1 million 
in fiscal 2025 and $12.6 million over a three-year period. By extending the mailing 
deadline for assessment notices to May 1, 2024, the bill prevents the potential State and 
local revenue loss.      
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues for Maryland counties and 
Baltimore City can be found in the County Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. 
Information on the most recent property reassessments for each county can be found in the 
Local Government Overview Report. A copy of both reports is available on the DLS 
website. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
HB 1516/ Page 4 
 
Exhibit 1 
Assessment Notices and Potential Revenue Impact 
 
County 
Number of 
Accounts 
FY 2025 
Revenue Loss 
Three-year  
Revenue Loss 
Allegany 
1,668 
$82,434 
$494,605 
Anne Arundel 
8,148 
1,836,586 
11,019,519 
Baltimore City 
4,268 
1,216,588 
7,299,526 
Baltimore 
13,849 
2,661,033 
15,966,198 
Calvert 
2,254 
370,093 
2,220,557 
Caroline 
156 
10,588 
63,528 
Carroll 
569 
182,171 
1,093,028 
Cecil 
12,461 
2,140,523 
12,843,137 
Charles 
3,583 
824,654 
4,947,925 
Dorchester 
616 
60,352 
362,111 
Frederick 
2,253 
948,480 
5,690,878 
Garrett 
804 
238,882 
1,433,290 
Harford 
7,311 
1,258,015 
7,548,091 
Howard 
2,735 
1,176,691 
7,060,145 
Kent 
231 
29,908 
179,450 
Montgomery 
9,851 
8,341,794 
50,050,767 
Prince George’s 
16,622 
5,846,030 
35,076,179 
Queen Anne’s 
1,124 
190,185 
1,141,110 
St. Mary’s 
1,626 
381,402 
2,288,413 
Somerset 
726 
51,165 
306,987 
Talbot 
381 
58,247 
349,480 
Washington 
1,125 
201,106 
1,206,635 
Wicomico 
1,904 
203,635 
1,221,812 
Worcester 
5,744 
1,784,895 
10,709,370 
Total  
100,009 
$30,095,457 
$180,572,740 
State Impact 
$3,072,080 
$18,432,477 
 
Source:  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
HB 1516/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
HB 1516/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Real Property Assessments – Notice of Change in Value or 
Classification – Time Period 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
HB1516 
 
PREPARED BY: 
SDAT 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill would allow the Department to send reassessment notices as scheduled. Small 
businesses will experience an increase in assessed property values as scheduled.  
 

END OF PAGE 6