START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1509 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
House Bill 1509 
(Delegate Stein, et al.) 
Environment and Transportation 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Baltimore Regional Water Governance Model Workgroup - Established 
 
   
This bill establishes the Baltimore Regional Water Governance Model Workgroup to 
review and analyze various topics related to regional governance models for water and 
wastewater in the Baltimore region. The Mayor of Baltimore City and the 
Baltimore County Executive must jointly provide staff for the workgroup. In consultation 
with the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) and the Maryland Department of the 
Environment (MDE), the workgroup must develop a report of its findings and, by 
June 30, 2027, submit the report to the Mayor of Baltimore City, the Baltimore County 
Executive, the Governor, and the General Assembly. The workgroup must hire 
independent consultants to facilitate the workgroup’s tasks. The Governor must include in 
the annual budget bill for fiscal 2026 an appropriation of $500,000 to hire the independent 
consultants. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 only 
in FY 2026 due to the mandated appropriation. State revenues are not affected. This bill 
establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
500,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
$0 
($500,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Baltimore City and Baltimore County revenues increase by a total of 
$500,000 in FY 2026; expenditures increase correspondingly, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful impact on any small 
business independent consultants hired under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1509/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must (1) review the report of the Baltimore Regional 
Water Governance Task Force submitted pursuant to Chapters 178 and 179 of 2023; 
(2) analyze issues relevant to implementing a regional water governance model in the 
Baltimore region, including several specified tasks; (3) analyze whether creating a 
City-County Rate Board is necessary to ensure fairness for consumers and balance city and 
county rates; and (4) review the regional governance models recommended in the task force 
report and other existing and potential regional water and wastewater governance models 
to assess how different regional approaches may improve specified metrics. In developing 
the required report, the workgroup may not consider or make recommendations related to 
a privately operated regional water governance model. 
 
The independent consultants hired pursuant to the bill must include (1) outside counsel to 
assist with the analysis of issues related to regional governance and (2) experts in equity 
analysis. 
 
Workgroup members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 178 and 179 established the Baltimore Regional Water 
Governance Task Force to (1) review specified findings of the 2021 Water/Sewer Services 
Comprehensive Business Process Review conducted by a consulting firm hired by 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County; (2) review other existing regional water and 
wastewater governance models to assess how different regional approaches may improve 
specified metrics; (3) assess alternative governance structures for the Baltimore region’s 
water and wastewater utility; (4) analyze the fiscal implications and efficiencies of each 
alternative governance structure; and (5) make a recommendation regarding the 
governance model best suited for water and wastewater systems in the Baltimore region 
and the legislation and funding necessary to establish the recommended model. The final 
report of the task force, published in January 2024, is available on Baltimore City’s 
website. 
 
The Baltimore County Metropolitan District, established by the General Assembly 
pursuant to Chapter 539 of 1924, is the geographic boundary within which a property may 
be eligible to receive public water and sewer service. Residents of both Baltimore City and 
Baltimore County currently receive water through a system managed by the Baltimore City 
Department of Public Works under an agreement that dates back to 1972. A 1974 
agreement governs Baltimore City’s responsibility for the treatment of city and county 
wastewater. Under these agreements, Baltimore City bills all customers for water use. Each 
jurisdiction bills its own residents for sewer charges and other related charges. 
Baltimore City is primarily responsible for managing the water and wastewater facilities. 
According to the task force report, the regional drinking water and wastewater systems 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
HB 1509/ Page 3 
now serve as many as 1.8 million residents across Baltimore City, Baltimore County, and 
other surrounding jurisdictions (including Anne Arundel, Carroll, Harford, and 
Howard counties). 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in fiscal 2026 
only, reflecting the mandated appropriation for the purpose of hiring independent 
consultants pursuant to the bill. Baltimore City and Baltimore County revenues 
(collectively) increase correspondingly in fiscal 2026, reflecting receipt of the mandated 
appropriation. 
Baltimore 
City 
and 
Baltimore 
County 
expenditures 
increase 
correspondingly to hire the independent consultants to facilitate the workgroup’s tasks, as 
required by the bill. While these consultant costs may be incurred completely in 
fiscal 2026, it is possible that some portion of the costs are incurred in fiscal 2027. 
 
Baltimore City and Baltimore County both advise that they can staff the task force using 
existing resources. OAG and MDE can consult with the workgroup using existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable within existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 843 and SB 880 of 2023, which were enacted as Chapters 178 and 
179.  
 
Designated Cross File:  SB 1174 (Senator McCray)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) - Education, Energy, and the Environment. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Baltimore County; Office of the Attorney 
General; Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
js/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Kathleen P. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3