START OF PAGE 1
 
  HB 1503 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
House Bill 1503 
(Delegate Roberts) 
Ways and Means 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
 
Election Law - Campaign Finance Activities - State Treasurer 
 
 
This bill prohibits the State Treasurer, and any person acting on behalf of the State 
Treasurer, from participating in certain campaign finance activities during a regular session 
of the General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Existing State campaign finance law prohibits the 
Governor, the Lieutenant Governor, the Attorney General, the Comptroller, and members 
of the General Assembly, or a person acting on any one of those officials’ behalf, from – 
during a regular session of the General Assembly, and as to a federal, State, or local 
candidate or associated campaign finance entity – (1) receiving a contribution; 
(2) conducting a fund-raising event; (3) soliciting a contribution; or (4) depositing or using 
any contribution of money that was not deposited prior to the session. Exceptions apply for 
activities solely related to the official’s election to an elective federal or local office for 
which the official is a filed candidate and for publicly financed gubernatorial tickets. In 
addition, a contribution may be deposited by an official, or a person acting on the official’s 
behalf, during the legislative session, if the contribution was made electronically before the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
HB 1503/ Page 2 
start of the session. The bill adds the State Treasurer to the list of officials subject to the 
prohibition. 
 
Under existing law, the campaign finance entity of an official in violation of the prohibition 
must refund the contribution to the contributor and pay a civil penalty of $1,000 plus the 
amount of the contribution, unless the State Board of Elections at its discretion assesses a 
lesser penalty for good cause. Penalties are distributed to the Fair Campaign Financing 
Fund, which holds funds for public campaign financing of gubernatorial tickets under the 
Public Financing Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Board of Elections; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2