START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1 
(Senator Augustine) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Electricity and Gas - Retail Supply - Regulation and Consumer Protection 
 
 
This bill alters regulatory requirements for the marketing and sale of electricity and gas by 
retail suppliers, utilities, and related entities. Most of the requirements are related to 
residential service. The bill must be construed to apply only prospectively and may not be 
applied or interpreted to have any effect on or application to any electricity supply 
agreement or gas supply agreement that is in effect on or before December 31, 2024. The 
bill also (1) increases the maximum amount that the Public Service Commission (PSC) 
may assess public service companies each year to reimburse its expenses; (2) alters the 
name, purposes, and permissible uses of the Retail Choice Customer Education and 
Protection Fund; and (3) requires PSC to conduct a study on co-located load configuration. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Net special fund expenditures for PSC and the Office of People’s Counsel 
(OPC) increase by $1.7 million FY 2025. Future years generally reflect annualization and 
the elimination of one-time costs. The FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes 12 positions and $1.2 million in associated net funding for PSC and OPC, 
contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file, as discussed below. Special fund 
revenues increase correspondingly from fees and from assessments imposed on public 
service companies to fund PSC and OPC operations. Other effects are discussed below. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$1.7 
$1.8 
$1.9 
$2.0 
$2.1 
SF Expenditure 
$1.7 
$1.8 
$1.9 
$2.0 
$2.1 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Broadly, in addition to other minor and conforming changings, the bill:   
 
 
establishes an energy salesperson license and an energy vendor license, subject to 
specified requirements; 
 
updates and aligns licensing requirements for electricity and gas suppliers and 
enhances related penalties; 
 
establishes new requirements for residential electricity supplier contracts; 
 
establishes new reporting requirements for billing entities; 
 
establishes new requirements related to electric and gas company marketing and 
cost recovery; 
 
establishes additional requirements on green power marketing; 
 
establishes additional requirements for residential energy retailers, as defined; 
 
states the intent of the General Assembly that PSC establish, staff, and fund a new 
division focused on retail supply;  
 
authorizes PSC to impose a one-time $275,000 special assessment; 
 
increases the amount that PSC may annually assess each public service company to 
fund its operations; 
 
modifies the purposes and permissible uses of the Retail Choice Customer 
Education and Protection Fund, renames it the Education and Protection Fund, and 
allows for it to be used as a funding source for a required training and educational 
program; and 
 
requires PSC to study and make recommendations on issues related to co-located 
load configuration and to report its findings and recommendations to specified 
committees of the General Assembly by December 15, 2024. 
 
New Licenses 
 
The bill establishes energy salesperson and energy vendor licenses, subject to specified 
requirements described below. Energy salespersons and energy vendors are also generally 
integrated into other provisions relating to electricity and natural gas supply, such as those 
requiring PSC to adopt consumer protection orders or regulations and establishing civil 
penalties. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1/ Page 3 
 
Energy Salesperson License  
 
“Energy salesperson” means an individual who is licensed by PSC to sell:   
 
 
electricity or electricity supply services to residential retail electric customers on 
behalf of an electricity supplier as an employee or agent of the electricity supplier; 
or 
 
gas or gas supply services to residential retail gas customers on behalf of a gas 
supplier as an employee or agent of the gas supplier. 
 
It does not include specified governmental entities or an employee or contractor of an 
electric company when the individual is performing duties specific to standard offer service 
(SOS). 
 
Beginning July 1, 2025, a person may not engage in the business of an energy salesperson 
in the State unless the person holds a license issued by PSC. Additionally, a licensed energy 
salesperson may offer or sell electricity supply agreements or gas supply agreements to 
customers in the State only if the energy salesperson is associated with a licensed electricity 
supplier or licensed gas supplier, respectively. 
 
The bill specifies application requirements for an energy salesperson license, including 
providing proof of association with a licensed electricity or gas supplier, as appropriate, 
payment of an applicable licensing fee, and proof of compliance with applicable training 
requirements for customer protection. PSC must also, by regulation or order, require proof 
of financial integrity and require the licensee to post a bond or similar instrument if, in 
PSC’s judgement, it is necessary to insure the licensee’s financial integrity. The term of 
the license is three years and may be renewed. Terms may be staggered by PSC. The license 
cannot be transferred without prior PSC approval. 
 
 
Energy Vendor License 
 
“Energy vendor” means a person that has a contract or subcontract to provide energy sales 
services to an electricity supplier or a gas supplier that provides electricity supply services 
or gas supply services, respectively, to a residential customer.  
 
Beginning July 1, 2025, a person may not engage in the business of an energy vendor in 
the State unless the person holds a license issued by PSC. The bill specifies application 
requirements for an energy vendor license, including payment of an applicable licensing 
fee, and additional actions that PSC must take by regulation or order that mirror those for 
energy salespersons. The term of the license is three years and may be renewed. Terms 
may be staggered by PSC. The license cannot be transferred without prior PSC approval.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1/ Page 4 
Public Service Commission Licensing and Related Enforcement Activities  
 
Existing provisions related to PSC’s authority to license electricity and gas suppliers are 
updated to incorporate energy salespersons and energy vendors and to authorize PSC to 
deny an initial license or refuse to renew a license. Additionally, PSC’s authority to impose 
a moratorium on adding or soliciting customers by an electricity supplier for just cause on 
its own investigation, or on complaint of OPC, the Attorney General, or an affected party 
is expanded to include other specified regulatory actions:  licensing, civil penalties, and 
ordering refunds. The expanded authority for electricity suppliers is mirrored in updated 
provisions regulating gas suppliers. 
 
The maximum civil penalty for related electricity supplier violations is increased from 
$10,000 to $25,000 and applicability is expanded to include energy vendors. Civil penalty 
and other PSC enforcement provisions for electricity suppliers are mirrored in updated 
provisions regulating gas suppliers, including the maximum civil penalty of $25,000. 
Energy salespersons are not subject to a civil penalty, but are subject, after a hearing, to 
specified administrative actions, such as license revocation. 
 
Residential Electricity or Gas Supply Other Than Standard Offer Service 
 
For residential electricity supply other than supply offered through SOS or specified 
governmental entities, a residential electricity supplier:   
 
 
may offer electricity, other than green power, only at a price that does not exceed 
the trailing 12-month average of the electric company’s SOS rate in the electric 
company’s service territory as of the date of agreement with the customer; 
 
may offer residential electricity supply only for a term up to 12 months at a time 
and without automatic renewal; 
 
may, for electricity supply other than green power, automatically renew the term 
only if the electricity supplier provides notice to the customer 90 days before and 
30 days before renewal; 
 
may offer green power that meets specified requirements, discussed below, but may 
not automatically renew the term with the customer; 
 
may not offer a variable rate other than a rate that adjusts for seasonal variation up 
to two times in a single year (this does not prohibit the offer and use of time-of-use 
rates that establish different rates for periods within a single day); and 
 
may not pay a commission or other incentive-based compensation to an energy 
salesperson for enrolling customers. 
 
Additionally, a residential electricity supplier may not sell to an electric company, and an 
electric company may not purchase from an electricity supplier, accounts receivable. The 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 1/ Page 5 
above requirements must be construed to apply to all electricity agreements and supply 
agreements entered into or renewed on or after January 1, 2025. 
 
An electric company and a residential electricity supplier must establish a mechanism for 
a customer whose account number or customer choice identification number has been 
compromised to receive a replacement number on request, subject to verification in a 
manner approved by PSC. 
 
Generally, as approved by PSC by regulation or order, each electric company and each 
residential electricity supplier must allow a customer to indicate the customer’s intention 
to remain on SOS indefinitely and not to receive directed marketing contacts from 
electricity suppliers through the implementation of a “do not transfer” list onto which the 
customer may request to be placed. 
 
The bill establishes parallel requirements for gas suppliers that supply gas to residential 
gas customers – although there are no requirements related to green power. 
 
The requirement that PSC establish the definition of “default service” and include 
information on the transition of SOS to a default service in a recurring report are repealed. 
 
 
Monthly Data Reporting 
 
By the 15th day of each month, each billing entity, as defined, must submit a report to PSC 
on customer choice in its service territory for the preceding month, including:   
 
 
the total kilowatt-hours distributed, and supply cost charged, to customers 
purchasing electricity from a third-party electricity supplier, along with the total cost 
that would have been paid by those customers under SOS; 
 
the net third-party total cost compared to the net SOS cost; 
 
the total third-party average rate, the SOS average rate, and the difference between 
the two; 
 
various specified third-party average rates for specified customers and types of 
rates, and the variance between such rates and the SOS average rate; and  
 
other pertinent information PSC considers appropriate. 
 
The bill establishes parallel requirements billing entities for gas customers. 
 
Marketing and Cost Recovery 
 
Generally, except for materials to educate or inform a retail customer about SOS, default 
gas commodity service, or customer choice, an electric company or gas company may not 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 1/ Page 6 
recover through its rates costs associated with marketing its services. However, PSC may 
adopt criteria for reviewing marketing and other communications materials to determine 
whether their costs may be recovered through rates. 
 
An electric cooperative may advertise, market, and promote SOS and related products in 
its service territory in compliance with appropriate consumer protections consistent with 
those that apply to electricity suppliers under § 7-507 of the Public Utilities Article (this 
does not apply to Choptank Electric Cooperative). An electric cooperative may recover 
through its rates any costs associated with marketing its services, including the costs 
associated with materials that educate or inform a retail customer about SOS or customer 
choice. 
 
Green Power Marketing 
 
Generally, an electricity supplier that supplies electricity to residential electric customers 
may not market electricity as “green power” unless:   
 
 
the percentage of electricity being offered, or the equivalent number of renewable 
energy credits (RECs) associated with the electricity being marketed as 
green power, equals or exceeds the greater of 51% or 1% higher than the Renewable 
Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) for the year the electricity is provided to the 
customer; and 
 
PSC approves the price of the electricity being marketed as green power, subject to 
specified requirements. 
 
PSC must hold a proceeding each year to set the price per megawatt-hour for electricity 
marketed as green power that, generally, an electricity supplier may not exceed. However, 
the bill establishes a process that authorizes PSC to set a higher price for a particular 
electricity supplier under specified circumstances. Among other requirements, the 
electricity supplier must demonstrate to PSC that the actual cost for the generation or 
supply of electricity exceeds the general green power price set by PSC. A separate price 
approved by PSC may not be more than 150% of the general price unless PSC determines 
that the actual cost of the green power exceeds the general price; any such approval requires 
PSC to report to the General Assembly, as specified. PSC must annually review any 
specific supplier prices. 
 
Beginning January 1, 2025, an electricity supplier must purchase RECs for each year the 
electricity supplier offers green power for sale to residential retail electric customers. The 
RECs must be retired in a PJM Generation Attribute Tracking System reserve subaccount 
accessible by PSC. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 1/ Page 7 
An electricity supplier that claims in its marketing materials for residential customers that 
the customer will be purchasing green power must include in those marketing materials 
related disclosures about the source of the green power. The bill specifies one disclosure 
and requires PSC to adopt regulations that explain related concepts. An annual reporting 
requirement for electricity suppliers is updated to include (1) the amount and types of 
generation associated with RECs purchased in accordance with the bill during the reporting 
period and (2) the amount of renewable energy certificates that do not qualify as RECs and 
related information. 
 
PSC, in its discretion, may determine whether an electricity supplier is marketing 
electricity in accordance with these requirements. 
 
The above requirements do not apply to specified governmental entities or a supplier when 
supplying electricity to commercial retail electric customers. 
 
Residential Energy Retailer Disclosures 
 
PSC may adopt regulations to (1) require a “residential energy retailer” to post notices and 
disclosures required under Title 7 of the Public Utilities Article on the retailer’s website, 
subject to specified requirements and (2) require or prohibit the use of specific language in 
a residential energy retailer’s marketing materials, disclaimers, disclosures, and legal 
documents, as specified. However, PSC must require a residential energy retailer to post 
on its website the terms and conditions of its residential services and products and an 
environmental disclosure in clear, unambiguous language. For purposes of these 
requirements, a “residential energy retailer” means an electricity supplier that supplies 
electricity to residential retail electric customers, a gas supplier that supplies gas to 
residential retail customers, an energy salesperson, and an energy vendor. It does not 
include specified governmental entities or a gas or electric supplier when supplying gas or 
electricity to commercial retail customers. 
 
General Assembly Intent That the Public Service Commission Establish, Staff, and Fund a 
New Division 
 
The bill establishes the intent of the General Assembly that:   
 
 
PSC establish a division with the specific responsibility to receive, investigate, and 
resolve complaints against electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, and energy 
salespersons for violations with respect to retail customers; 
 
(1) at least two additional Position Identification Numbers (PINs) be created and 
assigned to the new division, in addition to existing PSC personnel in its Consumer 
Affairs Division, who may be assigned to assist the new division in its 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 1/ Page 8 
responsibilities and (2) the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) must 
include the two PINs in PSC’s fiscal 2025 budget; 
 
the functions of the new division be funded by licensing and renewal fees imposed 
on electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, and energy salespersons; and 
 
the special assessment on public service companies authorized under the bill be used 
for initial funding of the new division. 
 
Special Assessment 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for fiscal 2025 only, in addition to the amounts 
appropriated in the budget bill for fiscal 2025, PSC may impose up to $275,000 as a special 
assessment using the assessment process authorized under § 2-110 of the Public Utilities 
Article. The assessment must be imposed proportionally, as specified, on the electric 
companies, electricity suppliers, gas companies, and gas suppliers otherwise subject to 
PSC’s annual assessment. The statutory limit of public service company revenues that 
applies to PSC’s annual assessment does not apply to the bill’s special assessment. 
 
The amounts collected under the special assessment may be expended for fiscal 2025 for 
the support of PSC with an approved budget amendment. Unexpended funds at the end of 
fiscal 2025 are considered encumbered by PSC and may not be deducted from the 
fiscal 2026 appropriation. 
 
Annual Assessment on Public Service Company Gross Operating Revenues 
 
The amount that PSC may assess each public service company to fund its operations each 
year is increased, from 0.25% to 0.5%, of each company’s gross operating revenues derived 
from intrastate utility and electricity supplier operations in the preceding calendar year. 
The amount that PSC may assess to fund OPC is unchanged. 
 
Retail Choice and Customer Education Fund 
 
The Retail Choice Customer Education and Protection Fund is renamed the Education and 
Protection Fund. The purposes and permissible uses of the fund are expanded to include 
(1) educating customers on energy choices that help meet the State’s climate commitments, 
as specified; (2) protecting customers from unfair, false, misleading, or deceptive practices 
by energy salespersons and energy vendors (currently, this is only for electricity and gas 
suppliers); and (3) developing a training and educational program for electricity and gas 
suppliers, energy salespersons, and energy vendors. 
 
Conforming changes are made to allow funding for the currently required supplier training 
and educational program to include the Education and Protection Fund as a funding source 
and to include energy salespersons and energy vendors. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 1/ Page 9 
By December 31, 2024, PSC must develop the training and education program and report 
to the General Assembly on the status of program development. 
 
Staggered Licenses with Maximum Three-year Duration 
 
All new and renewed licenses for electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, and energy 
salespersons must be for a term of no more than three years. 
 
The licenses of electricity suppliers and gas suppliers that are licensed by PSC as of 
July 1, 2024, must expire on a staggered basis as determined by PSC such that equal 
numbers of licenses expire throughout each of the following three years, but not later than 
June 30, 2027. 
 
The licenses of energy salespersons who are licensed by PSC on or before June 30, 2027, 
must expire on a staggered basis as determined by PSC such that equal numbers of licenses 
expire each year. 
 
Co-located Load Configuration Study 
 
PSC must study and make recommendations on issues related to the utilization of end-use 
electricity customer load that is physically connected to the facilities of an existing or 
planned electric generation facility, also known as co-located load configuration, 
including:   
 
 
any potential cost impacts to Maryland ratepayers related to co-located load 
configurations; 
 
any potential impacts to the wholesale capacity, energy, and ancillary markets, or 
the planning function overseen by PJM Interconnection, LLC related to co-located 
load configurations; 
 
any potential impacts to the reliability of the electric distribution or transmission 
systems serving Maryland related to co-located load configurations; and 
 
means to manage or mitigate the impacts specified above. 
 
By December 15, 2024, PSC must report its findings and recommendations to the Senate 
Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment and the House Economic Matters 
Committee. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 1/ Page 10 
Current Law:   
 
Retail Customer Choice 
 
 
Generally 
 
The Electric Customer Choice and Competition Act of 1999 facilitated the restructuring of 
the electric utility industry in Maryland. The resulting system of customer choice allows 
the customer to purchase electricity from a competitive supplier or to continue receiving 
electricity under SOS. Default SOS electric service is provided by a customer’s electric 
company (e.g., Baltimore Gas and Electric Company or Pepco). Competitive electric 
supply is provided by competitive electricity suppliers. In either case, the electric company 
delivers the electricity and recovers the costs for delivery through distribution rates. Gas 
supply and delivery are similarly restructured, with gas suppliers and gas companies.  
 
In practice, to provide SOS, electric companies solicit bids for electricity through a series 
of rolling auctions every six months. At any one time, the SOS rate reflects the average of 
four separate auctions held over two years, which has a moderating effect on rate changes.  
 
 
Supplier Licensing and Related Enforcement Activities 
 
An electricity supplier must be licensed by PSC before doing business in the State. PSC 
must adopt regulations or issue orders to protect consumers, electric companies, and 
electricity suppliers from anticompetitive and abusive trade practices and to establish 
related consumer safeguards, such as procedures for contracting with customers.  
 
An electricity supplier or person selling or offering to sell electricity in the State in violation 
of supplier licensing requirements, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, is subject 
to a civil penalty of up to $10,000 or license revocation or suspension. 
 
PSC is required to license gas suppliers and has the same regulatory authority as it does for 
electricity suppliers. PSC must adopt licensing requirements and procedures for gas 
suppliers that protect consumers, the public interest, and the collection of all State and local 
taxes. Penalties for gas suppliers or persons selling or offering to sell natural gas are not 
separately specified.  
 
Electricity and gas supplier licenses do not expire under current law.  
 
 
Limitation on Supply Offers to Households Receiving Energy Assistance 
 
Effective July 1, 2023, unless PSC has approved the supply offer, a retail supplier may not 
offer to provide electricity or gas to households in the State that have received energy 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 1/ Page 11 
assistance from Office of Home Energy Programs within the Department of Human 
Services during the previous fiscal year or take other similar actions. An approved supply 
offer must include a commitment to charging at or below SOS for the duration of the offer. 
 
 
Energy Supplier Contracts 
 
PSC regulations specify minimum contract requirements for electricity and gas supply, 
which are similar but not identical. Broadly, a supply contract may only be executed by the 
appropriate electricity or gas supplier licensee. A supply contract must contain all material 
terms and conditions, a statement of contract duration and any rollover provision, a 
statement that the supplier and the customer may terminate the contract early, renewal 
procedures (if any), and the amount of any cancellation fee. Evergreen contracts are 
permitted, subject to certain disclosure requirements.  
 
Renewable Energy Credits  
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. REC generators and 
electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs using a PSC-approved system known as the 
Generation Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by PJM, 
that tracks the ownership and trading of RECs. Generally, to be eligible for compliance 
with the State RPS, RECs must be created at a facility either in the PJM region or adjacent 
to the PJM region if the electricity is delivered into the PJM region, and certain sources, 
like solar, have further geographic restrictions. For additional related information, see the 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard. 
 
Annual Assessment on Public Service Company Gross Operating Revenues 
 
The costs and expenses of PSC and OPC must be borne by the public service companies 
that are subject to PSC’s jurisdiction. The total amount that may be charged to a public 
service company for a State fiscal year, as a percentage of the company’s gross operating 
revenues derived from intrastate utility and electricity supplier operations in the preceding 
calendar year may not exceed 0.25% for PSC. PSC is also authorized to assess up to 
0.074% for the expenses of OPC. Assessed amounts accrue to the Public Utility Regulation 
Fund. 
 
Retail Choice Customer Education and Protection Fund 
 
Chapter 134 of 2016 established the Retail Choice Customer Education and Protection 
Fund in PSC. The purpose of the fund is to provide resources to improve PSC’s ability to  
(1) educate customers on retail electric and gas choice and (2) protect customers from 
unfair, false, misleading, or deceptive practices by electricity or gas suppliers. The fund 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 1/ Page 12 
may be used only for these purposes. Revenues from specified civil penalties assessed on 
energy suppliers accrue to the fund, rather than the general fund. The fund consists of 
(1) the revenues from the related civil penalties; (2) money appropriated in the State budget 
to the fund; and (3) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the 
fund. 
 
Supplier Training Program 
 
Chapters 373 and 374 of 2020 required PSC to develop a training and educational program, 
in consultation with interested stakeholders, for any entity or individual that is licensed by 
PSC as an electricity supplier or a gas supplier, subject to specified requirements. The 
program must require that a designated representative of each licensed electricity supplier 
or licensed gas supplier demonstrate a thorough understanding of relevant PSC regulations. 
PSC must conduct an examination at the end of the training and certify that the designated 
representative has successfully completed the training. PSC may recover the initial costs 
of the program through its standard assessment and may establish reasonable fees for the 
program. In practice, the program has yet to be funded. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal effects associated with implementing the bill and the 
contingent provisions in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly are 
discussed separately below. 
 
Implementation of the Bill 
 
Retail Energy Supply – Regulation and Enforcement 
 
PSC advises that the incremental workload required by the bill cannot be absorbed within 
existing resources. PSC requires additional staff to review potentially thousands of 
individual licenses and to develop and enforce ongoing licensure and related requirements. 
Additional funds are also required for contractual services to develop automated licensing 
and citation platforms. There will also be extensive rulemaking as part of implementation. 
This estimate reflects the intent of the General Assembly that PSC establish a division with 
the specific responsibility to receive, investigate, and resolve complaints against electricity 
suppliers, gas suppliers, and energy salespersons for violations with respect to retail 
customers; costs may be marginally less if PSC instead hires positions directly into its 
existing divisions. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly does not 
include positions specific to implementation of this bill. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $523,296 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a 90-day startup delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program 
manager, one regulatory economist, one administrative specialist, and one staff attorney to 
administer and enforce the new licensing and related provisions in the bill. It includes 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 1/ Page 13 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and a 
one-time programming expense.  
 
Positions 
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$282,272 
Programming Costs 
200,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
41,024 
Total FY 2025 PSC Implementation Expenditures $523,296 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment each fiscal year on the public service 
companies that it regulates. Under the bill, PSC also (1) collects initial and renewal 
licensure revenue from energy salespersons and energy vendors beginning in fiscal 2026; 
(2) collects renewal licensure revenue from energy suppliers beginning in fiscal 2025; and 
(3) is authorized to impose a one-time special assessment of $275,000 in fiscal 2025. 
Licensure revenues, though unknown, and special assessment revenues are assumed to 
offset revenues generated from the standard assessment. Accordingly, special fund 
revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from licensure revenue and assessments 
imposed on public service companies. 
 
Enhanced penalties are not anticipated to materially affect special fund revenues. 
 
Education and Protection Fund and Education Programs 
 
PSC can handle the bill’s requirements related to the (renamed) Education and Protection 
Fund with existing budgeted resources. PSC advises that special funds (from retail supplier 
penalties under current law, plus additional penalties under the bill) in the fund will be used 
as they become available to fund (1) a new climate policy customer education program and  
(2) the currently required, but unfunded, supplier education program, with modifications 
for energy salespersons and energy vendors. Funding for retail customer education is 
expected to remain unchanged. In any particular year, special fund expenditures for PSC 
may be more or less than they otherwise would have been, as limited funds from retail 
supplier penalties are used for different purposes under the bill. Annual differences are 
likely modest, based on recent annual expenditures from the fund of about $450,000. 
 
 
Assessment Cap Increase 
 
Increasing the percentage of public service company revenues that PSC may assess each 
year does not directly affect special fund revenues or expenditures. However, it does 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 1/ Page 14 
increase the likelihood that the assessment can collect a sufficient amount of revenues to 
fund PSC’s budget. 
 
 
Co-located Load Configuration Study 
 
PSC can conduct the study on co-located load configuration and report on its findings and 
recommendations with existing budgeted resources. 
 
Contingent Funding Effectuated by Enactment of the Bill 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes the following funding 
for both PSC and OPC, contingent on enactment of this bill or its cross file:  $634,837 in 
special funds for eight positions in PSC; and $528,368 in special funds for five positions 
in OPC (net of a $200,000 reduction in consultant funding, described below). The budget 
language specifies that the amounts are to provide operating funds and positions to address 
capacity and workload challenges. Both PSC and OPC advise that the contingent funding 
provisions are to support implementation of prior-year legislation, and not this bill. 
Therefore, this analysis assumes that the contingent funding is in addition to, and distinct 
from, the administrative requirements and associated fiscal effects described above. 
 
 
Public Service Commission 
 
Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $634,837 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for 
the employee turnover included in the fiscal 2025 budget associated with the new positions 
and generally reflects an October 1, 2024 start date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring  
eight staff due to the contingency in the fiscal 2025 budget that this bill effectuates:   
one human resources administrator, one staff attorney, two regulatory economists,  
two engineers, and two senior auditors. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. According to DBM, the $72,208 budgeted 
for contractual services is meant to fund operating expenses associated with the positions. 
 
Positions 
8.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$562,629 
Other Operating Expenses 
72,208 
Total FY 2025 PSC Contingent Expenditures 
$634,837 
 
Future year expenditures, which range from $772,330 in fiscal 2026 to $875,601 in 
fiscal 2029, reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as 
annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and the elimination of one-time costs. 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 1/ Page 15 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment on the public service companies that it 
regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
 
Office of People’s Counsel 
 
Special fund expenditures for OPC increase by $528,368 in fiscal 2025, which accounts 
for the lack of employee turnover included in the fiscal 2025 budget associated with the 
new positions and reflects a July 1, 2024 start date. This estimate reflects the cost hiring  
five staff due to the contingency in the fiscal 2025 budget that this bill effectuates:   
three assistant People’s Counsel, one legislative/communications director, and  
one administrative specialist. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, 
and ongoing operating expenses. It also includes a $200,000 reduction in OPC’s consultant 
budget, which this analysis assumes is ongoing, based on information provided by OPC. 
 
Positions 
5.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$687,321 
Consultant Costs 
-200,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
41,047 
Net FY 2025 OPC Contingent Expenditures 
$528,368 
 
Net future year expenditures, which range from $672,653 in fiscal 2026 to $762,396 in 
fiscal 2029, reflect salaries with annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual 
increases in ongoing operating expenses, the elimination of one-time costs, and continued 
annual reductions in OPC’s consultant budget. 
 
Generally, OPC is also funded through an assessment on the public service companies that 
PSC regulates. As a result, special fund revenues for OPC increase correspondingly from 
assessments imposed on public service companies. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small electricity suppliers must comply with the bill’s residential 
contract and price limitations, in addition to salesperson licensing, REC purchasing, green 
power marketing, reporting, and disclosure requirements. In particular, the contract 
limitations and the prohibition against the sale of residential accounts receivable to utilities 
likely limit the ability of many small suppliers to meaningfully participate in the retail 
markets in the State. For example, under current practice, many contract offerings are for 
longer than one year and may include rates higher than SOS. Electric companies also 
purchase accounts receivable from electricity suppliers and then recoup the funds directly 
from customers through their utility bills. Generally, prohibiting this practice shifts 
business risk from electric companies to electricity suppliers. Small residential gas 
suppliers have similar ongoing requirements related to contract and price limitations, 
licensing, and the sale of accounts receivable. 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
SB 1/ Page 16 
Finally, additional restrictions on residential electricity and gas supplier contract terms and 
prices may result in upward pressure on residential energy prices, which may increase costs 
for some small businesses that pay residential rates. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 267 (Delegate Crosby) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; Office of People’s Counsel; 
Department of Human Services; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection 
Division); Department of General Services; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 6, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
SB 1/ Page 17 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Electric 
companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy credits 
(RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each year 
or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. 
Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely through RECs, with 
negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that has not been the 
case recently. The Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for purposes related 
to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2024, the requirements are 33.7% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 6.5% from solar 
and 0.15% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 14.5% 
from solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
SB 1/ Page 18 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative. 
 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a three-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the Generation 
Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by PJM 
Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water-heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; waste-to-energy; refuse-derived fuel; thermal energy from a 
thermal biomass system; and raw or treated wastewater used as a heat source or sink for 
heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from 
Tier 1 beginning in 2022.  
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $438.8 million in 2022:  $332.7 million 
for 15.2 million RECs; and $77.1 million in ACPs. Costs and RECs are shown in Exhibit 1. 
This continues a multi-year trend of increasing compliance costs and, generally, average 
REC prices. 
 
In 2021, wind (50.8%), solar (13.2%), black liquor (12.5%), small hydroelectric (8.0%), 
and municipal solid waste (6.4%) were the primary energy sources used for Tier 1 RPS 
compliance. This continues a multi-year trend of increasing reliance on wind and solar 
energy. Maryland facilities generated 5.0 million RECs in 2021:  approximately 2.9 million 
Tier 1 RECs; and 2.1 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can be used for compliance in both 
Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are geographic and energy source 
restrictions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
SB 1/ Page 19 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2017-2022 
 
 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar RECs 
$50.0 
$56.4 
$79.3 
$99.8  
$187.3 
$246.5 
Tier 1 Solar RECs 
21.3 
27.4 
55.2 
122.9 
144.4 
101.4 
Tier 2 RECs 
0.7 
1.0 
0.06 
0.4 
1.0 
4.4 
ACPs 
0.1 
0.1 
7.7 
0.1 
77.1 
86.6 
Total 
$72.1 
$84.9 
$142.3 
$223.2  
$409.8 
$438.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar 
$7.14  
$6.54  
$7.77 
$8.24  
$14.36 
$17.80 
Tier 1 Solar 
38.18  
31.91  
47.26 
66.10  
72.59 
57.80 
Tier 2 
0.48  
0.66  
1.05 
1.06  
6.45 
7.42 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The vast majority of ACPs in 2021 and 2022 
($76.9 million and $85.9 million, respectively) were due to a shortfall of solar RECs. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Related Studies and Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2022, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
A supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a goal of 
100% by 2040 was due by January 1, 2024, but has been delayed. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also issued a report on the RPS in 2023, which can 
be found here. The report contains additional detail on the program, significant statutory 
changes, and visualizations of planned and actual RPS percentage requirements over time. 
 

END OF PAGE 19