START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1042

Chapter 1042

(Senate Bill 22)

AN ACT concerning

Baltimore City – Alcoholic Beverages – Board of License Commissioners

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor, rather than the Mayor and the President of
the City Council of Baltimore City, to appoint the members of the Board of License
Commissioners for Baltimore City with the advice and consent of the Senate;
authorizing the Governor, rather than the Mayor and the President of the City
Council of Baltimore City, to remove a member of the Board for certain infractions;
requiring certain members of the Board to be residents of the City or to have served
in the City government for a certain period of time immediately preceding their
appointment; clarifying that the Board and employees of the Board must comply with
State ethics requirements, rather than Baltimore City ethics requirements; and
generally relating to the Board of License Commissioners for Baltimore City.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 12–202, 12–206(d), and 12–207
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

12–102.

This title applies only in Baltimore City.

12–202.

(a) (1) The [Mayor] GOVERNOR shall appoint [two regular members to the
Board and the President of the City Council shall appoint one regular member] THREE
REGULAR MEMBERS and one substitute member to the Board.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1042 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The appointments shall be made:

(i) if the Senate is in session, with the advice and consent of the
Senate; or

(ii) if the Senate is not in session, by the [Mayor or President of the
City Council] GOVERNOR ALONE, subject to the advice and consent of the Senate when
the Senate next convenes.

(b) (1) Each member of the Board shall be:

(i) a resident and voter of the City; and

(ii) an individual of high character and integrity and of recognized
business capacity.

(2) At least one member of the Board shall be a member of the Bar of the
Supreme Court of Maryland.

(3) When evaluating an applicant for membership on the Board, the
[Mayor and the President of the City Council] GOVERNOR shall consider the need for
geographic, political, racial, ethnic, cultural, and gender diversity on the Board.

(c) The substitute member may serve on the Board if a regular member is absent
or recused.

(d) (1) The term of a member is 2 years and begins on July 1.

(2) The terms of the members are staggered as required by the terms
provided for members of the Board on July 1, 2016.

(3) At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is
appointed and qualifies.

(4) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(e) (1) To fill a vacancy that occurs during the term of office, THE GOVERNOR
SHALL APPOINT an eligible individual [shall be appointed by:

(i) the Mayor, if the vacancy occurs during the term of office of an
individual originally appointed by the Mayor; or

(ii) the President of the City Council, if the vacancy occurs during
the term of office of an individual originally appointed by the President of the City Council].

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1042

(2) An appointment under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be made
within 15 days after the vacancy occurs.

(3) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
rest of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(f) (1) The [Mayor or President of the City Council] GOVERNOR may remove
a member for misconduct in office, incompetence, or willful neglect of duty.

(2) [In this subsection, “appointing officer” means the Mayor or the
President of the City Council.

(3)] A member who is charged shall be given by the [appointing officer who
appointed the member] GOVERNOR a copy of the charges against the member and, with
at least 10 days’ notice, an opportunity to be heard publicly in person or by counsel.

[(4)] (3) If a member is removed, the [appointing officer who removed the
member] GOVERNOR shall file with the Office of the Secretary of State a statement of
charges against the member and the [appointing officer’s] GOVERNOR’S findings made on
the charges.

12–207.

(a) (1) In this subsection, “direct or indirect interest” means an interest that
is:

(i) proprietary;

(ii) obtained by a loan, mortgage, or lien or in any other manner; or

(iii) beneficially owned through an investment vehicle, estate, trust,
or other intermediary when the beneficiary does not control the intermediary or may
supervise or participate in the intermediary’s investment decisions.

(2) A member or an employee of the Board may not:

(i) have a direct or indirect interest in or on a premises where
alcoholic beverages are manufactured, distributed, or sold;

(ii) have a direct or indirect interest in a business wholly or partly
devoted to the manufacture, distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages;

(iii) own stock in a corporation that has a direct or indirect interest
in:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 1042 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. a premises where alcoholic beverages are manufactured,
distributed, or sold; or

2. a business wholly or partly devoted to the manufacture,
distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages;

(iv) receive a salary or other compensation or any other thing of value
from a business engaged in the manufacture, distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages;

(v) solicit or receive, directly or indirectly or on behalf of another
person, a commission, political contribution, remuneration, or gift from a person engaged
in the manufacture, distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages or an agent or employee of
the person; or

(vi) solicit or receive, directly or indirectly, a commission,
remuneration, or gift from:

1. a person engaged in the manufacture, distribution, or sale
of alcoholic beverages or an agent or employee of the person; or

2. a license holder.

(b) (1) Unless the public office or employment poses a conflict of interest, a
member or an employee of the Board may hold any other federal, State, or local public office
or employment.

(2) A member of the Board who applies for government employment that
poses a conflict of interest as determined by the [Baltimore City Board of Ethics] STATE
ETHICS COMMISSION shall resign from the Board by a letter addressed to the Governor.

(3) (i) If an individual who is a member or an employee of the Board
seeks election to an office that would pose a conflict of interest, on filing a certificate of
candidacy for election or within 30 days before the filing deadline for the primary election
for the office sought, whichever occurs later, the individual shall certify to the City Board
of Elections under oath that the individual is no longer a member or an employee of the
Board.

(ii) The certification shall be accompanied by a letter addressed to
the Governor containing the resignation of the member from the Board.

(c) (1) An employee of the Board shall devote the employee’s whole time and
attention to the business of the Board during the hours designated by the Board for the
performance of official duties.

(2) An employee of the Board may not:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1042

(i) engage in an occupation, a business, or a profession that in any
way is connected or associated, directly or indirectly, with the manufacture, distribution,
or sale of alcoholic beverages; or

(ii) transact any business beyond the official duties of the employee:

1. with a license holder; or

2. in connection with the operation of an establishment
licensed for the manufacture, distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages.

(3) Subject to § 12–206(e)(1) of this subtitle, an employee of the Board who
violates this subsection shall be removed.

(d) (1) A member or an employee of the Board shall comply with the public
ethics laws of the [City] STATE and the financial disclosure [provisions enacted by the
Mayor and City Council] REQUIREMENTS SET BY THE STATE ETHICS COMMISSION.

(2) An action of a member or an employee of the Board is subject to State
requirements for open or public meetings, including requirements for open sessions under
Title 3 of the General Provisions Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That ~~this~~ ~~Act~~ ~~shall~~ ~~take~~ ~~effect~~ ~~July~~
~~1,~~ ~~2024~~ the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

12–206.

(d) (1) The executive secretary and the deputy executive secretary shall [be]:

(i) 1. BE residents of the City; OR

2. HAVE SERVED IN THE CITY GOVERNMENT FOR A
MINIMUM OF 5 YEARS IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THEIR APPOINTMENT;

(ii) BE of high character and integrity; and

(iii) BE employed on the basis of their executive skill and experience.

(2) To the extent practicable, all other employees of the Board shall be
residents of the City.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. Section 2 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 2 years and, at the end of

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 1042 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

June 30, 2026, Section 2 of this Act, with no further action required by the General
Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6