START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 22 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 22 
(Senator Hayes) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Baltimore City - Alcoholic Beverages - Board of License Commissioners 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor, instead of the Mayor of Baltimore City and/or the President 
of the Baltimore City Council to appoint, fill a vacancy, and remove members of the 
Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners, as specified. The bill also clarifies that 
members of the board are subject to State ethics laws and specifies that the 
executive secretary and deputy executive secretary of the board may qualify for these 
positions if they have served in Baltimore City government for a minimum of five years 
immediately preceding their appointment instead of the existing city residency 
requirement. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. The provisions related to the 
executive secretary and deputy executive secretary of the board terminate 
June 30, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Baltimore City operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill requires the Governor, instead of the Mayor of Baltimore City 
and/or the President of the Baltimore City Council: 
 
 
to appoint three regular members and one substitute member to the board, as 
specified;  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 22/ Page 2 
 
to consider the need for geographic, political, racial, ethnic, cultural, and gender 
diversity when evaluating an applicant for membership on the board;  
 
to fill a vacancy on the board that occurs during the term of office of a board 
member; and 
 
to remove members of the board, as specified.  
 
The bill specifies that (1) a member of the board is subject to the conflict of interest rules 
of the State Ethics Commission, instead of the Baltimore City Board of Ethics; and 
(2) a member or employee of the board must comply with the public ethics laws of the 
State, instead of the city, and the financial disclosure requirements set by the State Ethics 
Commission, instead of the mayor and city council. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Appointments and Removal of Board Members 
 
The Baltimore City Board of License Commissioners consists of three regular members 
and one substitute member, who may serve if any regular member is absent or recused. The 
mayor must appoint two regular members to the board, and the city council president must 
appoint one regular member and one substitute member to the board. The appointments to 
the board must be made with the advice and consent of the Senate. Appointments made by 
the mayor or city council president when the Senate is not in session, are subject to the 
advice and consent of the Senate when the next Senate convenes. 
 
When evaluating an applicant for membership on the board, the mayor and the city council 
president must consider the need for geographic, political, racial, ethnic, cultural, and 
gender diversity on the board. The mayor or the city council president must appoint an 
eligible individual to fill a vacancy on the board and may remove a member for misconduct 
in office, incompetence, or willful neglect of duty, as specified. 
 
Executive Secretary and Deputy Executive Secretary of the Board 
 
The executive secretary and deputy executive secretary of the board must be (1) residents 
of the city; (2) of high character and integrity; and (3) employed on the basis of their 
executive skill and experience. To the extent practicable, all other employees of the board 
must be residents of the city.  
 
Conflicts of Interest – Baltimore City Board of Ethics 
 
A member of the board may not (1) have a direct or indirect interest in or on a premises in 
the State where alcoholic beverages are manufactured or sold or in a business wholly or 
partly devoted to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages in the State or (2) own 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 22/ Page 3 
stock in a corporation that has a direct or indirect interest in a premises in the State where 
alcoholic beverages are manufactured or sold or in a business wholly or partly devoted to 
the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages in the State. 
 
A board member is prohibited from soliciting or receiving a commission, remuneration, or 
gift from a person engaged in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, an agent or 
employee of the person, or a license holder. 
 
A member of the board who applies for government employment that poses a conflict of 
interest as determined by the Baltimore City Board of Ethics must resign from the board 
by a letter addressed to the Governor. A member or employee of the board must comply 
with the public ethics laws of the city and the financial disclosure provisions enacted by 
the mayor and city council. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1464 (Delegate Amprey) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Governor’s Office; State Ethics Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3