START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1043

Chapter 1043

(Senate Bill 51)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – License Renewal

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s
County to extend the deadline by which a holder of an alcoholic beverages license
must file an application for renewal; extending the expiration date for certain
alcoholic beverages licenses issued by the Board by a certain amount of time; and
generally relating to alcoholic beverages in Prince George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 26–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 26–1802
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

26–102.

This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

26–1802.

(A) [To] SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, TO renew a license,
a license holder shall file a license renewal application with the Board in accordance with
the following schedule of renewal deadlines and license expiration dates:

(1) for a Class A license, which shall expire on April 30, the application
deadline is March 1;

(2) for a Class B license, which shall expire on May 31, the application
deadline is April 1; and

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1043 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) for a Class C and a Class D license, both of which shall expire on June
30, the application deadline is May 1.

(B) THE BOARD MAY EXTEND THE DEADLINE BY WHICH A LICENSE HOLDER
MUST FILE A LICENSE RENEWAL APPLICATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, notwithstanding § 26–1802
of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, a license or permit issued by the Board of
License Commissioners for Prince George’s County that was subject to renewal from March
5, 2020, to December 31, 2023, both inclusive, and was not renewed because the holder
failed to file a renewal application, shall be considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, and
may be renewed to bring the license up–to–date if the license holder:

(1) demonstrates to the Board that the license holder meets all
requirements for renewal except for the submission of a renewal application in a timely
manner; and

(2) pays all past due fees.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2