START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 59 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 59 
(Senator Ellis, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Hospitals - Care of Infants After Discharge (Safe Sleep Act of 2024) 
 
   
This bill requires a hospital, as soon as practicable before discharging an infant after birth, 
to provide oral and written educational resources to the infant’s parent or legal guardian on 
how to provide a “safe sleep environment.” By January 1, 2025, each hospital must 
establish a process for (1) providing each parent or legal guardian with oral and written 
educational resources and information regarding a safe sleep environment and the risks of 
suffocation and sudden infant death in unsafe sleep environments; (2) a parent or legal 
guardian to confirm receipt of the educational resources; and (3) maintaining the records 
of confirmations. By January 1, 2025, the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), in 
consultation with local health officers, must develop for distribution to birthing parents and 
legal guardians a list of resources available by county to obtain the items necessary to 
provide a safe sleep environment for an infant. Each local health department must provide 
an updated list of resources to MDH each year.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDH general fund expenditures increase by $19,400 in FY 2025 only for 
contractual staff to develop an initial list of safe sleep environment resources available by 
county. Revenues are not affected.     
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
19,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($19,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local health departments can likely update the list of resources available in 
their county using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 59/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Safe sleep environment” means, as described in the most recent 
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) policy statements, an environment in which a 
newborn may sleep that reduces the risk of sleep-related infant deaths, including through:  
(1) the use of supine positioning; (2) the use of a firm, flat sleep surface; (3) the use of 
room sharing without bed sharing; (4) the avoidance of soft bedding and overheating; and 
(5) the avoidance of exposure to smoke. 
 
As soon as practicable before a hospital discharges an infant after the birth of the infant, 
the hospital must (1) provide oral and written educational resources, which may be 
supplemented by an educational video, to the infant’s parent or legal guardian on how to 
provide a safe sleep environment; (2) ask the infant’s parent or legal guardian to describe 
the sleep environment that the parent or legal guardian will provide at home; (3) inform 
the parent or legal guardian of the importance of ensuring that the infant has a safe sleep 
environment and the risks of suffocation and sudden infant death in unsafe sleep 
environments; and (4) document that the educational resources and information were 
provided to the parent or legal guardian. 
 
The hospital must also provide a list of resources available for the parent or legal guardian 
to obtain the items necessary to provide a safe sleep environment for the infant.  
 
Current Law:  “Health care facility” means a facility or an office where health or medical 
care is provided to patients by a health care provider, including a hospital or limited 
services hospital. 
 
There is no requirement for safe sleep information to be provided to new parents or 
guardians by hospitals on discharge. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $19,444 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of 
hiring one part-time contractual health educator to consult with local health officers and 
create a list of resources available by county to obtain the items necessary to provide a safe 
sleep environment for an infant. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, and operating 
expenses. This analysis assumes that the contractual position terminates following the 
completion of the list of resources, which must be developed by January 1, 2025. MDH 
can consult with local health departments to update the required list of resources each year 
using existing resources.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 59/ Page 3 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$8,463 
Operating Expenses 
10,981 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$19,444 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act.  
 
Additional Comments:  According to the AAP, approximately 3,000 infants die each year 
in the United States from sleep-related infant deaths, including sudden infant death 
syndrome, and accidental suffocation and strangulation in bed. A safe sleep environment 
can significantly reduce the risk of all sleep-related infant deaths. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; American Academy of 
Pediatrics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3