START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 19 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 19 
(Senator Sydnor) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation and 
Judiciary 
 
Failure to Pay Rent Proceedings - Shielding of Court Records 
 
 
This bill requires the District Court, within 60 days after the final resolution of a failure to 
pay rent proceeding that did not result in a judgment of possession, to shield all related 
court records. The District Court may, on motion of a tenant and if specified requirements 
are met, shield all court records relating to a failure to pay rent proceeding that results in a 
judgment of possession. The Judiciary must develop and publish a specified form to 
facilitate implementation. The bill’s shielding provisions apply prospectively only and may 
not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on or application to any action initiated 
under § 8-401 of the Real Property Article (failure to pay rent actions) before 
October 1, 2024. The bill’s provisions related to the development/publication of a 
specified form take effect August 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $23,400 in FY 2025 only for one-time 
programming costs and may also increase minimally to reflect an increased workload for 
the District Court, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
23,400 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($23,400) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 19/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Upon motion by a tenant, the court may shield all court records relating 
to a failure to pay rent proceeding that results in a judgment of possession if (1) the tenant 
demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence that the tenant exercised the right of 
redemption, as specified, and at least 12 months have passed since the final resolution of 
the proceeding that the tenant seeks to shield or (2) the District Court determines that there 
is good cause to shield the court records. The District Court must shield the court records 
within 30 days after granting the tenant’s motion to shield. However, if a judgment for 
possession has been entered in a proceeding in which the tenant asserted a rent escrow 
defense, the District Court may shield only the court records related to the judgement for 
possession. 
 
A shielded record may only be opened on (1) a written request by the tenant or (2) an order 
of the District Court for good cause shown. However, a tenant may receive a copy of an 
order issued under the bill’s provisions at any time, with proper identification, without a 
showing of need. An order to shield court records under the bill has no effect on a pending 
appeal. 
 
By October 1, 2024, the Judiciary must develop and publish on its website a form titled 
“Petition to Shield a Failure to Pay Rent Action Record” to facilitate the implementation 
of the bill’s provisions. 
 
Current Law:  In general, a landlord seeking to evict a tenant must file the appropriate 
action (e.g., failure to pay rent, breach of lease, etc.) in the District Court. If awarded a 
judgment by the court, the landlord files a warrant of restitution, which, once reviewed and 
signed by the court, authorizes an eviction. The warrants of restitution are forwarded to the 
local sheriff’s office who is then authorized to carry out the evictions. Statute sets forth 
numerous specific requirements for such actions, including those related to written notice 
prior to filing certain actions. This includes specific requirements for written notice prior 
to initiating a failure to pay rent action. 
 
In failure to pay rent actions, if judgment is in favor of the landlord and the tenant does not 
return the premises to the landlord or otherwise satisfy the judgment by paying the 
applicable rent and late fees within 4 days, as specified, the court must, at any time after 
4 days have elapsed, issue a warrant of restitution. The court may, upon presentation of a 
certificate signed by a physician certifying that surrendering the property within the 
4-day period would endanger the health or life of the tenant or other occupant, extend the 
time for surrender of the premises as justice may require up to 15 days. Statutory provisions 
also authorize stays of execution in other specified circumstances, such as in the event of 
extreme weather conditions.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 19/ Page 3 
If the landlord does not order a warrant of restitution within 60 days from either the date 
of judgment or the expiration date of any stay of execution (whichever is later), then (1) the 
judgment for possession must be stricken and (2) the judgment must generally count toward 
the threshold for the number of judgments at which a tenant no longer has the right to 
redemption of the leased premises, as specified. 
 
A tenant has the right to redemption of the leased premises by tendering in cash, certified 
check, or money order to the landlord or the landlord’s agent all past due amounts, as 
determined by the court, plus all court awarded costs and fees, at any time before actual 
execution of the eviction order. This right of redemption does not apply to any tenant 
against whom three judgments of possession have been entered for rent due and unpaid in 
the 12 months prior to the initiation of the action, as specified. 
 
In limited circumstances (pursuant to Chapter 722 of 2022), a tenant may petition the court 
to shield court records relating to any action for repossession for failure to pay rent if the 
failure to pay rent was due to a loss of income arising out of the COVID-19 pandemic. A 
petition may not be filed until the appeal period for the action has lapsed. However, the 
provisions of Chapter 722 only apply to court records in failure to pay rent actions that 
were filed on or after March 5, 2020, but before January 1, 2022; the provisions are also 
not applicable to any record relating to an action for repossession for failure to pay rent 
that resulted in a money judgment in favor of a landlord unless the petitioner provides 
evidence to the court that the judgment has been satisfied.  
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase by $23,426 in fiscal 2025 only 
for programming costs. Although these programming changes will generally help facilitate 
the required shielding of certain records (by coding for the specific shielding timelines), 
there are likely additional operational and potential fiscal impacts. For example, the 
Judiciary notes that the District Court is also impacted by the potential of additional filings 
if tenants submit motions to shield records in proceedings that did result in a judgment of 
possession. The Judiciary also notes that landlord-tenant matters routinely represent a high 
volume of the cases filed in the District Court each year. For example, in fiscal 2023, 
401,797 failure to pay rent cases were filed in the State. Accordingly, general fund 
expenditures may also increase minimally (in addition to the programming costs noted 
above) to reflect an increased workload for the District Court. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 34 of 2023; HB 134 of 2022; and HB 1008 of 2021.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 19/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  HB 181 (Delegate Hill, et al.) - Environment and Transportation 
and Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4