START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

Chapter 537

(Senate Bill 1)

AN ACT concerning

Electricity and Gas – Retail Supply – Regulation and Consumer Protection

FOR the purpose of altering a certain charge that may be assessed to a public service
company; changing the name of the Retail Choice Customer Education and
Protection Fund to the Education and Protection Fund; modifying the purpose and
uses of the Fund; altering the scope of a certain training and educational program
that the Public Service Commission is required to develop; requiring the Commission
to require a residential energy retailer to post certain information on the energy
retailer’s website; providing for the recovery of certain costs through rates;
establishing an energy salesperson license for certain persons that offer or sell
electricity supply agreements or gas supply agreements to customers in the State;
establishing an energy vendor license for certain persons that provide energy sales
services in the State; providing for the terms of electricity supplier, energy
salesperson, energy vendor, and gas supplier licenses issued by the ~~Public~~ ~~Service~~
Commission; establishing certain licensing and renewal requirements for certain
persons; providing for certain disciplinary actions by the Commission against
electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, ~~and~~ energy vendors, and energy salespersons for
certain acts; altering and establishing the amounts of certain civil penalties that may
be assessed with respect to electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, and energy
~~salespersons~~ vendors for certain violations; prohibiting the Commission from
imposing a civil penalty on an energy salesperson; establishing certain
authorizations and restrictions on the offer and sale of certain electricity supply and
gas supply; requiring an electric company ~~and~~ ~~an,~~ a certain electricity supplier, a gas
company, and a certain gas supplier to establish a mechanism for a customer to
request and receive a certain replacement number under certain circumstances and
to allow a customer to be placed on a certain list regarding electricity service or gas
service; requiring ~~electric~~ ~~companies~~ billing entities to submit to the Commission a
certain monthly report on customer choice; altering the contents of a certain annual
report that each electricity supplier is required to submit to the Commission;
prohibiting a certain electricity supplier from marketing electricity as green power
unless certain conditions are met; requiring an electricity supplier that offers green
power for sale to residential customers to purchase certain renewable energy credits
in excess of the renewable energy portfolio standard ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~year~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~amount~~
~~equal~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~electricity~~ ~~sold~~ ~~to~~ ~~residential~~ ~~customers~~ ~~as~~ ~~green~~ ~~power~~ ~~in~~
~~that~~ ~~year;~~ requiring the Commission to hold certain proceedings to set the price of
electricity marketed as green power under certain circumstances; requiring certain
electricity suppliers marketing and selling green power to residential customers to
include ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~disclosure~~ certain disclosures in certain marketing materials;
stating the intent of the General Assembly regarding the establishment of a certain
division within the Commission; allowing the Commission to impose on certain
persons up to a certain amount as a special assessment in a certain manner; allowing
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

certain funds to be expended for certain purposes in accordance with an approved
budget amendment; requiring, on or before a certain date, the Commission to develop
a certain training and education program; requiring the Commission to study and
report to certain committees of the General Assembly, on or before a certain date, on
certain customer load configurations; and generally relating to retail energy supply
and consumer protection.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 1–101(a), (l), (p), (ee), and (ff), ~~7–310(b)~~ 2–110(a) and (b), 7–701(a) and (m),
13–101, and 13–201(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Public Utilities
Section 1–101(l–1) and (l–2), ~~7–507.1~~ 7–315 through 7–318, 7–603.1, 7–604.2, and
7–707
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Utilities
Section 2–110(c)(12), ~~7–310(e)~~ 7–310, 7–311, 7–507, 7–510, 7–602, 7–603, 7–604,
7–605, 7–705(a), and 13–201(e)(3)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Utilities

1–101.

(a) In this division the following words have the meanings indicated.

(l) (1) “Electricity supplier” means a person:

(i) who sells:

1. electricity;

2. electricity supply services;

3. competitive billing services; or

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

4. competitive metering services; or

(ii) who purchases, brokers, arranges, or markets electricity or
electricity supply services for sale to a retail electric customer.

(2) “Electricity supplier” includes an electric company, an aggregator, a
broker, and a marketer of electricity.

(3) “Electricity supplier” does not include:

(i) the following persons who supply electricity and electricity
supply services solely to occupants of a building for use by the occupants:

1. an owner/operator who holds ownership in and manages
the internal distribution system serving the building; or

2. a lessee/operator who holds a leasehold interest in and
manages the internal distribution system serving the building;

(ii) a person who generates on–site generated electricity; or

(iii) a person that owns or operates equipment used for charging
electric vehicles, including a person that owns or operates:

1. an electric vehicle charging station;

2. electric vehicle supply equipment; or

3. an electric vehicle charging station service company or
provider.

(L–1) (1) “ENERGY SALESPERSON” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO IS
LICENSED BY THE COMMISSION TO SELL:

(1) (I) ELECTRICITY OR ELECTRICITY SUPPLY SERVICES TO
RESIDENTIAL RETAIL ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS ON BEHALF OF AN ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER AS AN EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER; OR

(2) (II) GAS OR GAS SUPPLY SERVICES TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL GAS
CUSTOMERS ON BEHALF OF A GAS SUPPLIER AS AN EMPLOYEE OR AGENT OF THE
GAS SUPPLIER.

(2) “ENERGY SALESPERSON” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES WHEN THE
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SELLS ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS
ARTICLE;

(II) THE WASHINGTON SUBURBAN SANITARY COMMISSION
WHEN THE WASHINGTON SUBURBAN SANITARY COMMISSION SELLS ENERGY
UNDER DIVISION II OF THIS ARTICLE;

(III) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS ARTICLE; OR

(IV) AN EMPLOYEE OR CONTRACTOR OF AN ELECTRIC COMPANY
WHEN THE EMPLOYEE OR CONTRACTOR IS PERFORMING DUTIES SPECIFIC TO
STANDARD OFFER SERVICE.

(L–2) “ENERGY VENDOR” MEANS A PERSON THAT HAS A CONTRACT OR
SUBCONTRACT TO PROVIDE ENERGY SALES SERVICES TO AN ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER OR A GAS SUPPLIER THAT PROVIDES ELECTRICITY SUPPLY SERVICES OR
GAS SUPPLY SERVICES, RESPECTIVELY, TO A RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER.

(p) (1) “Gas supplier” means a person who:

(i) sells:

1. gas;

2. gas supply services; or

3. competitive billing services for gas supply services; or

(ii) purchases, brokers, arranges, or markets gas or gas supply
services for sale to a retail gas customer.

(2) “Gas supplier” includes an aggregator, a broker, and a marketer of gas.

(3) “Gas supplier” does not include:

(i) a gas company to the extent that the gas company provides gas
sales or delivery service at rates regulated by the Commission;

(ii) the following persons who supply gas solely to occupants of a
building for use by the occupants:

1. an owner/operator who holds ownership in and manages
the internal distribution system serving the building; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

2. a lessee/operator who holds a leasehold interest in and
manages the internal distribution system serving the building; or

(iii) a person who transmits or distributes gas within a site owned by
the person or the person’s affiliate that is incidental to a primarily landlord–tenant
relationship.

(ee) (1) “Retail electric customer” means a purchaser of electricity for end use
in the State.

(2) “Retail electric customer” includes:

(i) a person that owns or operates equipment used for charging
electric vehicles, including:

1. an electric vehicle charging station;

2. electric vehicle supply equipment; or

3. an electric vehicle charging station service company or
provider; and

(ii) a person that charges an electric vehicle at an electric vehicle
charging station that the person owns or operates.

(3) “Retail electric customer” does not include:

(i) an occupant of a building in which the owner/operator or
lessee/operator manages the internal distribution system serving the building and supplies
electricity and electricity supply services solely to occupants of the building for use by the
occupants;

(ii) a person who generates on–site generated electricity, to the
extent the on–site generated electricity is consumed by that person or its tenants; or

(iii) except as provided in paragraph (2)(ii) of this subsection, a
person that charges an electric vehicle at an electric vehicle charging station.

(ff) (1) “Retail gas customer” means a purchaser of gas for end use in the State.

(2) “Retail gas customer” excludes an occupant of a building in which the
owner/operator or lessee/operator manages the internal distribution system serving the
building and supplies gas and gas supply services solely to occupants of the building for use
by the occupants.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2–110.

(a) In this section, “public service company” includes an electricity supplier and a
gas supplier as those terms are defined in § 1–101 of this article.

(b) (1) The costs and expenses of the Commission and the Office of People’s
Counsel shall be borne by the public service companies that are subject to the Commission’s
jurisdiction.

(2) The costs and expenses shall be assessed as provided in this section.

(3) The Commission shall pay the money that it collects for the assessment
under this section into the Public Utility Regulation Fund in the State Treasury established
under § 2–110.1 of this subtitle to reimburse the State for the expenses of the Commission
and the Office of People’s Counsel.

(c) (12) The total amount that may be charged to a public service company
under this section for a State fiscal year may not exceed:

(i) [0.25%] 0.50% of the public service company’s gross operating
revenues derived from intrastate utility and electricity supplier operations in the preceding
calendar year, or other 12–month period that the Chairman determines, for the costs and
expenses of the Commission other than that of the Office of People’s Counsel; plus

(ii) 0.074% of those revenues for the costs and expenses of the Office
of People’s Counsel.

7–310.

~~(b)~~ ~~There~~ ~~is~~ ~~a~~ ~~Retail~~ ~~Choice~~ ~~Customer~~ ~~Education~~ ~~and~~ ~~Protection~~ ~~Fund.~~

(e) (1) The Fund is a special, [nonlasping] NONLAPSING fund that is not
~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~§~~ ~~7–302~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~ ~~Article.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~State~~ ~~Treasurer~~ ~~shall~~ ~~hold~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~separately,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~Comptroller~~ ~~shall~~ ~~account~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~Fund.~~

(a) In this section, “Fund” means the [Retail Choice Customer] Education and
Protection Fund.

(b) There is [a Retail Choice Customer] AN Education and Protection Fund.

(c) The purpose of the Fund is to provide resources to improve the Commission’s
ability to:

(1) educate customers on:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(I) retail electric and gas choice; and

(II) ENERGY CHOICES THAT HELP MEET THE STATE’S CLIMATE
COMMITMENTS UNDER §§ 7–211 AND 7–211.2 OF THIS TITLE AND §§ 2–1204.1 AND
2–1204.2 OF THE ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE;

(2) protect customers from unfair, false, misleading, or deceptive practices
by electricity SUPPLIERS, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, ENERGY VENDORS, or gas
suppliers; AND

(3) DEVELOP A TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM FOR
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS, GAS SUPPLIERS, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY
VENDORS AS PROVIDED UNDER § 7–311 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(d) The Commission shall administer the Fund.

(e) (1) The Fund is a special, [nonlasping] NONLAPSING fund that is not
subject to § 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(f) The Fund consists of:

(1) revenue distributed to the Fund under § 13–201(e)(3) of this article;

(2) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; and

(3) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the
Fund.

(g) The Fund may be used only to:

(1) educate retail electric or gas customers on retail choice AND ENERGY
CHOICES THAT HELP TO MEET THE STATE’S CLIMATE COMMITMENTS UNDER §§
7–211 AND 7–211.2 OF THIS TITLE AND §§ 2–1204.1 AND 2–1204.2 OF THE
ENVIRONMENT ARTICLE; [and]

(2) improve customer protections for retail electric or gas customers; AND

(3) DEVELOP A TRAINING AND EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM FOR
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS, GAS SUPPLIERS, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY
VENDORS AS PROVIDED UNDER § 7–311 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(h) (1) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the same
manner as other State money may be invested.

(2) Any investment earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the General
Fund of the State.

(i) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the State
budget.

7–311.

(a) The Commission shall develop a training and educational program for any
entity or individual that is licensed by the Commission as an electricity supplier [or], a gas
supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN ENERGY VENDOR.

(b) The Commission shall develop the program in consultation with interested
stakeholders, including electricity suppliers [and], gas suppliers, ENERGY
SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS.

(c) The program shall require that a designated representative of each licensed
electricity supplier [or], licensed gas supplier, LICENSED ENERGY VENDOR, OR
LICENSED ENERGY SALESPERSON demonstrate a thorough understanding of the
Commission’s regulations regarding:

(1) sales;

(2) consumer protection; and

(3) any other matter the Commission deems appropriate.

(d) At the conclusion of the training, the Commission shall:

(1) conduct an examination; and

(2) on a satisfactory score, certify that the designated representative of the
licensed electricity supplier [or], licensed gas supplier, LICENSED ENERGY
SALESPERSON, OR LICENSED ENERGY VENDOR has successfully completed the training.

(e) (1) The Commission shall determine the schedule and frequency by which
a designated representative of a licensed electricity supplier [or], licensed gas supplier,
LICENSED ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR LICENSED ENERGY VENDOR must complete the
training and certification.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(2) A designated representative of a new electricity supplier [or], gas
supplier, ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR ENERGY VENDOR shall complete the training and
certification prior to the issuance of a license.

(f) The Commission may adopt regulations that include appropriate penalties or
sanctions for failure to comply with this section.

(g) (1) The Commission shall use [the assessments collected in accordance
with § 2–110 of this article] THE FOLLOWING FUNDING SOURCES for the initial
development of the training and educational program:

(I) THE ASSESSMENTS COLLECTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–110 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

(II) FUNDS DEPOSITED INTO THE EDUCATION AND
PROTECTION FUND IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 7–310 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) The Commission may establish reasonable fees to pay for the costs of
the program.

7–315.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION, “RESIDENTIAL ENERGY RETAILER” INCLUDES:

(I) AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES ELECTRICITY
TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS;

(II) A GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO RESIDENTIAL
RETAIL GAS CUSTOMERS;

(III) AN ENERGY SALESPERSON; AND

(IV) AN ENERGY VENDOR.

(2) “RESIDENTIAL ENERGY RETAILER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES WHEN THE
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SELLS ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS
TITLE; OR

(II) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS TITLE;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES WHEN
SUPPLYING ELECTRICITY TO COMMERCIAL RETAIL ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS; OR

(IV) A GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO COMMERCIAL
RETAIL GAS CUSTOMERS.

(B) THE COMMISSION MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO:

(1) REQUIRE A RESIDENTIAL ENERGY RETAILER TO POST NOTICES
AND DISCLOSURES REQUIRED UNDER THIS TITLE ON THE RETAILER’S WEBSITE:

(I) IN A PROMINENT LOCATION;

(II) USING AT LEAST A CERTAIN MINIMUM FONT SIZE; AND

(III) IN A FORMAT APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION; AND

(2) REQUIRE OR PROHIBIT THE USE OF SPECIFIC LANGUAGE IN A
RESIDENTIAL ENERGY RETAILER’S MARKETING MATERIALS, DISCLAIMERS,
DISCLOSURES, AND LEGAL DOCUMENTS, INCLUDING REQUIRING OR PROHIBITING
THE USE OF SPECIFIC LANGUAGE BASED ON SERVICE OR PRODUCT TYPE.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL REQUIRE A RESIDENTIAL ENERGY RETAILER
TO POST ON THE RETAILER’S WEBSITE, IN CLEAR AND UNAMBIGUOUS LANGUAGE:

(1) THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE RESIDENTIAL SERVICES
AND PRODUCTS SOLD BY THE RETAILER; AND

(2) AN ENVIRONMENTAL DISCLOSURE, IN A FORMAT REQUIRED BY
THE COMMISSION, FOR THE RESIDENTIAL SERVICES AND PRODUCTS SOLD BY THE
RETAILER.

7–316.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “MARKETING” DOES NOT INCLUDE MATERIALS TO
EDUCATE OR INFORM A RETAIL CUSTOMER ABOUT STANDARD OFFER SERVICE,
DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE, OR CUSTOMER CHOICE.

(B) AN EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION, AN
ELECTRIC COMPANY ~~AND~~ OR A GAS COMPANY MAY NOT RECOVER THROUGH ITS
RATES ANY COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH MARKETING ITS SERVICES.

(C) AN ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE MAY RECOVER THROUGH ITS RATES ANY
COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH MARKETING ITS SERVICES, INCLUDING THE COSTS

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

ASSOCIATED WITH MATERIALS THAT EDUCATE OR INFORM A RETAIL CUSTOMER
ABOUT STANDARD OFFER SERVICE OR CUSTOMER CHOICE.

(D) THE COMMISSION MAY, BY REGULATION, ADOPT CRITERIA FOR
REVIEWING MARKETING AND OTHER COMMUNICATION MATERIALS OF AN ELECTRIC
COMPANY OR A GAS COMPANY TO DETERMINE WHETHER THE COST OF THE
MATERIALS MAY BE RECOVERED THROUGH THE COMPANY’S RATES.

7–317.

(A) (1) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2025, A PERSON MAY NOT ENGAGE IN THE
BUSINESS OF AN ENERGY SALESPERSON IN THE STATE UNLESS THE PERSON HOLDS
A LICENSE ISSUED BY THE COMMISSION.

(2) A LICENSED ENERGY SALESPERSON MAY OFFER OR SELL
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AGREEMENTS OR GAS SUPPLY AGREEMENTS TO CUSTOMERS
IN THE STATE ONLY IF THE ENERGY SALESPERSON IS ASSOCIATED WITH A LICENSED
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER OR LICENSED GAS SUPPLIER, RESPECTIVELY.

(B) (1) AN APPLICATION FOR AN ENERGY SALESPERSON LICENSE SHALL:

(I) BE MADE TO THE COMMISSION IN WRITING ON A FORM
ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION;

(II) BE VERIFIED BY OATH OR AFFIRMATION; AND

(III) CONTAIN INFORMATION THAT THE COMMISSION REQUIRES,
INCLUDING:

1. PROOF OF ASSOCIATION WITH A LICENSED
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER OR LICENSED GAS SUPPLIER, AS APPROPRIATE;

2. PROOF OF COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE
TRAINING REQUIREMENTS FOR CUSTOMER PROTECTION UNDER THIS SUBTITLE
AND SUBTITLES 5 AND 6 OF THIS TITLE AS REQUIRED BY THE COMMISSION; AND

3. PAYMENT OF THE APPLICABLE LICENSING FEE.

(2) (I) THE TERM OF AN ENERGY SALESPERSON LICENSE IS 3
YEARS.

(II) THE TERMS OF LICENSES MAY BE STAGGERED AS
DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) SUBJECT TO SUBPARAGRAPH (V) OF THIS PARAGRAPH,
UNLESS A LICENSE IS RENEWED FOR A 3–YEAR TERM IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SUBSECTION, THE LICENSE EXPIRES ON THE DATE THAT THE COMMISSION SETS.

(IV) A LICENSEE MAY RENEW A LICENSE FOR A 3–YEAR TERM
BEFORE THE LICENSE EXPIRES IF THE LICENSEE:

1. OTHERWISE IS ENTITLED TO BE LICENSED;

2. SUBMITS TO THE COMMISSION A RENEWAL
APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE COMMISSION PROVIDES; AND

3. PAYS TO THE COMMISSION THE APPLICABLE
RENEWAL FEE SET BY THE COMMISSION.

(V) A LICENSEE MAY CONTINUE TO PROVIDE SERVICES AS AN
ENERGY SALESPERSON AFTER THE LICENSEE’S LICENSE EXPIRES IF THE
LICENSEE’S RENEWAL APPLICATION IS SUBMITTED TO THE COMMISSION BEFORE
THE LICENSE EXPIRES.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL, BY REGULATION OR ORDER:

(1) REQUIRE PROOF OF FINANCIAL INTEGRITY;

(2) REQUIRE A LICENSEE TO POST A BOND OR OTHER SIMILAR
INSTRUMENT IF, IN THE COMMISSION’S JUDGMENT, THE BOND OR SIMILAR
INSTRUMENT IS NECESSARY TO ENSURE AN ENERGY SALESPERSON’S FINANCIAL
INTEGRITY; AND

(3) ADOPT ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS THE COMMISSION FINDS TO
BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST.

(D) A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED
WITHOUT PRIOR COMMISSION APPROVAL.

7–318.

(A) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2025, A PERSON MAY NOT ENGAGE IN THE BUSINESS
OF AN ENERGY VENDOR IN THE STATE UNLESS THE PERSON HOLDS A LICENSE
ISSUED BY THE COMMISSION.

(B) (1) AN APPLICATION FOR AN ENERGY VENDOR LICENSE SHALL:

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(I) BE MADE TO THE COMMISSION IN WRITING ON A FORM
ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION;

(II) BE VERIFIED BY OATH OR AFFIRMATION; AND

(III) CONTAIN INFORMATION THAT THE COMMISSION REQUIRES,
INCLUDING PAYMENT OF THE APPLICABLE LICENSING FEE.

(2) (I) THE TERM OF AN ENERGY VENDOR LICENSE IS 3 YEARS.

(II) THE TERMS OF LICENSES MAY BE STAGGERED AS
DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(III) UNLESS A LICENSE IS RENEWED FOR A 3–YEAR TERM IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, THE LICENSE EXPIRES ON THE DATE THAT
THE COMMISSION SETS.

(IV) A LICENSEE MAY RENEW A LICENSE FOR A 3–YEAR TERM
BEFORE THE LICENSE EXPIRES IF THE LICENSEE:

1. OTHERWISE IS ENTITLED TO BE LICENSED;

2. SUBMITS TO THE COMMISSION A RENEWAL
APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE COMMISSION PROVIDES; AND

3. PAYS TO THE COMMISSION THE APPLICABLE
RENEWAL FEE SET BY THE COMMISSION.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL, BY REGULATION OR ORDER:

(1) REQUIRE PROOF OF FINANCIAL INTEGRITY;

(2) REQUIRE A LICENSEE TO POST A BOND OR OTHER SIMILAR
INSTRUMENT IF, IN THE COMMISSION’S JUDGMENT, THE BOND OR SIMILAR
INSTRUMENT IS NECESSARY TO ENSURE AN ENERGY VENDOR’S FINANCIAL
INTEGRITY; AND

(3) ADOPT ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS THE COMMISSION FINDS TO
BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST.

(D) A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED
WITHOUT PRIOR COMMISSION APPROVAL.

7–507.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) A person, other than an electric company providing standard offer service
under § 7–510(c) of this subtitle, a municipal electric utility serving customers solely in its
distribution territory, THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SELLING ENERGY
UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS TITLE, or a community choice aggregator under § 7–510.3 of
this subtitle, may not engage in the business of an electricity supplier in the State unless
the person holds a license issued by the Commission.

(b) (1) An application for an electricity supplier license shall:

[(1)] (I) be made to the Commission in writing on a form adopted by the
Commission;

[(2)] (II) be verified by oath or affirmation; and

[(3)] (III) contain information that the Commission requires, including:

[(i)] 1. proof of technical and managerial competence;

[(ii)] 2. proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, and any independent system operator or regional
or system transmission operator to be used by the licensee;

[(iii)] 3. a certification of compliance with applicable federal and
State environmental laws and regulations that relate to the generation of electricity; and

[(iv)] 4. payment of the applicable licensing fee.

(2) (I) THE TERM OF AN A RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER
LICENSE IS 3 YEARS.

(II) THE TERMS OF LICENSES MAY BE STAGGERED AS
DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(III) UNLESS A LICENSE FOR A RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER IS RENEWED FOR A 3–YEAR TERM IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SUBSECTION, THE LICENSE EXPIRES ON THE DATE THAT THE COMMISSION SETS.

(IV) A LICENSEE MAY RENEW A LICENSE FOR AN ADDITIONAL A
3–YEAR TERM BEFORE THE LICENSE EXPIRES IF THE LICENSEE:

1. OTHERWISE IS ENTITLED TO BE LICENSED;

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

2. SUBMITS TO THE COMMISSION A RENEWAL
APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE COMMISSION PROVIDES; AND

3. PAYS TO THE COMMISSION THE APPLICABLE
RENEWAL FEE SET BY THE COMMISSION.

(c) The Commission shall, by regulation or order:

(1) require proof of financial integrity;

(2) require a licensee to post a bond or other similar instrument[,] if, in the
Commission’s judgment, the bond or similar instrument is necessary to insure an electricity
supplier’s financial integrity;

(3) require a licensee to:

(i) provide proof that [it] THE LICENSEE is qualified to do business
in the State with the Department of Assessments and Taxation; and

(ii) agree to be subject to all applicable taxes; and

(4) adopt any other requirements [it] THE COMMISSION finds to be in the
public interest, which may include different requirements for:

(i) electricity suppliers that serve only large customers; and

(ii) the different categories of electricity suppliers.

(d) A license issued under this section may not be transferred without prior
Commission approval.

(e) The Commission shall adopt regulations or issue orders to:

(1) protect consumers, electric companies, [and] electricity suppliers, AND
ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS from anticompetitive and abusive
practices;

(2) require each electricity supplier AND, EACH ENERGY SALESPERSON,
AND EACH ENERGY VENDOR to provide, in addition to the requirements under §
7–505(b)(5) of this subtitle, adequate and accurate customer information to enable
customers to make informed choices regarding the purchase of any electricity services
offered by the electricity supplier;

(3) establish reasonable restrictions on telemarketing;

(4) establish procedures for contracting with customers;
– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) establish requirements and limitations relating to deposits, billing,
collections, and contract cancellations;

(6) establish provisions providing for the referral of a delinquent account
by an electricity supplier to the standard offer service under § 7–510(c) of this subtitle; and

(7) establish procedures for dispute resolution.

(f) In accordance with regulations or orders of the Commission, electricity bills,
for competitive and regulated electric services, provided to consumers may provide, in
addition to the requirements of § 7–505(b)(5) of this subtitle and subsection (e)(2) of this
section, the following information:

(1) the identity and phone number of the electricity supplier of the service;

(2) sufficient information to evaluate prices and services; and

(3) information identifying whether the price is regulated or competitive.

(g) (1) An electricity supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, AN ENERGY
VENDOR, or any person or governmental unit may not, without first obtaining the
customer’s permission:

(i) make any change in the electricity supplier for a customer; or

(ii) add a new charge for a new or existing service or option.

(2) The Commission shall adopt regulations or issue orders establishing
procedures to prevent the practices prohibited under paragraph (1) of this subsection.

(h) (1) An electricity supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN ENERGY
VENDOR may not discriminate against any customer based wholly or partly on race, color,
creed, national origin, or sex of an applicant for service or for any arbitrary, capricious, or
unfairly discriminatory reason.

(2) An electricity supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN ENERGY
VENDOR may not refuse to provide service to a customer except by the application of
standards that are reasonably related to the electricity supplier’s economic and business
purposes.

(i) An electricity supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, AND AN ENERGY
VENDOR shall be subject to all applicable federal and State environmental laws and
regulations.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(j) An electricity supplier shall post on the Internet information that is readily
understandable about its services and rates for small commercial and residential electric
customers.

(k) (1) [The] FOR SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (R) OF THIS SECTION, FOR
JUST CAUSE ON THE COMMISSION’S OWN INVESTIGATION OR ON COMPLAINT OF THE
OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OR AN AFFECTED
PARTY, THE Commission may:

(I) DENY A LICENSE TO, OR revoke [or], suspend, OR REFUSE TO
RENEW the license of, an electricity supplier[,] OR, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN
ENERGY VENDOR;

(II) impose a civil penalty or other remedy[,];

(III) order a refund or credit to a customer[,]; or

(IV) impose a moratorium on adding or soliciting additional
customers by the electricity supplier[, for just cause on the Commission’s own investigation
or on complaint of the Office of People’s Counsel, the Attorney General, or an affected party]
OR, ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR ENERGY VENDOR.

(2) A civil penalty may be imposed in addition to the Commission’s decision
to DENY, revoke, suspend, OR REFUSE TO RENEW A LICENSE or impose a moratorium.

(3) Just cause includes:

(i) intentionally providing false information to the Commission;

(ii) switching, or causing to be switched, the electricity supply for a
customer without first obtaining the customer’s permission;

(iii) failing to provide electricity for its customers;

(iv) committing fraud or engaging in deceptive practices;

(v) failing to maintain financial integrity;

(vi) violating a Commission regulation or order;

(vii) failing to pay, collect, remit, or calculate accurately applicable
State or local taxes;

(viii) violating a provision of this article or any other applicable
consumer protection law of the State;

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ix) conviction of a felony by the licensee or principal of the licensee
or any crime involving fraud, theft, or deceit; [and]

(x) DENIAL, suspension, or revocation of OR REFUSAL TO RENEW
a license by any State or federal authority; AND

(XI) COMMISSION OF ANY OF THE ACTS DESCRIBED IN ITEMS (I)
THROUGH (X) OF THIS PARAGRAPH BY A PERSON THAT IS AN AFFILIATE OF THE
LICENSEE OR THAT IS UNDER COMMON CONTROL WITH THE LICENSEE.

(l) (1) An electricity supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON VENDOR, or ANY
OTHER person, EXCEPT FOR AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, selling or offering to sell
electricity in the State in violation of this section OR § 7–507.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE §
7–318 OF THIS TITLE, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, is subject to:

(i) a civil penalty of not more than [$10,000] $25,000 for the
violation; [or]

(ii) license DENIAL, revocation, or suspension OR REFUSAL TO
RENEW THE LICENSE; OR

(III) BOTH.

(2) AN ENERGY SALESPERSON SELLING OR OFFERING TO SELL
ELECTRICITY IN THE STATE IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION OR § 7–317 OF THIS
TITLE, AFTER NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A HEARING, IS SUBJECT TO
LICENSE DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL TO RENEW THE
LICENSE.

(3) Each day OR PART OF A DAY a violation continues is a separate
violation.

(3) (4) EACH CUSTOMER TO WHOM ELECTRICITY IS SOLD OR
OFFERED IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION IS A SEPARATE VIOLATION.

(4) (5) The Commission shall determine the amount of any civil penalty
after considering:

(i) the number of previous violations of any provision of this division
BY THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER, ENERGY SALESPERSON VENDOR, OR OTHER
PERSON;

(ii) the gravity of the current violation; [and]

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(iii) the good faith of the electricity supplier, ENERGY
SALESPERSON VENDOR, or OTHER person charged in attempting to achieve compliance
after notification of the violation; AND

(IV) ANY OTHER MATTER THAT THE COMMISSION CONSIDERS
APPROPRIATE AND RELEVANT.

(m) In connection with a consumer complaint or Commission investigation under
this section OR § 7–507.1 OF THIS SUBTITLE § 7–317 OR § 7–318 OF THIS TITLE, an
electricity supplier, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, ENERGY VENDOR, AND ANY OTHER
PERSON SELLING OR OFFERING TO SELL ELECTRICITY IN THE STATE shall provide to
the Commission access to any accounts, books, papers, and documents [which] THAT the
Commission considers necessary to resolve the matter at issue.

(n) The Commission may order the electricity supplier, ENERGY SALESPERSON,
AN ENERGY VENDOR, OR OTHER PERSON to cease adding or soliciting additional
customers or to cease serving customers in the State.

(o) The Commission shall consult with the Consumer Protection Division of the
Office of the Attorney General before issuing regulations designed to protect consumers.

(p) The People’s Counsel shall have the same authority in licensing, complaint,
and dispute resolution proceedings as it has in Title 2 of this article.

(q) Nothing in this subtitle may be construed to affect the authority of the
Division of Consumer Protection in the Office of the Attorney General to enforce violations
of Titles 13 and 14 of the Commercial Law Article or any other applicable State law or
regulation in connection with the activities of electricity suppliers AND, ENERGY
SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS.

(R) THE COMMISSION MAY NOT IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY ON AN ENERGY
SALESPERSON UNDER SUBSECTION (K) OR (L) OF THIS SECTION.

~~7–507.1.~~

(A) (1) A PERSON MAY NOT ENGAGE IN THE BUSINESS OF AN ENERGY
SALESPERSON IN THE STATE UNLESS THE PERSON HOLDS A LICENSE ISSUED BY THE
~~COMMISSION.~~

(2) A LICENSED ENERGY SALESPERSON MAY OFFER OR SELL
~~ELECTRICITY~~ ~~SUPPLY~~ ~~AGREEMENTS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~GAS~~ ~~SUPPLY~~ ~~AGREEMENTS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CUSTOMERS~~
IN THE STATE ONLY IF THE ENERGY SALESPERSON IS ASSOCIATED WITH A LICENSED
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER OR LICENSED GAS SUPPLIER, RESPECTIVELY.

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) (1) AN APPLICATION FOR AN ENERGY SALESPERSON LICENSE SHALL:

(I) BE MADE TO THE COMMISSION IN WRITING ON A FORM
ADOPTED BY THE COMMISSION;

(II) BE VERIFIED BY OATH OR AFFIRMATION; AND

(III) CONTAIN INFORMATION THAT THE COMMISSION REQUIRES,
~~INCLUDING:~~

1. PROOF OF ASSOCIATION WITH A LICENSED
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER OR LICENSED GAS SUPPLIER, AS APPROPRIATE;

2. PROOF OF COMPLIANCE WITH ALL APPLICABLE
~~TRAINING~~ ~~REQUIREMENTS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~CUSTOMER~~ ~~PROTECTION~~ ~~UNDER~~ ~~THIS~~ ~~SUBTITLE~~
AND SUBTITLE 6 OF THIS TITLE AS REQUIRED BY THE COMMISSION; AND

3. PAYMENT OF THE APPLICABLE LICENSING FEE.

(2) (I) THE TERM OF AN ENERGY SALESPERSON LICENSE IS 3
~~YEARS.~~

(II) THE TERMS OF LICENSES MAY BE STAGGERED AS
DETERMINED BY THE COMMISSION.

(III) UNLESS A LICENSE IS RENEWED FOR A 3–YEAR TERM IN
ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION, THE LICENSE EXPIRES ON THE DATE THAT
THE COMMISSION SETS.

(IV) A LICENSEE MAY RENEW A LICENSE FOR AN ADDITIONAL
3–YEAR TERM BEFORE THE LICENSE EXPIRES IF THE LICENSEE:

1. OTHERWISE IS ENTITLED TO BE LICENSED;

2. SUBMITS TO THE COMMISSION A RENEWAL
APPLICATION ON THE FORM THAT THE COMMISSION PROVIDES; AND

3. PAYS TO THE COMMISSION THE APPLICABLE
RENEWAL FEE SET BY THE COMMISSION.

(C) THE COMMISSION SHALL, BY REGULATION OR ORDER:

(1) REQUIRE PROOF OF FINANCIAL INTEGRITY;

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(2) REQUIRE A LICENSEE TO POST A BOND OR OTHER SIMILAR
INSTRUMENT IF, IN THE COMMISSION’S JUDGMENT, THE BOND OR SIMILAR
INSTRUMENT IS NECESSARY TO INSURE AN ENERGY SALESPERSON’S FINANCIAL
INTEGRITY; AND

(3) ADOPT ANY OTHER REQUIREMENTS THE COMMISSION FINDS TO
BE IN THE PUBLIC INTEREST.

(D) A LICENSE ISSUED UNDER THIS SECTION MAY NOT BE TRANSFERRED
WITHOUT PRIOR COMMISSION APPROVAL.

7–510.

(a) (1) Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the phased implementation of
customer choice shall be implemented as follows:

(i) on July 1, 2000, one–third of the residential class in the State of
each electric company shall have the opportunity for customer choice;

(ii) on January 1, 2001, the entire industrial class and the entire
commercial class in the State of each electric company shall have the opportunity for
customer choice;

(iii) on July 1, 2001, two–thirds of the residential class in the State
of each electric company shall have the opportunity for customer choice;

(iv) on July 1, 2002, all customers of each electric company shall have
the opportunity for customer choice; and

(v) by July 1, 2003, under a separate schedule adopted by the
Commission, all customers of each electric cooperative shall have the opportunity for
customer choice.

(2) (i) In accordance with this paragraph, the Commission may adopt a
separate schedule for municipal electric utilities for the implementation of customer choice.

(ii) A municipal electric utility may not be required to make its
service territory available for customer choice unless it elects to do so.

(iii) If a municipal electric utility elects to allow customer choice, the
municipal electric utility shall file a proposed plan and schedule with the Commission.

(iv) The Commission may approve each municipal electric utility
plan and schedule after considering the features that distinguish the municipal electric
utility from other electric companies.

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(v) Nothing in this subtitle may be construed to require the
functional, operational, structural, or legal separation of the regulated and nonregulated
operations of the municipal electric utility.

(3) If a municipal electric utility serves customers outside its distribution
territory, electricity suppliers licensed under § 7–507 of this subtitle may serve the
customers in the distribution territory of the municipal electric utility.

(b) For good cause shown and if the Commission finds the action to be in the
public interest, the Commission may:

(1) accelerate or delay the initial implementation date of July 1, 2000, by
up to 3 months; or

(2) accelerate any of the other implementation dates and phase–in
percentages in subsection (a) of this section.

(c) (1) Beginning on the initial implementation date, an electric company’s
obligation to provide electricity supply and electricity supply service is stated by this
subsection.

(2) (I) Electricity supply purchased from a customer’s electric company
is known as standard offer service.

(II) A customer is considered to have chosen the standard offer
service if the customer:

[(i)] 1. is not allowed to choose an electricity supplier under the
phase in of customer choice in subsection (a) of this section;

[(ii)] 2. contracts for electricity with an electricity supplier and it
is not delivered;

[(iii)] 3. cannot arrange for electricity from an electricity supplier;

[(iv)] 4. does not choose an electricity supplier;

[(v)] 5. chooses the standard offer service; or

[(vi)] 6. has been denied service or referred to the standard offer
service by an electricity supplier in accordance with § 7–507(e)(6) of this subtitle.

(3) [(i) Except as provided under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
any obligation of an electric company to provide standard offer service shall cease on July
1, 2003.

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(ii) 1. Electric cooperatives and municipal electric utilities may
choose to continue providing standard offer service in their respective distribution
territories and may cease offering that service after notifying the Commission at least 12
months in advance.

2. On and after July 1, 2003,] an (I) AN electric
company continues to have HAS the obligation to provide standard offer service to
residential and small commercial customers at a market price that permits recovery of the
verifiable, prudently incurred costs to procure or produce the electricity plus a reasonable
return.

(iii) 1.] (II) On or before December 31, 2008, and every 5 years
thereafter, the Commission shall report to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257
of the State Government Article, to the General Assembly on the status of the standard
offer service[,] AND the development of competition[, and the transition of standard offer
service to a default service].

[2. The Commission shall establish, by order or regulation,
the definition of “default service”.]

(4) (i) 1. On or before July 1, 2001, the Commission shall adopt
regulations or issue orders to establish procedures for the competitive selection of wholesale
electricity suppliers, including an affiliate of an electric company, to provide electricity for
standard offer service to customers of electric companies under paragraph (2) of this
subsection, except for customers of electric cooperatives and municipal electric utilities.

2. Unless delayed by the Commission, the competitive
selection shall take effect no later than July 1, 2003.

(ii) 1. Under the obligation to provide standard offer service in
accordance with [paragraph (3)(ii) of] this subsection, the Commission, by regulation or
order, and in a manner that is designed to obtain the best price for residential and small
commercial customers in light of market conditions at the time of procurement and the
need to protect these customers from excessive price increases:

A. shall require each investor–owned electric company to
obtain its electricity supply for residential and small commercial customers participating
in standard offer service through a competitive process in accordance with this paragraph;
and

B. may require or allow an investor–owned electric company
to procure electricity for these customers directly from an electricity supplier through one
or more bilateral contracts outside the competitive process.

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. A. As the Commission directs, the competitive process
shall include a series of competitive wholesale bids in which the investor–owned electric
company solicits bids to supply anticipated standard offer service load for residential and
small commercial customers as part of a portfolio of blended wholesale supply contracts of
short, medium, or long terms, and other appropriate electricity products and strategies, as
needed to meet demand in a cost–effective manner.

B. The competitive process may include different bidding
structures and mechanisms for base load, peak load, and very short–term procurement.

C. By regulation or order, as a part of the competitive process,
the Commission shall require or allow the procurement of cost–effective energy efficiency
and conservation measures and services with projected and verifiable energy savings to
offset anticipated demand to be served by standard offer service, and the imposition of other
cost–effective demand–side management programs.

3. A. In order to prevent an excessive amount of load
being exposed to upward price risks and volatility, the Commission may stagger the dates
for the competitive wholesale auctions.

B. By regulation or order, the Commission may allow a date
on which a competitive wholesale auction takes place to be altered based on current market
conditions.

4. By regulation or order, the Commission may allow an
investor–owned electric company to refuse to accept some or all of the bids made in a
competitive wholesale auction in accordance with standards adopted by the Commission.

5. The investor–owned electric company shall publicly
disclose the names of all bidders and the names and load allocation of all successful bidders
90 days after all contracts for supply are executed.

6. AN INVESTOR–OWNED ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY
~~MARKET~~ ~~STANDARD~~ ~~OFFER~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~CUSTOMERS~~ ~~IN~~ ~~ITS~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~TERRITORY~~ ~~IN~~
~~COMPLIANCE~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~APPROPRIATE~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~PROTECTIONS~~ ~~CONSISTENT~~ ~~WITH~~
THOSE THAT APPLY TO ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS UNDER § 7–507 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(5) An electric company may procure the electricity needed to meet its
standard offer service electricity supply obligation from any electricity supplier, including
an affiliate of the electric company.

(6) In order to meet long–term, anticipated demand in the State for
standard offer service and other electricity supply, the Commission may require or allow
an investor–owned electric company to construct, acquire, or lease, and operate, its own
generating facilities, and transmission facilities necessary to interconnect the generating
facilities with the electric grid, subject to appropriate cost recovery.

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(7) (i) To determine whether an appropriate phased implementation of
electricity rates that is necessary to protect residential customers from the impact of
sudden and significant increases in electricity rates, the Commission in the case of an
increase of 20% or more over the previous year’s total electricity rates, shall conduct
evidentiary proceedings, including public hearings.

(ii) 1. A deferral of costs as part of a phased implementation of
electricity rates by an investor–owned electric company shall be treated as a regulatory
asset to be recovered in accordance with a rate stabilization plan under Part III of this
subtitle or any other plan for phased implementation approved by the Commission.

2. A deferral of costs under this paragraph must be just,
reasonable, and in the public interest.

(iii) The Commission shall approve the recovery of deferred costs
under subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph as:

1. long–term recovery in accordance with a rate stabilization
plan under Part III of this subtitle; or

2. short–term recovery through a rate proceeding
mechanism approved by the Commission.

(iv) The Commission may approve a phasing in of increased costs by:

1. placing a cap on rates and allowing recovery over time; or

2. allowing rates to increase and providing for a rebate to
customers of any excess costs paid.

(8) (i) An electric cooperative that as of July 1, 2006, supplied its
standard offer service load through a portfolio of blended wholesale supply contracts of
short, medium, and long terms, and other appropriate electricity products and strategies,
as needed to meet demand in a cost–effective manner, may choose to continue to use a
blended portfolio:

1. as approved and modified by the electric cooperative’s
board of directors; and

2. with appropriate review for prudent cost recovery as
determined by the Commission.

(ii) The Commission may not set or enforce a termination date for
the procurement of supply through a managed portfolio previously approved by the
Commission.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(9) (i) The Commission, on request by an electric cooperative or on its
own initiative, shall initiate a proceeding to investigate options for a rate stabilization plan
to assist residential electric customers to gradually adjust to market rates over an extended
period of time.

(ii) If an electric cooperative determines that total electric rates for
residential customers are anticipated to increase by more than 20% in a 12–month period
resulting from an increase in the cost of generation, the electric cooperative shall survey its
membership to determine whether to make a request to the Commission to initiate a
proceeding under subsection (a) of this section.

(iii) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph, as
approved by the Commission, an electric cooperative may receive a modification in
distribution and transmission rates.

(10) (I) THIS PARAGRAPH DOES NOT APPLY TO A
MEMBER–REGULATED COOPERATIVE AS DEFINED IN § 5–601 OF THE CORPORATIONS
AND ASSOCIATIONS ARTICLE.

(II) AN ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE MAY ADVERTISE, MARKET,
AND PROMOTE STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AND RELATED PRODUCTS IN ITS SERVICE
TERRITORY, INCLUDING AVAILABILITY, PRICE, AND OTHER TERMS, IN COMPLIANCE
WITH APPROPRIATE CONSUMER PROTECTIONS CONSISTENT WITH THOSE THAT
APPLY TO ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS UNDER § 7–507 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

[(d) Notwithstanding the dates set forth in this section or any other law, customer
choice may not commence until legislation is enacted by the General Assembly to
restructure Maryland taxes to address the State and local tax implications of restructuring
the electric utility industry.]

(D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY
SUPPLY OTHER THAN SUPPLY OFFERED THROUGH:

(I) STANDARD OFFER SERVICE;

(II) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES’ SALE OF
ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS TITLE; OR

(III) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) AN A RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER:

– 26 –
END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(I) MAY OFFER ELECTRICITY, OTHER THAN GREEN POWER,
ONLY AT A PRICE THAT DOES NOT EXCEED THE TRAILING 12–MONTH AVERAGE OF
THE ELECTRIC COMPANY’S STANDARD OFFER SERVICE RATE IN THE ELECTRIC
COMPANY’S SERVICE TERRITORY AS OF THE DATE OF AGREEMENT WITH THE
CUSTOMER;

(II) MAY OFFER RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY SUPPLY ONLY:

1. FOR A TERM NOT TO EXCEED 12 MONTHS AT A TIME;

(III) MAY, FOR ELECTRICITY SUPPLY OTHER THAN GREEN
POWER, AUTOMATICALLY RENEW THE TERM ONLY IF THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER
PROVIDES NOTICE TO THE CUSTOMER 90 DAYS BEFORE AND 30 DAYS BEFORE
RENEWAL;

(IV) MAY OFFER GREEN POWER THAT MEETS THE
REQUIREMENTS OF § 7–707 OF THIS TITLE, BUT MAY NOT AUTOMATICALLY RENEW
THE TERM WITH THE CUSTOMER; AND

2. WITHOUT AUTOMATIC RENEWAL;

(III) (V) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
MAY NOT OFFER A VARIABLE RATE OTHER THAN A RATE THAT ADJUSTS FOR
SEASONAL VARIATION NOT MORE THAN TWICE IN A SINGLE YEAR; AND

(IV) (VI) MAY NOT PAY A COMMISSION OR OTHER
INCENTIVE–BASED COMPENSATION TO AN ENERGY SALESPERSON FOR ENROLLING
CUSTOMERS; AND

(V) MAY NOT IMPOSE ON A CUSTOMER A FEE FOR
CANCELLATION OR EARLY TERMINATION OF AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLY AGREEMENT.

(3) PARAGRAPH (2)(III) (2)(V) OF THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT
PROHIBIT THE OFFER AND USE OF TIME–OF–USE RATES THAT ESTABLISH
DIFFERENT RATES FOR PERIODS WITHIN A SINGLE DAY.

(4) AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER MAY NOT OFFER OR PROVIDE
~~ELECTRICITY~~ ~~SUPPLY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~CUSTOMER~~ ~~WHO~~ ~~RECEIVES~~ ~~ENERGY~~ ~~ASSISTANCE~~
THROUGH THE ELECTRIC UNIVERSAL SERVICE PROGRAM UNDER § 7–512.1 OF THIS
SUBTITLE OR THE ENERGY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
HUMAN SERVICES UNDER TITLE 5, SUBTITLE 5A OF THE HUMAN SERVICES
~~ARTICLE.~~

– 27 –
END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) (4) AN A RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER MAY NOT SELL
TO AN ELECTRIC COMPANY, AND AN ELECTRIC COMPANY MAY NOT PURCHASE FROM
AN THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER, ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE.

(E) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES’ SALE OF
ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS TITLE; OR

(II) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) AN ELECTRIC COMPANY AND AN A RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER SHALL ESTABLISH A MECHANISM FOR A CUSTOMER WHOSE ACCOUNT
NUMBER OR CUSTOMER CHOICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER HAS BEEN
COMPROMISED TO RECEIVE A REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT NUMBER OR CUSTOMER
CHOICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ON REQUEST, SUBJECT TO VERIFICATION IN A
MANNER APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION.

(F) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES’ SALE OF
ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS TITLE; OR

(II) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
AS AS APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION BY REGULATION OR ORDER, EACH ELECTRIC
COMPANY AND EACH RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER SHALL ALLOW A
CUSTOMER TO INDICATE THE CUSTOMER’S INTENTION TO REMAIN ON STANDARD
OFFER SERVICE INDEFINITELY AND NOT TO RECEIVE DIRECTED MARKETING
CONTACTS FROM ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A
“DO NOT TRANSFER” LIST ONTO WHICH THE CUSTOMER MAY REQUEST TO BE
PLACED.

(3) A RESIDENTIAL ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER MAY CONTACT A
CUSTOMER ON A “DO NOT TRANSFER” LIST UNTIL THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLY
AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO BETWEEN THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER AND THE
CUSTOMER EXPIRES.

– 28 –
END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(G) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “BILLING ENTITY” MEANS AN ELECTRIC
COMPANY, A LICENSED ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER, OR ANY OTHER ENTITY THAT IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR ISSUING AN ELECTRIC BILL TO A RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER.

(2) ON OR BEFORE THE 15TH DAY OF EACH MONTH, EACH ELECTRIC
COMPANY BILLING ENTITY SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COMMISSION ON
CUSTOMER CHOICE IN ITS SERVICE TERRITORY FOR THE PRECEDING MONTH,
INCLUDING:

(1) (I) THE TOTAL KILOWATT–HOURS DISTRIBUTED TO
CUSTOMERS PURCHASING ELECTRICITY FROM A THIRD–PARTY ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER;

(2) (II) THE TOTAL SUPPLY COST CHARGED TO CUSTOMERS
PURCHASING ELECTRICITY FROM A THIRD–PARTY ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER;

(3) (III) THE TOTAL COST THAT CUSTOMERS SPECIFIED IN ITEM (2)
(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION PARAGRAPH WOULD HAVE PAID UNDER STANDARD OFFER
SERVICE;

(4) (IV) THE NET THIRD–PARTY TOTAL COST COMPARED TO THE
NET STANDARD OFFER SERVICE COST;

(5) (V) THE TOTAL THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE RATE;

(6) (VI) THE STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(7) (VII) THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TOTAL THIRD–PARTY
AVERAGE RATE AND THE STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(8) (VIII) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE RESIDENTIAL RATES BROKEN
OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH OF THESE RATES AND THE
STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(9) (IX) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE GENERAL SERVICE
NONDEMAND RATES BROKEN OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH
OF THESE THIRD–PARTY RATES AND THE STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AVERAGE
RATE;

(10) (X) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE GENERAL SERVICE DEMAND
RATES BROKEN OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH OF THESE
THIRD–PARTY RATES AND THE STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

– 29 –
END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(11) (XI) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE LARGE POWER DEMAND RATES
BROKEN OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH OF THESE
THIRD–PARTY RATES AND THE STANDARD OFFER SERVICE AVERAGE RATE; AND

(12) (XII) OTHER PERTINENT INFORMATION THE COMMISSION
CONSIDERS APPROPRIATE.

[(e)] (H) The Commission shall, by regulation or order, adopt procedures to
implement this section[, including the allocation of any unused opportunity for customer
choice among customer classes].

[(f)] (I) Except as provided in § 7–510.3 of this subtitle, a county or municipal
corporation may not act as an aggregator unless the Commission determines there is not
sufficient competition within the boundaries of the county or municipal corporation.

7–602.

The General Assembly finds and declares that the purpose of this subtitle is to:

(1) clarify existing law regarding the provision of competitive retail gas
supply and gas supply services in the State;

(2) require the Commission to license gas suppliers AND, ENERGY
SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS;

(3) authorize the Commission to adopt complaint procedures;

(4) establish certain requirements relating to the competitiveness of retail
gas supply and gas supply services markets; and

(5) establish standards for the protection of consumers.

7–603.

(a) The Commission shall license gas suppliers AND, ENERGY SALESPERSONS,
AND ENERGY VENDORS and shall have the same authority as the Commission has under
[§ 7–507] §§ 7–507 AND 7–507.1 §§ 7–317, 7–318, AND 7–507 of this title for electricity
suppliers AND, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS, including the
authority to:

(1) DENY, revoke [or], suspend, OR REFUSE TO RENEW a license;

(2) impose a moratorium, civil penalty, or other remedy; or

(3) order a refund for or credit to a customer.

– 30 –
END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(b) The Commission shall adopt licensing requirements and procedures for gas
suppliers AND, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS that protect
consumers, the public interest, and the collection of all State and local taxes, CONSISTENT
WITH THE REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRICITY SUPPLIERS ~~AND~~ ~~ENERGY~~
SALESPERSONS UNDER SUBTITLE 5 OF THIS TITLE AND ENERGY SALESPERSONS
AND ENERGY VENDORS UNDER SUBTITLE 3 OF THIS TITLE.

7–603.1.

(A) (1) FOR SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (B)(5) OF THIS SECTION, FOR JUST
CAUSE ON THE COMMISSION’S OWN INVESTIGATION OR ON COMPLAINT OF THE
OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL, OR AN AFFECTED
PARTY, THE COMMISSION MAY:

(I) DENY A LICENSE TO, OR REVOKE, SUSPEND, OR REFUSE TO
RENEW THE LICENSE OF, A GAS SUPPLIER OR, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN
ENERGY VENDOR;

(II) IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY OR OTHER REMEDY;

(III) ORDER A REFUND OR CREDIT TO A CUSTOMER; OR

(IV) IMPOSE A MORATORIUM ON ADDING OR SOLICITING
ADDITIONAL CUSTOMERS BY THE GAS SUPPLIER OR, ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN
ENERGY VENDOR.

(2) A CIVIL PENALTY MAY BE IMPOSED IN ADDITION TO THE
COMMISSION’S DECISION TO DENY, REVOKE, SUSPEND, OR REFUSE TO RENEW A
LICENSE OR IMPOSE A MORATORIUM.

(3) JUST CAUSE INCLUDES:

(I) INTENTIONALLY PROVIDING FALSE INFORMATION TO THE
COMMISSION;

(II) SWITCHING, OR CAUSING TO BE SWITCHED, THE GAS
SUPPLY FOR A CUSTOMER WITHOUT FIRST OBTAINING THE CUSTOMER’S
PERMISSION;

(III) FAILING TO PROVIDE GAS FOR ITS CUSTOMERS;

(IV) COMMITTING FRAUD OR ENGAGING IN DECEPTIVE
PRACTICES;

– 31 –
END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) FAILING TO MAINTAIN FINANCIAL INTEGRITY;

(VI) VIOLATING A COMMISSION REGULATION OR ORDER;

(VII) FAILING TO PAY, COLLECT, REMIT, OR CALCULATE
ACCURATELY APPLICABLE STATE OR LOCAL TAXES;

(VIII) VIOLATING A PROVISION OF THIS ARTICLE OR ANY OTHER
APPLICABLE CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW OF THE STATE;

(IX) CONVICTION OF A FELONY BY THE LICENSEE OR PRINCIPAL
OF THE LICENSEE OR ANY CRIME INVOLVING FRAUD, THEFT, OR DECEIT;

(X) DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF OR REFUSAL TO
RENEW A LICENSE BY ANY STATE OR FEDERAL AUTHORITY; AND

(XI) COMMISSION OF ANY OF THE ACTS DESCRIBED IN ITEMS (I)
THROUGH (X) OF THIS PARAGRAPH BY A PERSON THAT IS AN AFFILIATE OF THE
LICENSEE OR THAT IS UNDER COMMON CONTROL WITH THE LICENSEE.

(B) (1) (I) A GAS SUPPLIER, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON VENDOR, OR
ANY OTHER PERSON, EXCEPT FOR AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, SELLING OR
OFFERING TO SELL GAS IN THE STATE IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION OR § 7–603
OF THIS SUBTITLE, AFTER NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A HEARING, IS
SUBJECT TO:

(I) 1. A CIVIL PENALTY OF NOT MORE THAN $25,000 FOR
THE VIOLATION;

(II) 2. LICENSE DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OR
REFUSAL TO RENEW THE LICENSE; OR

~~(III)~~ 3. BOTH.

(II) AN ENERGY SALESPERSON SELLING OR OFFERING TO SELL
GAS IN THE STATE IN VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION OR § 7–603 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
AFTER NOTICE AND AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A HEARING, IS SUBJECT TO LICENSE
DENIAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL TO RENEW THE LICENSE.

(2) EACH DAY OR PART OF A DAY A VIOLATION CONTINUES IS A
SEPARATE VIOLATION.

– 32 –
END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(3) EACH CUSTOMER TO WHOM GAS IS SOLD OR OFFERED IN
VIOLATION OF THIS SECTION IS A SEPARATE VIOLATION.

(4) THE COMMISSION SHALL DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF ANY CIVIL
PENALTY AFTER CONSIDERING:

(I) THE NUMBER OF PREVIOUS VIOLATIONS OF ANY PROVISION
OF THIS DIVISION BY THE GAS SUPPLIER, ENERGY SALESPERSON VENDOR, OR
OTHER PERSON;

(II) THE GRAVITY OF THE CURRENT VIOLATION;

(III) THE GOOD FAITH OF THE GAS SUPPLIER, ENERGY
SALESPERSON VENDOR, OR OTHER PERSON CHARGED IN ATTEMPTING TO ACHIEVE
COMPLIANCE AFTER NOTIFICATION OF THE VIOLATION; AND

(IV) ANY OTHER MATTER THAT THE COMMISSION CONSIDERS
APPROPRIATE AND RELEVANT.

(5) THE COMMISSION MAY NOT IMPOSE A CIVIL PENALTY ON AN
INDIVIDUAL ENERGY SALESPERSON IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SUBSECTION.

(C) IN CONNECTION WITH A CONSUMER COMPLAINT OR COMMISSION
INVESTIGATION UNDER THIS SECTION OR § 7–603 OF THIS SUBTITLE, A GAS
SUPPLIER, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, AN ENERGY VENDOR, AND ANY OTHER
PERSON SELLING OR OFFERING TO SELL GAS IN THE STATE SHALL PROVIDE TO THE
COMMISSION ACCESS TO ANY ACCOUNTS, BOOKS, PAPERS, AND DOCUMENTS THAT
THE COMMISSION CONSIDERS NECESSARY TO RESOLVE THE MATTER AT ISSUE.

(D) THE COMMISSION MAY ORDER THE GAS SUPPLIER, ENERGY
SALESPERSON, AN ENERGY VENDOR, OR OTHER PERSON TO CEASE ADDING OR
SOLICITING ADDITIONAL CUSTOMERS OR TO CEASE SERVING CUSTOMERS IN THE
STATE.

7–604.

(a) On or before July 1, 2001, the Commission shall adopt consumer protection
orders or regulations for gas suppliers AND, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY
VENDORS that:

(1) protect consumers from discriminatory, unfair, deceptive, and
anticompetitive acts and practices in the marketing, selling, or distributing of natural gas;

– 33 –
END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) provide for contracting, enrollment, and billing practices and
procedures; and

(3) the Commission considers necessary to protect the consumer.

(b) In adopting orders and regulations under this section, unless the Commission
determines that the circumstances do not require consistency, the Commission shall:

(1) provide customers with protections consistent with applicable
protections provided to retail electric customers; and

(2) impose appropriate requirements on gas suppliers AND, ENERGY
SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS that are consistent with applicable
requirements imposed on electricity suppliers AND, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, AND
ENERGY VENDORS.

7–604.2.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE” MEANS THE
SUPPLY OF RETAIL GAS COMMODITY SERVICE BY A CUSTOMER’S GAS COMPANY.

(B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES TO RESIDENTIAL GAS SUPPLY OTHER
THAN DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE PROVIDED BY A GAS COMPANY.

(2) A GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL
GAS CUSTOMERS:

(I) MAY OFFER GAS SERVICE ONLY AT A PRICE THAT DOES NOT
EXCEED THE TRAILING 12–MONTH AVERAGE OF THE GAS COMPANY’S DEFAULT GAS
COMMODITY SERVICE IN THE GAS COMPANY’S SERVICE TERRITORY AS OF THE DATE
OF THE AGREEMENT WITH THE CUSTOMER;

(II) MAY OFFER RESIDENTIAL GAS SUPPLY ONLY FOR A TERM
NOT TO EXCEED 12 MONTHS AT A TIME AND MAY AUTOMATICALLY RENEW THE TERM
ONLY IF THE GAS SUPPLIER PROVIDES NOTICE TO THE CUSTOMER 90 DAYS BEFORE
AND 30 DAYS BEFORE RENEWAL;

(III) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, MAY
NOT OFFER A VARIABLE RATE OTHER THAN A RATE THAT ADJUSTS FOR SEASONAL
VARIATION NOT MORE THAN TWICE IN A SINGLE YEAR; AND

(IV) MAY NOT PAY A COMMISSION OR OTHER INCENTIVE–BASED
COMPENSATION TO AN ENERGY SALESPERSON FOR ENROLLING CUSTOMERS.

– 34 –
END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(3) PARAGRAPH (2)(III) OF THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT PROHIBIT
THE OFFER AND USE OF RATES THAT DIFFER BASED ON THE TOTAL NUMBER OF
THERMS USED BY A CUSTOMER IN ANY BILLING PERIOD.

(4) A GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL
GAS CUSTOMERS MAY NOT SELL TO A GAS COMPANY, AND A GAS COMPANY MAY NOT
PURCHASE FROM THE GAS SUPPLIER, ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE.

(C) A GAS COMPANY AND A GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO
RESIDENTIAL RETAIL GAS CUSTOMERS SHALL ESTABLISH A MECHANISM FOR A
CUSTOMER WHOSE ACCOUNT NUMBER OR CUSTOMER CHOICE IDENTIFICATION
NUMBER HAS BEEN COMPROMISED TO RECEIVE A REPLACEMENT ACCOUNT NUMBER
OR CUSTOMER CHOICE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER ON REQUEST, SUBJECT TO
VERIFICATION IN A MANNER APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION.

(D) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
AS APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION BY REGULATION OR ORDER, EACH GAS
COMPANY AND EACH GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL
GAS CUSTOMERS SHALL ALLOW A CUSTOMER TO INDICATE THE CUSTOMER’S
INTENTION TO REMAIN ON DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE INDEFINITELY AND
NOT TO RECEIVE DIRECTED MARKETING CONTACTS FROM GAS SUPPLIERS
THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A “DO NOT TRANSFER” LIST ONTO WHICH THE
CUSTOMER MAY REQUEST TO BE PLACED.

(2) A GAS SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES GAS TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL
GAS CUSTOMERS MAY CONTACT A CUSTOMER ON A “DO NOT TRANSFER” LIST UNTIL
THE GAS SUPPLY AGREEMENT ENTERED INTO BETWEEN THE GAS SUPPLIER AND
THE CUSTOMER EXPIRES.

(E) (1) IN THIS SUBSECTION, “BILLING ENTITY” MEANS A GAS COMPANY,
A LICENSED GAS SUPPLIER, OR ANY OTHER ENTITY THAT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
ISSUING A GAS BILL TO A RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER.

(2) ON OR BEFORE THE 15TH DAY OF EACH MONTH, EACH BILLING
ENTITY SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE COMMISSION ON CUSTOMER CHOICE IN
ITS SERVICE TERRITORY FOR THE PRECEDING MONTH, INCLUDING:

(I) THE TOTAL THERMS DISTRIBUTED TO CUSTOMERS
PURCHASING GAS FROM A THIRD–PARTY GAS SUPPLIER;

(II) THE TOTAL SUPPLY COST CHARGED TO CUSTOMERS
PURCHASING GAS FROM A THIRD–PARTY GAS SUPPLIER;

– 35 –
END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) THE TOTAL COST THAT CUSTOMERS SPECIFIED IN ITEM (II)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH WOULD HAVE PAID UNDER DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY
SERVICE;

(IV) THE NET THIRD–PARTY TOTAL COST COMPARED TO THE
NET DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE COST;

(V) THE TOTAL THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE RATE;

(VI) THE DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(VII) THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TOTAL THIRD–PARTY
AVERAGE RATE AND THE DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(VIII) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE RESIDENTIAL RATES BROKEN
OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH OF THESE RATES AND THE
DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(IX) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE GENERAL SERVICE
NONDEMAND RATES BROKEN OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH
OF THESE THIRD–PARTY RATES AND THE DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE
AVERAGE RATE;

(X) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE GENERAL SERVICE DEMAND
RATES BROKEN OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH OF THESE
THIRD–PARTY RATES AND THE DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;

(XI) THE THIRD–PARTY AVERAGE LARGE POWER DEMAND RATES
BROKEN OUT BY SUPPLIER AND THE VARIANCE BETWEEN EACH OF THESE
THIRD–PARTY RATES AND THE DEFAULT GAS COMMODITY SERVICE AVERAGE RATE;
AND

(XII) OTHER PERTINENT INFORMATION THE COMMISSION
CONSIDERS APPROPRIATE.

(F) THE COMMISSION SHALL, BY REGULATION OR ORDER, ADOPT
PROCEDURES TO CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

7–605.

(a) This subtitle may not be construed to:

(1) affect the authority of the Division of Consumer Protection of the Office
of the Attorney General to enforce violations of Titles 13 and 14 of the Commercial Law

– 36 –
END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

Article or any other applicable State law or regulation in connection with the activities of
gas suppliers OR, ENERGY SALESPERSONS, OR ENERGY VENDORS; or

(2) exempt gas companies [and], gas suppliers, AND ENERGY
SALESPERSONS, AND ENERGY VENDORS from otherwise applicable State or federal
consumer protection and antitrust laws.

(b) The Commission shall consult with the Consumer Protection Division of the
Office of the Attorney General before adopting regulations designed to protect consumers
of gas supply and gas supply services.

(c) The People’s Counsel has the same authority in licensing, complaint, and
dispute resolution proceedings as the People’s Counsel has under Subtitle 5 of this title and
Title 2 of this article.

(d) In connection with a consumer complaint or Commission investigation under
this subtitle, a gas supplier OR, AN ENERGY SALESPERSON, OR AN ENERGY VENDOR
shall provide to the Commission access to any accounts, books, papers, and documents that
the Commission considers necessary to resolve a matter in dispute.

7–701.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(m) “Renewable energy credit” or “credit” means a credit equal to the generation
attributes of 1 megawatt–hour of electricity that is derived from a Tier 1 renewable source
or a Tier 2 renewable source that is located:

(1) in the PJM region;

(2) outside the area described in item (1) of this subsection but in a control
area that is adjacent to the PJM region, if the electricity is delivered into the PJM region; or

(3) on the outer continental shelf of the Atlantic Ocean in an area that:

(i) the United States Department of the Interior designates for
leasing after coordination and consultation with the State in accordance with § 388(a) of the
Energy Policy Act of 2005; and

(ii) is between 10 and 80 miles off the coast of the State.

7–705.

(a) (1) Each EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, EACH electricity supplier shall submit a report to the Commission each year
in a form and by a date specified by the Commission that:

– 37 –
END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) (i) (I) 1. demonstrates that the electricity supplier has complied
with the applicable renewable energy portfolio standard under § 7–703 of this subtitle and
includes the submission of the required amount of renewable energy credits; or

(ii) 2. demonstrates the amount of electricity sales by which the
electricity supplier failed to meet the applicable renewable energy portfolio standard; [and]

(2) (II) documents the level of participation of minority business
enterprises and minorities in the activities that support the creation of renewable energy
credits used to satisfy the standard under § 7–703 of this subtitle, including development,
installation, and operation of generating facilities that create credits; AND

(3) (III) DOCUMENTS THE AMOUNTS AND TYPES OF GENERATION
ASSOCIATED WITH RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS PURCHASED IN COMPLIANCE
WITH § 7–707(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE DURING THE REPORTING PERIOD; AND

(IV) DOCUMENTS THE AMOUNT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
CERTIFICATES THAT DO NOT QUALIFY AS RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS AS DEFINED
IN § 7–701 OF THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING, FOR EACH CERTIFICATE:

1. THE ENERGY SOURCE ASSOCIATED WITH THE
CERTIFICATE, INCLUDING ITS LOCATION, WHEN IT WAS CONSTRUCTED, AND WHICH
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM RECEIVED THE ENERGY;

2. WHETHER THE PURCHASE OF THE CERTIFICATE WAS
BUNDLED WITH A POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT FROM THE ENERGY SOURCE
ASSOCIATED WITH THE CERTIFICATE;

3. WHETHER THE CERTIFICATE WAS PURCHASED
DIRECTLY FROM THE OPERATOR OF THE ENERGY SOURCE OR THROUGH A THIRD
PARTY; AND

4. ANY OTHER INFORMATION REQUIRED BY THE
COMMISSION.

(2) PARAGRAPH (1)(III) AND (IV) OF THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT
APPLY TO:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES’ SALE OF
ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(II) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS TITLE.

– 38 –
END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

7–707.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “GREEN POWER” MEANS ENERGY SOURCES OR
RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS THAT ARE MARKETED AS GREEN, ECO–FRIENDLY,
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY OR RESPONSIBLE, CARBON–FREE, RENEWABLE,
~~100%~~ ~~RENEWABLE,~~ ~~100%~~ ~~WIND,~~ ~~100%~~ ~~HYDRO,~~ ~~100%~~ ~~SOLAR,~~ ~~100%~~ ~~EMISSION–FREE,~~
OR SIMILAR CLAIMS.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER” DOES NOT INCLUDE:,
“GREEN POWER” MEANS ENERGY SOURCES OR RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS THAT
ARE MARKETED AS CLEAN, GREEN, ECO–FRIENDLY, ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY
OR RESPONSIBLE, CARBON–FREE, RENEWABLE, 100% RENEWABLE, 100% WIND,
100% HYDRO, 100% SOLAR, 100% EMISSION–FREE, OR SIMILAR CLAIMS.

(B) THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(1) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES WHEN THE
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SELLS ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; OR

(2) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF THIS
TITLE; OR

(3) AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES WHEN SUPPLYING
ELECTRICITY TO COMMERCIAL RETAIL ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS.

(B) (C) (1) AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER THAT SUPPLIES ELECTRICITY
TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS MAY NOT MARKET ELECTRICITY AS
GREEN POWER UNLESS:

(I) (1) THE PERCENTAGE OF THE ELECTRICITY BEING
OFFERED, OR THE EQUIVALENT NUMBER OF RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ELECTRICITY BEING MARKETED AS GREEN POWER, THAT IS
ELIGIBLE FOR INCLUSION IN MEETING THE RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO
STANDARD EQUALS OR EXCEEDS THE GREATER OF:

1. (I) 51%; OR

2. (II)1% HIGHER THAN THE RENEWABLE ENERGY
PORTFOLIO STANDARD FOR THE YEAR THE ELECTRICITY IS PROVIDED TO THE
CUSTOMER; AND

– 39 –
END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) (2) THE COMMISSION APPROVES THE PRICE OF THE
ELECTRICITY BEING MARKETED AS GREEN POWER IN ACCORDANCE WITH
SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION; AND

(3) THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER SUBMITS AN APPLICATION TO THE
COMMISSION THAT:

(I) DESCRIBES THE ELECTRICITY BEING MARKETED AS GREEN
POWER, INCLUDING THE GREEN POWER SOURCE AND PERCENTAGE OF THE
ELECTRICITY THAT IS GREEN POWER;

(II) DESCRIBES HOW THE GREEN POWER COMPLIES WITH STATE
LAW AND REGULATIONS; AND

(III) INCLUDES ANY OTHER INFORMATION THE COMMISSION
CONSIDERS NECESSARY.

(2) IN APPROVING THE PRICE OF ELECTRICITY UNDER PARAGRAPH
(1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER:

(I) WHETHER THE PURCHASE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
~~CREDITS~~ ~~WAS~~ ~~BUNDLED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~A~~ ~~POWER~~ ~~PURCHASE~~ ~~AGREEMENT~~ ~~FROM~~ ~~THE~~ ~~ENERGY~~
SOURCES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CREDIT;

(II) THE PRICE OF THE ENERGY PURCHASED, INCLUDING THE
~~TOTAL~~ ~~COST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RENEWABLE~~ ~~ENERGY~~ ~~CREDITS~~ ~~OR~~ ~~POWER~~ ~~PURCHASE~~
~~AGREEMENTS;~~

(III) THE AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY THAT IS ELIGIBLE FOR
INCLUSION IN MEETING THE RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARD; AND

(IV) THE STATE IN WHICH THE ELECTRICITY WAS GENERATED.

(D) (1) THE PRICE APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER SUBSECTION
(B)(2) OF THIS SECTION SHALL BE DETERMINED THROUGH:

(I) A PROCEEDING HELD IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2)
OF THIS SUBSECTION; OR

(II) A PROCEEDING HELD IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (3)
OF THIS SUBSECTION.

– 40 –
END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

(2) (I) EACH YEAR THE COMMISSION SHALL HOLD A PROCEEDING
TO SET A PRICE PER MEGAWATT–HOUR FOR ELECTRICITY MARKETED AS GREEN
POWER UNDER THIS SECTION THAT MAY NOT BE EXCEEDED BY AN ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
PRICE SET BY THE COMMISSION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH
MAY:

1. EXCEED THE MAXIMUM PRICE PER MEGAWATT–HOUR
THAT IS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 7–510(D)(2)(I) OF THIS TITLE; AND

2. DIFFER BASED ON THE AMOUNT AND SOURCE OF THE
ELECTRICITY GENERATION.

(III) DURING A PROCEEDING HELD UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH, THE COMMISSION:

1. SHALL CONSIDER:

A. THE PRICE OF THE ENERGY PURCHASED, INCLUDING
THE TOTAL COST OF THE RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS;

B. THE AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY THAT IS ELIGIBLE FOR
INCLUSION IN MEETING THE RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARD;

C. THE STATE IN WHICH THE ELECTRICITY WAS
GENERATED; AND

D. APPLICABLE MARKET DATA; AND

2. MAY CONSIDER WHETHER THE PURCHASE OF
RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS WAS BUNDLED WITH A POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT
FROM THE ENERGY SOURCES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CREDIT.

(3) (I) ON REQUEST BY AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER, THE
COMMISSION SHALL HOLD A PROCEEDING TO SET A PRICE PER MEGAWATT–HOUR
FOR ELECTRICITY MARKETED AS GREEN POWER FOR THAT ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER.

(II) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (4) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AT A
PROCEEDING HELD UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH THE COMMISSION MAY SET A PRICE
PER MEGAWATT–HOUR THAT IS HIGHER THAN THE PRICE DETERMINED IN THE
PROCEEDING HELD UNDER PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION FOR AN
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER IF:
– 41 –
END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER DEMONSTRATES TO THE
COMMISSION’S SATISFACTION, BASED ON AN INDEPENDENT THIRD–PARTY AUDIT,
THAT THE ACTUAL COST TO THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER FOR THE GENERATION OR
SUPPLY OF ELECTRICITY EXCEEDS THAT OF THE PRICE DETERMINED THROUGH THE
PROCEEDING HELD IN ACCORDANCE WITH PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

2. THE INCREASED PRICE REFLECTS ONLY THE COST OF
THE ELECTRICITY MARKETED AS GREEN POWER AND IS NOT ASSOCIATED WITH ANY
OF THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER’S OTHER COSTS; AND

3. THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER DEMONSTRATES TO THE
COMMISSION’S SATISFACTION THAT THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER HAS A
SIGNIFICANT LONG–TERM INVESTMENT IN RENEWABLE ENERGY THAT MEETS THE
RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARD UNDER § 7–703 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(III) DURING A PROCEEDING HELD UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH,
THE COMMISSION SHALL CONSIDER:

1. WHETHER THE PURCHASE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS WAS BUNDLED WITH A POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT FROM THE ENERGY
SOURCES ASSOCIATED WITH THE CREDIT;

2. THE PRICE OF THE ENERGY PURCHASED, INCLUDING
THE TOTAL COST OF THE RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS OR POWER PURCHASE
AGREEMENTS;

3. THE AMOUNT OF ELECTRICITY THAT IS ELIGIBLE FOR
INCLUSION IN MEETING THE RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARD;

4. THE STATE IN WHICH THE ELECTRICITY WAS
GENERATED; AND

5. APPLICABLE MARKET DATA.

(4) (I) A PRICE APPROVED BY THE COMMISSION UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION MAY NOT EXCEED 150% OF THE MAXIMUM PRICE PER MEGAWATT–HOUR
THAT IS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 7–510(D)(2)(I) OF THIS TITLE UNLESS THE
COMMISSION DETERMINES THAT THE ACTUAL COST OF THE GREEN POWER EXCEEDS
THAT AMOUNT.

(II) WITHIN 120 DAYS AFTER APPROVING A PRICE FOR GREEN
POWER THAT EXCEEDS 150% OF THE MAXIMUM PRICE PER MEGAWATT–HOUR THAT

– 42 –
END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

IS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 7–510(D)(2)(I) OF THIS TITLE, AND ANNUALLY FOR AS
LONG AS THE PRICE EXCEEDS THAT AMOUNT, THE COMMISSION SHALL SUBMIT A
REPORT TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE
STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THAT:

1. DEMONSTRATES THAT THE APPROVED PRICE
REPRESENTS ONLY THE ACTUAL PRICE OF THE GREEN POWER; AND

2. INCLUDES THE COMMISSION’S ORDER AUTHORIZING
THE PRICE OF THE GREEN POWER.

(III) IF THE COMMISSION HAS APPROVED FOR 3 CONSECUTIVE
YEARS A PRICE FOR GREEN POWER THAT EXCEEDS 150% OF THE MAXIMUM PRICE
PER MEGAWATT–HOUR THAT IS AUTHORIZED UNDER § 7–510(D)(2)(I) OF THIS TITLE,
THE COMMISSION SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL REPORT REQUIRED UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH:

1. INFORMATION ON MARKET CONDITIONS THAT
NECESSITATE THE APPROVED PRICE OF THE GREEN POWER THAT EXCEEDS 150% OF
THE MAXIMUM PRICE PER MEGAWATT–HOUR THAT IS AUTHORIZED UNDER §
7–510(D)(2)(I) OF THIS TITLE; AND

2. A RECOMMENDATION OF WHETHER TO INCREASE THE
LIMITATION ON THE MAXIMUM PRICE OF GREEN POWER ABOVE WHICH THE
COMMISSION IS REQUIRED TO MAKE A DETERMINATION UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH.

(5) THE COMMISSION:

(I) SHALL ANNUALLY REVIEW A PRICE APPROVED UNDER
PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(II) MAY, ON ITS OWN INITIATIVE, OR ON PETITION BY THE
OFFICE OF PEOPLE’S COUNSEL, REQUIRE AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER OFFERING
GREEN POWER UNDER A PRICE ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE PRICE CONTINUES TO MEET THE
REQUIREMENTS OF PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) (C) (E) (1) ON AND AFTER JANUARY 1, 2025, AN ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER SHALL PURCHASE RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS FOR EACH YEAR THE
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER OFFERS GREEN POWER FOR SALE TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL
ELECTRIC CUSTOMERS AS FOLLOWS:

(I) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2025, 0% OF THE CREDITS MAY BE
GENERATED IN THE PJM REGION;
– 43 –
END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2027, AT LEAST 10% OF THE CREDITS
SHALL BE GENERATED IN THE PJM REGION;

(III) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2029, AT LEAST 20% OF THE CREDITS
SHALL BE GENERATED IN THE PJM REGION;

(IV) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2031, AT LEAST 30% OF THE CREDITS
SHALL BE GENERATED IN THE PJM REGION;

(V) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2033, AT LEAST 40% OF THE CREDITS
SHALL BE GENERATED IN THE PJM REGION; AND

(VI) BEGINNING JULY 1, 2035, AT LEAST 50% OF THE CREDITS
SHALL BE GENERATED IN THE PJM REGION.

(2) THE CREDITS THAT AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER PURCHASES
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE:

~~(I)~~ ~~GENERATED:~~

1. IN THE PJM REGION; OR

2. OUTSIDE THE PJM REGION ONLY IF THE
ELECTRICITY IS DELIVERED INTO THE PJM REGION; AND

(II) (2) A RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDIT AN ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER PURCHASES UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE
RETIRED IN A PJM ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION SERVICES, INC., GENERATION
ATTRIBUTE TRACKING SYSTEM RESERVE SUBACCOUNT ACCESSIBLE BY THE
COMMISSION.

(C) (D) (F) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES WHEN THE
DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SELLS ENERGY UNDER § 7–704.4 OF THIS
SUBTITLE; OR

(II) A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER § 7–510.3 OF
THIS TITLE.

(2) AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER THAT CLAIMS IN THE ELECTRICITY
SUPPLIER’S MARKETING OF ELECTRICITY TO RESIDENTIAL RETAIL ELECTRIC
CUSTOMERS THAT THE CUSTOMER WILL BE PURCHASING GREEN POWER SHALL
– 44 –
END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING DISCLOSURE OR A SIMILAR DISCLOSURE APPROVED BY
THE COMMISSION:

“IF YOU PURCHASE THIS ENERGY PLAN, YOU ARE AGREEING TO PURCHASE
~~LOCAL~~ ~~UTILITY~~ ~~DISTRIBUTION~~ ~~GRID~~ ~~ELECTRICITY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~PAIRED~~ ~~WITH~~
RENEWABLE ENERGY CREDITS (“RECS”) IN AN AMOUNT SUFFICIENT TO MATCH THE
PERCENT OF “GREEN POWER” ELECTRICITY IN YOUR CONTRACT.”.

“WE DELIVER ENERGY THROUGH THE PURCHASE OF RENEWABLE ENERGY
CREDITS (RECS). A REC REPRESENTS THE SOCIAL GOOD THAT ACCOMPANIES 1
MEGAWATT–HOUR OF RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY GENERATION. RECS MAY BE SOLD
SEPARATELY FROM RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY ITSELF. RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY
AND RECS MAY BE SOLD TO DIFFERENT ENTITIES. THE PURCHASE OF A REC DOES
NOT INDICATE THAT RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY ITSELF HAS BEEN PURCHASED BY
THE ENTITY THAT PURCHASED THE REC.”.

(E) (G) IN ADDITION TO THE DISCLOSURE REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION
(D) (F) OF THIS SECTION, THE COMMISSION SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT
REQUIRE AN ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER, OTHER THAN THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL
SERVICES WHEN THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES SELLS ENERGY UNDER
§ 7–704.4 OF THIS SUBTITLE OR A COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATOR UNDER §
7–510.3 OF THIS TITLE, THAT OFFERS GREEN POWER FOR SALE TO RESIDENTIAL
RETAIL CUSTOMERS TO INCLUDE IN THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER’S MARKETING
MATERIALS A DISCLOSURE, WRITTEN IN PLAIN LANGUAGE, THAT EXPLAINS:

(1) WHAT THE CUSTOMER WILL ACTUALLY BE PAYING FOR WHEN THE
CUSTOMER PURCHASES GREEN POWER FROM THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER;

(2) HOW THE ELECTRICITY THAT THE CUSTOMER HAS PURCHASED IS
GENERATED;

(3) HOW THE GREEN POWER WILL BENEFIT THE ENVIRONMENT;

(4) THE PERCENTAGE OF ELECTRICITY THAT WOULD BE PROVIDED
BY THE ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER THAT IS ELIGIBLE FOR INCLUSION IN MEETING THE
RENEWABLE ENERGY PORTFOLIO STANDARD; AND

(5) THE STATE IN WHICH THE ELECTRICITY WAS GENERATED.

(H) THE COMMISSION, IN ITS DISCRETION, MAY DETERMINE WHETHER AN
ELECTRICITY SUPPLIER IS MARKETING ELECTRICITY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS
SECTION.

13–101.
– 45 –
END OF PAGE 45

START OF PAGE 46
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) This section does not apply to a violation of the following provisions of this
article:

(1) Title 5, Subtitle 4;

(2) Title 7, Subtitle 1;

(3) Title 8, Subtitles 1 and 3; and

(4) Title 9, Subtitle 3.

(b) A person may not fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any provision of this
division or any effective and outstanding direction, ruling, order, rule, regulation, or
decision of the Commission.

(c) An individual who knowingly violates or knowingly aids or abets a public
service company in the violation of subsection (b) of this section or any provision of this
division:

(1) is guilty of a misdemeanor; and

(2) unless a different punishment is specifically provided by law, on
conviction is subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 for a first offense and not exceeding
$5,000 for each additional or subsequent offense.

13–201.

(a) This section does not apply to a violation of the following provisions of this
article:

(1) Title 5, Subtitle 4;

(2) Title 7, Subtitle 1;

(3) § 7–213 as it applies to electric cooperatives;

(4) Title 8, Subtitles 1 and 3;

(5) Title 9, Subtitle 3; and

(6) Title 8, Subtitle 4.

(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, the Commission
may impose a civil penalty not exceeding $25,000 against a person who violates a provision

– 46 –
END OF PAGE 46

START OF PAGE 47
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

of this division, or an effective and outstanding direction, ruling, order, rule, or regulation
of the Commission.

(2) The civil penalty that the Commission may impose on a common carrier
for each violation may not exceed $2,500.

(e) (3) A civil penalty assessed for a violation of [§ 7–505(b)(7), § 7–507, §
7–603, § 7–604, or § 7–606] § 7–317, § 7–318, § 7–505(B)(7), § 7–507, § 7–507.1, §
7–603, § 7–603.1, § 7–604, § 7–606, OR § 7–707 of this article, or a rule, an order, or a
regulation adopted under any of those sections, shall be paid into the ~~Retail~~ ~~Choice~~
~~Customer~~ Education and Protection Fund under § 7–310 of this article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the General
Assembly that:

(1) the Public Service Commission shall establish a division within the
Commission with the specific responsibility to receive, investigate, and resolve, including
by disciplinary actions and prosecution, complaints against electricity suppliers, gas
suppliers, and energy salespersons for violations of this Act with respect to retail
customers;

(2) (i) at least two additional Position Identification Numbers (PINs)
shall be created and assigned to the new division, in addition to existing Commission
personnel in the Commission’s Consumer Affairs Division, who may be assigned to assist
the new division in its responsibilities under this Act; and

(ii) the Department of Budget and Management shall include the two
PINs created under item (i) of this item in the Commission’s budget for fiscal year 2025;

(3) the functions of the new division shall be funded by licensing and
renewal fees imposed on electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, and energy salespersons under
this Act; and

(4) a special assessment on public service companies under Section 3 of this
Act shall be used for initial funding of the new division.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for fiscal year 2025 only, in
addition to the amounts appropriated in the budget bill for fiscal year 2025, the Public
Service Commission may impose up to $275,000 as a special assessment using the
assessment process authorized under § 2–110 of the Public Utilities Article, provided that:

(1) the assessment shall be imposed only on those electric companies,
electricity suppliers, gas companies, and gas suppliers otherwise subject to the assessment
under § 2–110 of the Public Utilities Article; and

– 47 –
END OF PAGE 47

START OF PAGE 48
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) the limit under § 2–110(c)(12) of the Public Utilities Article does not
apply to any assessment made under this section.

(b) (1) The amounts collected under subsection (a) of this section may be
expended for fiscal year 2025 for the support of the Commission in accordance with an
approved budget amendment.

(2) Notwithstanding § 2–110(c)(10) of the Public Utilities Article, any
unexpended funds at the end of fiscal year 2025 that were collected under this section:

(i) shall be considered encumbered by the Public Service
Commission by June 30, 2025; and

(ii) may not be deducted from the appropriation for fiscal year 2026.

(c) The bill sent to each electric company, electricity supplier, gas company, and
gas supplier subject to the assessment under subsection (a) of this section shall equal the
product of multiplying:

(1) the amount authorized to be collected under this section; and

(2) the ratio of the gross operating revenues of the entity subject to the
special assessment to the total gross operating revenues for all entities subject to the
assessment.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(1) the licenses of electricity suppliers and gas suppliers that are licensed
by the Public Service Commission as of July 1, 2024, shall expire on a staggered basis as
determined by the Commission, such that equal numbers of licenses shall expire
throughout each of the following 3 years but not later than June 30, 2027;

(2) the licenses of energy salespersons who are licensed by the Commission
on or before June 30, 2027, shall expire on a staggered basis as determined by the
Commission, such that equal numbers of licenses shall expire each year; and

(3) all new and renewed licenses for electricity suppliers, gas suppliers, and
energy salespersons shall be for a term not exceeding 3 years.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 31,
2024, the Public Service Commission shall:

(1) in accordance with § 7–311 of the Public Utilities Article, as enacted by
Section 1 of this Act, develop a training and education program for any entity or individual

– 48 –
END OF PAGE 48

START OF PAGE 49
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 537

that is licensed by the Commission as an electricity supplier, a gas supplier, an energy
salesperson, or an energy vendor; and

(2) in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, report to
the General Assembly on the status of the development of the training and education
program required under § 7–311 of the Public Utilities Article, as enacted by Section 1 of
this Act.

SECTION 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Public Service Commission shall study and make recommendations on
issues related to the utilization of end–use electricity customer load that is physically
connected to the facilities of an existing or planned electric generation facility, also known
as co–located load configuration, including:

(1) any potential cost impacts to Maryland ratepayers related to co–located
load configurations;

(2) any potential impacts to the wholesale capacity, energy and ancillary
markets, or the planning function overseen by PJM Interconnection, LLC related to
co–located load configurations;

(3) any potential impacts to the reliability of the electric distribution or
transmission systems serving Maryland related to co–located load configurations; and

(4) means to manage or mitigate the impacts specified in items (1) through
(3) of this subsection.

(b) On or before December 15, 2024, the Public Service Commission shall report
its findings and recommendations to the Senate Committee on Education, Energy, and the
Environment and the House Economic Matters Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article.

SECTION ~~5.~~ ~~6.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That a presently existing
obligation or contract right may not be impaired in any way by this Act.

SECTION ~~6.~~ ~~7.~~ 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That ~~§~~ ~~7–510(d)~~ §§ 7–510(d)
and 7–604.2(c) of the Public Utilities Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall be
construed to apply to all electricity supply agreements and gas supply agreements entered
into or renewed on or after January 1, 2025.

SECTION ~~7.~~ ~~8.~~ 9. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be
construed to apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any
effect on or application to any electricity supply agreement or gas supply agreement that is
in effect on or before December 31, 2024.

– 49 –
END OF PAGE 49

START OF PAGE 50
Ch. 537 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION ~~8.~~ ~~9.~~ 10. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 50 –
END OF PAGE 50