START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 33 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 33 
(Senator Rosapepe, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
More Opportunities for Career–Focused Students Act of 2024 
 
 
This bill requires public high schools to inform students of employment and skills training 
opportunities in the same manner that they inform them of postsecondary educational 
opportunities. Information provided to students by public high schools must include 
information on employment and skills training opportunities available through 
(1) registered apprenticeship sponsors; (2) employers registered with the Maryland 
Department of Labor or workforce development boards; and (3) schools licensed by the 
Maryland Higher Education Commission that provide training, retraining, or enhancement 
in employment skills. When informing students about these opportunities, each public high 
school must highlight opportunities in high-skilled careers that do not require completion 
of a college degree and are in high demand in the State. Local school boards must assist 
public high schools in complying with the bill. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill pertains only to local school boards. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to have a material effect on local operations or 
finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  For an overview of registered apprenticeship programs in the State, please 
see the Appendix – Apprenticeship. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 33/ Page 2 
Local workforce development boards (LWDBs) are mandated under the federal Workforce 
Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA), with local employers making up a majority of 
the members of each board. Maryland has 13 regional LWDBs serving all 24 counties, 
including Baltimore City. Primarily through more than 30 American Job Centers located 
throughout the State, LWDBs offer basic career services (e.g., job search assistance); 
individualized career services (e.g., training in interviewing skills); and referrals to more 
industry specific training (e.g., apprenticeships or technical classroom training). Priority is 
given to people with barriers to employment, as defined by WIOA. Some services target 
youth, returning citizens, and veterans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 121 and HB 1247 of 2023; SB 318 and HB 652 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 837 (Delegate Wu, et al.) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Department 
of Labor; Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 26, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 33/ Page 3 
Appendix – Apprenticeship 
 
 
Generally, apprenticeship is a voluntary, industry-sponsored system that prepares 
individuals for occupations typically requiring high-level skills and related technical 
knowledge. Apprenticeships are sponsored by one or more employers or jointly by a 
labor-management committee. An apprentice receives supervised, structured, on-the-job 
training under the direction of a skilled journeyperson and related technical instruction in 
a specific occupation. Apprenticeships are designed to meet the workforce needs of the 
program sponsor. Many industry sponsors use apprenticeship as a method to train 
employees in the knowledge necessary to become a skilled worker. This also means the 
number of apprenticeships available is dependent on the current workforce needs of the 
industry and the capacity and willingness of employers or employer groups to supervise 
them. 
 
Apprenticeships are available to individuals age 16 and older; an employer, however, may 
set a higher entry age. By law, individuals must be age 18 to apprentice in hazardous 
occupations, although there are some exemptions available to minors who are registered as 
apprentices. Time-based apprenticeships last from one to six years and involve a minimum 
of 144 hours of related technical instruction and at least 2,000 hours per year of on-the-job 
training. 
 
A national apprenticeship and training program was established in federal law in 1937 with 
the passage of the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as the Fitzgerald Act. The 
purpose of the Act was to promote national standards of apprenticeship and to safeguard the 
welfare of apprentice workers. 
 
Along with more than half of other states and the District of Columbia, Maryland has 
chosen to operate its own apprenticeship programs under the federal law. The Division of 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning (DWDAL) within the Maryland Department 
of Labor is responsible for the daily oversight of State apprenticeship programs. More 
specifically, DWDAL approves new apprenticeship programs as well as changes to current 
programs and ensures compliance with State and federal requirements. The approval 
process involves assessing the appropriateness of an apprenticeship program in a proposed 
industry, the education that will be provided to the apprentice, the current staffing level of 
the entity proposing the program to determine whether adequate supervision can be 
provided, recruitment and retention efforts, and the overall operations of the entity. The 
Maryland Apprenticeship and Training Council serves in an advisory role for legislation 
and regulations, recommending changes to update apprenticeship laws. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 33/ Page 4 
As of November 28, 2023, there were 11,530 apprentices registered in 125 different 
occupations, with more than 400 approved registered apprenticeship programs and more 
than 3,800 employers. There were 1,825 Certificates of Completion for apprentices 
processed between January 1, 2023, and November 28, 2023. The State added 38 new 
apprenticeship programs in 2023. The diversity of Maryland’s apprenticeship system has 
also increased since the transfer of the program to DWDAL in 2016. The percentage of 
minority apprentices increased from 36% in November 2016 to 44% in November 2023. 
Likewise, the percentage of female apprentices increased from 3.7% in November 2016 to 
7.7% in November 2023. 
 
Chapter 168 (Senate Bill 104) of 2023 established the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
The purpose of the commission is to examine and make recommendations to reduce skill 
shortages in high-demand occupations and provide affordable training for career pathways 
for young people by: 
 
 
expanding registered apprenticeships in industry sectors with skill shortages;  
 
growing the number of registered apprentices to at least 60,000 by 2030; and  
 
reaching the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future goal for 45% of high school graduates 
completing the high school level of a registered apprenticeship. 
 
The Apprenticeship 2030 Commission met four times in 2023 and published the Interim 
Report of the Apprenticeship 2030 Commission. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4