START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 51 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 51 
(Senator Rosapepe) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - License Renewal 
    
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to extend 
the deadline by which a license holder must file a renewal application. The bill also 
specifies that a license or permit issued by the board that was subject to renewal from 
March 5, 2020, to December 31, 2023, and was not renewed because the holder failed to 
file a renewal application must be considered unexpired until July 1, 2025, and may be 
renewed to bring the license holder up-to-date if the license holder demonstrates to the 
board that the license holder meets all requirements for renewal and pays all past due fees. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect Prince George’s County finances or 
operations.  
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To renew an alcoholic beverages license in Prince George’s County, a 
license holder must file a renewal application in accordance with the following schedule: 
 
 
for a Class A license expiring on April 30, the application deadline is March 1; 
 
for a Class B license expiring on May 31, the application deadline is April 1; and 
 
for a Class C and D license expiring on June 30, the application deadline is May 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 51/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 816 (Prince George's County Delegation) - Economic 
Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 12, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2