START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 892

Chapter 892

(Senate Bill 181)

AN ACT concerning

Qualifying Nonprofit Organizations – Training and Reentry Services – Funding

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ authorizing the Governor to include a certain appropriation
in the annual budget bill for certain fiscal years to provide grants to certain
qualifying nonprofit organizations that provide certain services to incarcerated or
formerly incarcerated individuals; requiring the Governor’s Office of Crime
Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services to administer the funds; and generally
relating to reentry services and employment opportunities for formerly incarcerated
individuals.

BY adding to
Article – Public Safety
Section 4–1013
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

4–1013.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “QUALIFYING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN
ORGANIZATION THAT:

(1) PROVIDES TRAINING AND REENTRY ASSISTANCE FOR
INCARCERATED AND FORMERLY INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS;

(2) PROVIDES TRAINING FOR AT LEAST 50 INCARCERATED OR
FORMERLY INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS PER YEAR IN AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR;

(3) IS ABLE TO PROVIDE AN AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR CERTIFICATE FROM
A NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR ORGANIZATION TO ELIGIBLE
PARTICIPANTS; AND

(4) DEMONSTRATES A MINIMUM OF A 50% EMPLOYMENT PLACEMENT
RATE FOR ELIGIBLE PARTICIPANTS IN A PAID AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR JOB.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 892 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) FOR FISCAL YEARS 2026 THROUGH 2028, EACH YEAR THE GOVERNOR
~~SHALL~~ MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF
$1,000,000 TO BE USED SOLELY AS AN OPERATING GRANT TO QUALIFYING
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING TRAINING TO
FORMERLY INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS IN AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR.

(C) THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
VICTIM SERVICES SHALL ADMINISTER THE GRANT FUNDS TO QUALIFYING
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 4–1008 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(D) A QUALIFYING NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION THAT RECEIVES A GRANT
UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL SUBMIT FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR THE FOLLOWING TO
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION,
YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES:

(1) PROOF OF THE EXPENDITURE OF THE GRANT FUNDS AND THE
PURPOSES FOR WHICH THE FUNDS WERE EXPENDED;

(2) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF INCARCERATED AND FORMERLY
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUALS WHO RECEIVED SERVICES; AND

(3) ANY RELATED OUTCOME–BASED PERFORMANCE MEASURES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2028,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2