START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 863

Chapter 863

(Senate Bill 119)

AN ACT concerning

Legally Protected Health Care – Gender–Affirming Treatment

FOR the purpose of altering the definition of “legally protected health care” to include
certain gender–affirming treatment, including medications and supplies, for the
purposes of certain provisions of law that prohibit health occupations disciplinary
actions and certain actions in criminal and civil proceedings and the use of certain
resources in furtherance of certain investigations and proceedings related to legally
protected health care; and generally relating to legally protected health care.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 9–302(b)(2), 9–402(a), 10–408(c)(5), and 11–802(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Criminal Procedure
Section 9–106(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 15–151(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 1–227
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 2–312
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 863 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

9–302.

(b) (2) (i) In this paragraph, “legally protected health care” has the
meaning stated in § 2–312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(ii) A judge may not order a person within the State to give testimony
or a statement, or produce documents, electronically stored information, or other tangible
things under this subsection, in a case where prosecution is pending, or where a grand jury
investigation has commenced or is about to commence, for a violation of a criminal law of
another state involving the provision of, receipt of, or assistance with legally protected
health care in the State, unless the acts forming the basis of the prosecution or investigation
would constitute a crime in this State.

9–402.

(a) (1) In this subsection, “legally protected health care” has the meaning
stated in § 2–312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(2) (i) To request issuance of a subpoena under this section, a party
shall submit a foreign subpoena to a clerk of the circuit court for the county in which
discovery is sought to be conducted in this State.

(ii) The request under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph shall
include a sworn, written statement signed under penalty of perjury by the party seeking
enforcement, or the party’s counsel, that no portion of the subpoena is intended or
anticipated to further any investigation or proceeding related to legally protected health
care, unless the out–of–state proceeding is:

1. Based in tort, contract, or statute;

2. A claim for which a similar or equivalent claim would exist
in the State; and

3. A. Brought by the patient who received legally
protected health care, or the patient’s legal representative; or

B. Based on conduct that would be prohibited under the laws
of this State.

(3) A request for the issuance of a subpoena under this subtitle does not
constitute an appearance in the courts of this State.

10–408.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 863

(c) (5) (i) In this paragraph, “legally protected health care” has the
meaning stated in § 2–312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(ii) A judge may not issue an ex parte order under this section for
the purpose of investigating or recovering evidence of actions related to legally protected
health care, unless the acts forming the basis for the investigation or recovery of evidence
would constitute a crime in this State.

11–802.

(a) (1) In this subsection, “legally protected health care” has the meaning
stated under § 2–312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(2) (i) Except as provided in subparagraphs (ii), (iii), and (iv) of this
paragraph, a copy of any foreign judgment authenticated in accordance with an act of
Congress or statutes of this State may be filed in the office of the clerk of a circuit court.

(ii) If the face amount of the judgment is $2,500 or less, the copy
shall be filed with the clerk of the District Court.

(iii) If the face amount of the judgment is not more than a
jurisdictional amount described in § 4–401 of this article, but more than $2,500, the copy
may be filed either with the clerk of the District Court or in the office of the clerk of a circuit
court.

(iv) Except as required by federal law, a judgment creditor may not
file a copy of any foreign judgment under this section if the judgment was issued in
connection with any litigation concerning legally protected health care, unless the
underlying cause of action is:

1. Based in tort, contract, or statute;

2. A claim for which a similar or equivalent claim would exist
in the State; and

3. A. Brought by the patient who received legally
protected health care, or the patient’s legal representative; or

B. Based on conduct that would be prohibited under the laws
of this State.

(3) The clerk shall treat the foreign judgment in the same manner as a
judgment of the court in which the foreign judgment is filed.

Article – Criminal Procedure

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 863 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

9–106.

(b) (1) In this subsection, “legally protected health care services” has the
meaning stated in § 2–312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(2) Unless compelled by a writ of mandamus issued by a federal court, the
Governor may not surrender a person on demand of the executive authority of any other
state if the alleged act for which surrender is being demanded relates to providing,
procuring, or aiding another in providing or procuring legally protected health care services
and the act would not be a crime in the State.

Article – Health – General

15–151.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Gender–affirming treatment” means any medically necessary
treatment consistent with current clinical standards of care prescribed by a licensed health
care provider for the treatment of a condition related to the individual’s gender identity.

(ii) “Gender–affirming treatment” includes:

1. Hormone therapy, hormone blockers, and puberty
blockers;

2. Hair alteration for the purposes of altering secondary sex
characteristics and surgical site preparation;

3. Alterations to voice, voice therapy, and voice lessons;

4. Alterations to abdomen, chest, trunk, and buttocks;

5. Alterations to the face and neck;

6. Alterations to the genitals and gonads;

7. Laser treatment for scars from gender–affirming
treatment;

8. Standard fertility preservation procedures, as set forth in
§ 15–810.1 of the Insurance Article;

9. Revisions to previous treatments and reversal of
treatments;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 863

10. Combinations of gender–affirming procedures; and

11. Other treatments as prescribed to suppress the
development of endogenous secondary sex characteristics, align the individual’s
appearance or physical body with gender identity, and alleviate symptoms of clinically
significant distress resulting from gender dysphoria.

(iii) “Gender–affirming treatment” may include treatment described
in the current clinical standards of care for gender–affirming treatment published by the
World Professional Association for Transgender Health.

(3) “Gender identity” has the meaning stated in § 20–101 of the State
Government Article.

Article – Health Occupations

1–227.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Health care practitioner” means an individual who is licensed,
certified, or otherwise authorized by law to provide health care services under this article.

(3) “Legally protected health care” has the meaning stated in § 2–312 of
the State Personnel and Pensions Article.

(b) A health occupations board may not revoke, suspend, discipline, take an
adverse action against, or refuse to issue or renew a license, certification, or other
authorization to practice for any health care practitioner in whole or in part because of the
provision or support of the provision of legally protected health care if the legally protected
health care was provided in accordance with the standard of care as determined by the
relevant health occupations board established under this article and in accordance with the
laws of this State.

(c) A health occupations board may not revoke, suspend, discipline, take an
adverse action against, or refuse to issue or renew a license, certification, or other
authorization to practice for any health care practitioner if the health care practitioner is
disciplined by a licensure board in another state in whole or in part because of the provision
or support of the provision of legally protected health care if the legally protected health
care was provided in accordance with the standard of care as determined by the relevant
health occupations board established under this article and in accordance with the laws of
this State.

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 863 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2–312.

(a) (1) In this section[, “legally] THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
MEANINGS INDICATED.

(2) “GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT” HAS THE MEANING STATED
IN § 15–151 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE.

(3) “LEGALLY protected health care” means:

(I) all reproductive health services, medications, and supplies
related to the direct provision or support of the provision of care related to pregnancy,
contraception, assisted reproduction, and abortion that is lawful in the State; OR

(II) ALL GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT, INCLUDING
MEDICATIONS AND SUPPLIES, RELATED TO THE DIRECT PROVISION OR SUPPORT OF
THE PROVISION OF CARE RELATED TO GENDER–AFFIRMING TREATMENT THAT IS
LAWFUL IN THE STATE.

(b) This section does not apply to an interstate investigation or proceeding
described under subsection (c) of this section if:

(1) the interstate investigation or proceeding concerns conduct that would
be subject to civil liability, criminal liability, or administrative sanction if committed in the
State; or

(2) the subject of the interstate investigation or proceeding submits a
written request to provide information or assistance to the investigation or proceeding.

(c) An agency of the State or a political subdivision of the State, an agent or
employee of the State or a political subdivision of the State acting in the agent’s or
employee’s official capacity, or a private party providing services on behalf of the State or
a political subdivision of the State, may not provide information, expend time or money, or
use State facilities, State property, State equipment, State personnel, or other State
resources in furtherance of any interstate investigation or proceeding seeking to impose
civil or criminal liability on, or administrative sanction against, a person for any activity
relating to legally protected health care if the activity would not be subject to civil or
criminal liability or professional sanction in the State.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6