START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 143 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 143 
(Senator Gallion) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Teachers' Retirement and Pension Systems - Reemployment 
 
 
This bill allows each local school system and the Maryland School for the Deaf (MSD) to 
hire up to five retirees of the Teachers’ Retirement System or Teachers’ Pension System 
(TRS/TPS) into any position in the system or MSD (instead of any school-based position) 
without a retirement benefit offset. The bill applies retroactively to retirees that meet 
specified criteria. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill is expected to apply in only a limited number of circumstances, 
it has no discernible effect on State pension liabilities or contribution rates. No effect on 
revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill applies retroactively to a TPS retiree who (1) following 
retirement, was reemployed by the Harford County Board of Education in a position within 
the Payroll Department of the board and (2) in calendar 2022 or 2023, exceeded the 
retiree’s earnings limitation. 
 
If, on or before July 1, 2024, the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement and Pension 
System (SRPS) has offset the retirement benefits of a retiree that meets the above criteria, 
the SRPS board must refund the offset to the retiree by December 31, 2024. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 143/ Page 2 
Current Law:  In general, a retiree who receives a retirement benefit from SRPS may be 
reemployed, except that the retiree may not be reemployed by the State or any participating 
SRPS employer within 45 days of retiring. In most cases, a retiree who is rehired by the 
same employer for whom the retiree worked at the time of retirement is subject to an 
earnings cap. The purpose of the cap, which is the member’s average final compensation 
(AFC) at the time of retirement, is to ensure that a retiree does not earn more in retirement 
than the retiree earned as an active member with the same employer. If the sum of a retiree’s 
earnings and initial retirement allowance exceeds the earnings cap, the retiree is subject to 
a dollar-for-dollar offset of the retirement benefit for any amount that exceeds the cap. For 
a member who retires directly from State service, the State is regarded as a single employer, 
so reemployment with any State agency activates the benefit reduction. 
 
Broad Exemptions from Earnings Limitation 
 
Statute includes several broad exemptions from the offset, including for retirees who:   
 
 
have been retired for at least five years; 
 
retired with an AFC less than $25,000 and are reemployed on a permanent, 
temporary, or contractual basis; or 
 
are serving in any specified elected position. 
 
Exemption for Teachers’ Retirement System/Teachers’ Pension System Retirees 
 
In addition to other specified exemptions for TRS/TPS retirees, each local school 
superintendent and MSD may also hire a total of five TRS/TPS retirees to work in any 
position at any public school and be exempt from any retirement benefit reduction. The bill 
removes the requirement that the position be at a school, thereby allowing school systems 
to rehire retirees into central office or other nonschool-based positions. The State 
Retirement Agency advises that 36 TRS/TPS retirees were reemployed during the 
2022-2023 school year without a benefit offset under the exemption amended by the bill. 
The agency is aware of one individual affected by the bill’s retroactive application. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 143/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland School for 
the Deaf; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3