START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 181 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 181 
(Senator McCray, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Judiciary 
 
Qualifying Nonprofit Organizations - Training and Reentry Services - Funding 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Governor, for fiscal 2026 through 2028, to include each year in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $1.0 million to be used solely as an operating grant 
to qualifying nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing training to formerly 
incarcerated individuals in automotive repair. The Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy (GOCPP) must administer the grant funds in accordance with existing 
provisions related to GOCPP grant programs. A qualifying nonprofit organization that 
receives a grant pursuant to the bill must submit, for each fiscal year, specified information 
to the Executive Director of GOCPP. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates 
June 30, 2028. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The FY 2025 budget includes $500,000 in general funds for the purpose of 
providing an operating grant to Vehicles for Change Inc. contingent on the enactment of 
this bill or its cross file; general fund expenditures further increase by $29,700 in FY 2025 
for administrative costs. Although funding is discretionary in the out-years, future year 
expenditures reflect an estimated $1.0 million appropriation (through FY 2028) for grants 
and ongoing administrative costs (through the first quarter of FY 2029). Revenues are not 
affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
529,700 
1,029,400 
1,030,600 
1,032,000 
8,300 
Net Effect 
($529,700) 
($1,029,400) 
($1,030,600) 
($1,032,000) 
($8,300)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 181/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  An eligible qualifying nonprofit organization that receives a grant under 
the bill must submit, for each fiscal year, the following information to the 
Executive Director of GOCPP:  (1) proof of the expenditure of the grant funds and the 
purposes for which the funds were expended; (2) the total number of incarcerated and 
formerly incarcerated individuals who received services; and (3) any related 
outcome-based performance measures. 
 
A nonprofit organization that receives funding under the bill must also comply with any 
data sharing and reporting requirements established by GOCPP as a condition of receiving 
funding. 
 
“Qualifying nonprofit organization” means an organization that (1) provides training and 
reentry assistance for incarcerated and formerly incarcerated individuals; (2) provides 
training for at least 50 incarcerated or formerly incarcerated individuals per year in 
automotive repair; (3) is able to provide an automotive repair certificate from a nationally 
recognized automotive repair organization to eligible participants; and (4) demonstrates a 
minimum of a 50% employment placement rate for eligible participants in a paid 
automotive repair job. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Workforce Development and Adult Learning  
 
The Maryland Department of Labor’s (MDL) Division of Workforce Development and 
Adult Learning (DWDAL) oversees Correctional Education throughout Maryland’s State 
correctional facilities. DWDAL’s Office of Correctional Education provides career 
training opportunities “behind the fence.” Offerings vary by institution but include training 
in automotive skills, barbering, construction, and welding. All occupational courses lead 
to a portable, industry-recognized credential that contributes to an inmate’s employability 
after release. In addition to occupational programming, the Office of Correctional 
Education oversees academic and transitional courses throughout Maryland’s prisons. 
Academic programming includes GED preparation ahead of earning a Maryland high 
school diploma and English as a second language courses. Prior to release, inmates may 
complete transitional courses to ease their reentrance to society. These offerings include 
classes in parenting, employment readiness, financial literacy, and life skills. 
 
Chapter 485 of 2022, the Maryland New Start Act of 2022, established the New Start Grant 
Program in MDL to award grants to at least five eligible organizations to create or support 
existing entrepreneurship development programs that assist specified formerly imprisoned 
individuals or specified individuals approved for release by a correctional facility. The Act 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 181/ Page 3 
also authorized the Department of Commerce, in collaboration with the Governor’s Office 
of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs, to administer a microloan program to 
award collateral-free loans to these formerly or currently imprisoned individuals. The 
Governor must include an appropriation of at least $300,000 to the Maryland New Start 
Microloan Fund and at least $200,000 for the Maryland New Start Grant Program in the 
annual budget bill through fiscal 2028. 
 
MDL provides services to returning citizens through the Re-entry Navigator initiative. 
Re-entry Navigators are a team of employment specialists located within the American Job 
Centers across the state of Maryland who connect justice-involved job seekers with 
businesses by planning with pre-release individuals and supporting post-release job 
seekers. The navigators also continually establish a network of employer contacts who are 
interested in hiring their clients. More information on the Re-entry Navigator Program can 
be found on MDL’s website. 
 
Performance Incentive Grant Fund 
 
The Performance Incentive Grant Fund (PIGF) within GOCPP is intended to make use of 
the savings from the implementation of Chapter 515 of 2016, the Justice Reinvestment Act, 
to provide grants for specified programs and services, including, among other things, 
reentry programming and services, behavioral health treatment, resources, and services, 
and training and education. Nonprofit organizations, among other entities, are eligible to 
apply for grant funds. 
 
Existing Requirements for the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy Grant 
Programs 
 
A local government or nonprofit entity that receives funding under Subtitle 10, Title 4 of 
the Public Safety Article (Miscellaneous Grant Programs) may use the funding only in 
accordance with Subtitle 10 and must comply with any data sharing and reporting 
requirements established by GOCPP under § 4-1009 of the Public Safety Article. 
 
Pursuant to § 4-1009, the Executive Director of GOCPP must establish outcome-based 
performance measures to track the performance of any activity or program supported by 
funds received under Subtitle 10. By October 1 each year, GOCPP must place on its 
website in an easily accessible location a filterable data display showing all such data 
collected for the previous year. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 181/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:   
 
Appropriation to Support Operating Grants 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget includes $500,000 in general funds for GOCPP for the purpose of 
providing an operating grant to Vehicles for Change Inc. contingent on the enactment of 
this bill or its cross file. This bill effectuates that contingency. Although the bill does not 
mandate funding to support the operating grants in future years, the bill explicitly 
authorizes the Governor, for fiscal 2026 through 2028, to include in the annual budget bill 
an appropriation of $1.0 million to be used solely as an operating grant to qualifying 
nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing training to formerly incarcerated 
individuals in automotive repair. Although funding for such grants in the out-years is 
discretionary, consistent with the bill’s intent, this analysis assumes that, in fiscal 2026 
through 2028, $1.0 million in general funds is provided to support the operating grants. 
Actual expenditures will vary with the amount of any discretionary funding included in the 
budget bill and ultimately passed by the General Assembly each year. 
 
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy – Administrative Expenditures 
 
This analysis assumes that additional general funds – beyond the $500,000 included in the 
budget for the operating grant to Vehicles for Change, Inc., as discussed above – are needed 
to cover administrative costs incurred by GOCPP in fiscal 2025 under the bill. Further, the 
bill specifies that the authorized funding in fiscal 2026 through 2028 may solely be used as 
an operating grant to qualifying nonprofit organizations; therefore, it is assumed that 
additional general funds continue to be needed in future years to cover any administrative 
costs incurred by GOCPP under the bill. 
 
For a grant program with a funding level of $500,000 in fiscal 2025 and an assumed 
funding level of $1.0 million annually through fiscal 2028, GOCPP advises that it needs 
two full-time regular positions and one part-time contractual position to implement the bill. 
However, the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees. While DLS 
acknowledges that GOCPP may well be understaffed, the additional workload resulting 
from this bill alone does not justify hiring that many staff. GOCPP already administers 
similar grant programs. In fact, GOCPP advises that in fiscal 2024, PIGF obligated 
approximately $16.2 million to 49 grantees, and that about half of the fiscal 2024 allocation 
was awarded to 21 programs prioritizing reentry programming and services. Accordingly, 
while the bill authorizes additional grant funding for a specific purpose, it likely does not 
result in a significant increase in the number or type of grant applications received – or the 
number of grants awarded – by GOCPP each year. Furthermore, the added responsibilities 
incurred as a result of this legislation are not permanent. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 181/ Page 5 
Accordingly, general fund administrative expenditures increase by $29,661 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for a 90-day start up delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one part-time contractual grants specialist to administer the grant funds. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$22,809 
Operating Expenses 
    6,852 
Total FY 2025 Administrative Expenditures 
$29,661 
 
Future year administrative expenditures, which total $29,371 in fiscal 2026, $30,645 in 
fiscal 2027, $31,975 in fiscal 2028, and $8,340 in fiscal 2029, reflect a full salary with 
annual increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating 
expenses. Although it is assumed that discretionary grant funding is not provided after 
fiscal 2028, this analysis assumes that the part-time contractual grants specialist remains 
on board through the first quarter of fiscal 2029 in order to close out the grant funds and 
handle any remaining administrative duties. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 488 (Delegate Ruff, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5