START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 135 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
Senate Bill 135 
(Senators Ellis and McKay) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Workgroup to Study Funding for the Westernport Wastewater Treatment 
Facility - Establishment 
 
   
This bill establishes the Workgroup to Study Funding for the Westernport Wastewater 
Treatment Facility. The chair of the Upper Potomac River Commission must designate the 
chair of the workgroup and the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) must 
provide staff for the workgroup. Workgroup members may not receive compensation but 
are entitled to reimbursement for expenses, as specified. By December 1, 2024, the 
workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members and staffing costs for 
MDE are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The workgroup must:   
 
 
identify 
and 
study 
the 
existing 
funding 
sources 
that 
support 
the 
Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility; 
 
study whether increased funding could enhance operations at the facility; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 135/ Page 2 
 
study the funding sources of comparable wastewater treatment facilities in the 
mid-Atlantic region; 
 
study available and potential federal, State, and local funding sources for the 
facility; and 
 
make recommendations regarding (1) whether additional funding could improve the 
operations of the facility and (2) the existing and prospective federal, State, and 
local funding sources for the facility. 
 
Current Law:  The Upper Potomac River Commission was established in 1935 and has 
jurisdiction over the water resources of Allegany County and a portion of Garrett County. 
To regulate the flow of the Potomac River, the commission supervises the Savage River 
Dam in Garrett County, which it owns, maintains, and operates with guidance from the 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Since 1960, the commission has also operated the 
Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility. The chair is chosen by the Governor, and 
one member each is appointed by the Allegany County and Garrett County commissioners. 
 
Discharge Permits Issued by the Maryland Department of the Environment 
 
A person must generally hold an MDE discharge permit before constructing, installing, 
modifying, extending, altering, or operating a system, facility, outlet, or establishment if 
its operation could cause or increase the discharge of pollutants into the waters of the State. 
This permitting requirement applies to (1) an industrial, commercial, or recreation facility 
or disposal system; (2) a State-owned treatment facility; or (3) any other outlet or 
establishment. Further, a person must hold a concentrated animal feeding operation 
(CAFO) discharge permit before beginning construction on any part of a new CAFO. MDE 
has broad authority to require a discharge permit for any other activity by rule or regulation. 
 
Additional Comments:  The Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility treats municipal 
sewage from Westernport and Luke, Maryland, along with Piedmont, West Virginia. The 
facility also used to treat industrial waste from the now-closed Luke Paper Mill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland State 
Archives; Department of Legislative Services   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 135/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 30, 2024 
Third Reader - February 28, 2024 
Enrolled - April 11, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3