START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 134 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 134 
(Senator Hettleman, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary and Health and Government 
Operations 
 
Office of the Correctional Ombudsman - Establishment and Funding 
 
 
This bill establishes (1) the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman (OCO) as an 
independent unit of State government and specifies staffing and duties for the office; (2) a 
Correctional Ombudsman Advisory Board; and (3) various reporting requirements. In 
addition, the bill (1) transfers the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit (JJMU) from the Office 
of the Attorney General (OAG) to OCO, including positions and funding; (2) states the 
intent of the General Assembly regarding funding for OCO and the focus of the activities 
of the office in its first year of operation; (3) requires OCO to review potential federal 
funding sources, as specified, and authorizes OCO to apply for relevant funding sources; 
and (4) for fiscal 2025 only, authorizes the distribution of a portion of the annual savings 
from the implementation of the recommendations of the Justice Reinvestment 
Coordinating Council (JRCC) to OCO. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million in FY 2025, reflecting 
contingent funding provided in the FY 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly; 
future years assume general fund expenditures and reflect annualization and ongoing costs. 
(This does not reflect funding transferred from OAG to OCO, as discussed below.) General 
fund expenditures could increase further (not reflected below) for the Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS). Potential increase in federal fund grant 
revenues (and corresponding federal fund expenditures).  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FF Revenue 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
GF Expenditure 
$0 
$836,800 
$861,800 
$887,300 
$914,000 
SF Expenditure 
$1,000,000 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
FF Expenditure 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($1,000,000) 
($836,800) 
($861,800) 
($887,300) 
($914,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 134/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local finances and operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Staffing and Funding for the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman 
 
OCO must include a full-time correctional ombudsman, staff as provided in the State 
budget, and JJMU. It is the intent of the General Assembly that the Governor must include 
in the State budget, for fiscal 2025 and each subsequent fiscal year, an appropriation in an 
amount sufficient to fund the bill’s provisions and to provide for at least two staff members 
for OCO in 2025 and at least seven staff members for the office in 2026 and each 
subsequent fiscal year. In addition, the Governor must transfer four positions and $603,067 
in general funds for JJMU as of July 1, 2024, from OAG to OCO. 
 
OCO must review potential federal funding sources, including grants offered under the 
Justice Reinvestment Initiative and the Second Chance Act. OCO is also authorized to 
apply for relevant funding sources. Finally, for fiscal 2025 only, the Justice Reinvestment 
Oversight Board (JROB) is authorized to recommend that a portion of the savings from the 
implementation of the recommendations of JRCC be distributed to OCO. 
 
Appointment of Ombudsman and Duties of Office 
 
Appointment of Correctional Ombudsman:  With the advice and consent of the Senate, the 
Governor must appoint the ombudsman for a five-year term. At the end of the term, the 
ombudsman must continue to serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Salaries of 
the ombudsman and staff and expenses for rent, equipment, supplies, and general operating 
expenses necessary for the work of OCO must be as provided in the State budget.  
 
Duties:  OCO, in response to a complaint or on the ombudsman’s initiative, must:   
 
 
investigate any administrative act that the ombudsman determines may be contrary 
to law or regulation, based on a mistake of fact, unsupported by sufficient evidence, 
performed in an inefficient manner, unreasonable under the totality of the 
circumstances, or otherwise erroneous; 
 
conduct independent reviews and assessments relating to (1) health and mental 
health services provided to individuals confined by any agency, as specified; 
(2) agency plans for the expansion, renovation, or closure of facilities; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 134/ Page 3 
(3) educational and vocational programs for individuals confined by any agency; 
and (4) agency policies on restrictive and protective housing; 
 
cooperate with any agency in efforts to improve the functioning of any agency or 
prevent abuses by agencies; 
 
inspect any facilities owned or controlled by any agency to monitor conditions in 
the facilities; 
 
seek to resolve complaints against an agency through mediation or other conflict 
resolution methods; 
 
maintain a website to provide specified information; and 
 
adopt regulations necessary to carry out the bill’s requirements. 
 
In addition, OCO must:   
 
 
unless OCO makes a determination otherwise, as specified, investigate each 
complaint; 
 
promptly inform a complainant of a decision not to investigate a complaint; 
 
on request, promptly inform a complainant of the status of an investigation; 
 
on the completion of an investigation, promptly inform the complainant of any 
conclusions, recommendations, and actions taken in response to the complaint; 
 
within 30 days after completing an investigation, submit to an agency a report 
containing any conclusions, recommendations, and requests for a response from the 
agency (which the agency must provide in writing within 45 days after receipt of 
the report); and 
 
treat all communications as confidential and reveal details of any communications 
only as specified. 
 
OCO may also:   
 
 
interview agency personnel or any individual confined by an agency; 
 
access any records maintained by an agency; 
 
perform unannounced site visits and on-site inspections of facilities maintained by 
an agency; 
 
receive and respond to complaints without interception, review, or interference by 
an agency; 
 
review all reports of disciplinary actions, grievances, and grievance dispositions by 
the agency; and 
 
collaborate with any agency or any unit of State government to investigate 
complaints or any alleged injury, neglect, or death of an individual confined by or 
under the supervision of an agency. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 134/ Page 4 
OCO and JJMU may subpoena any individual to appear to give sworn testimony or produce 
documentary evidence that is reasonably necessary to carry out the office’s or unit’s duties. 
If an individual fails or refuses to comply with a subpoena issued by the office or unit, a 
court of competent jurisdiction, on the application of the office or unit, may issue an 
attachment for the individual and compel the individual to comply with the subpoena, 
appear before the office or unit, and produce documentary evidence for examination and 
give testimony. If an individual disobeys a subpoena or refuses to testify, the court may 
punish the individual for contempt. 
 
It is the intent of the General Assembly that, in its first year of operation, OCO focus its 
activities primarily on those State correctional facilities located in the area of 
Jessup, Maryland. 
 
If OCO determines that an employee or agent of an agency acted in a manner warranting 
criminal charges or disciplinary proceedings, OCO must promptly refer the matter to 
appropriate authorities.  
 
“Agency” means (1) DPSCS; (2) any officer or employee of DPSCS; (3) any person 
providing services under a contract with DPSCS to individuals who are confined by or 
under the supervision of DPSCS; or (4) any officer, employee, or administrative hearing 
examiner of the State or a unit of local government who is acting or purporting to act in 
relation to individuals confined by or under the supervision of DPSCS. “Agency” does not 
include (1) a judge, as specified; (2) the General Assembly or any member, employee, or 
committee of the General Assembly; or (3) the Governor or the Governor’s personal staff. 
 
Miscellaneous Provisions and Reporting Requirements 
 
Personnel Action:  A supervisor, appointing authority, or the head of a principal unit may 
not take or refuse to take any personnel action as a reprisal against an employee of DPSCS 
who discloses information to OCO relating to the office’s duties under the bill.  
 
Reporting Requirements:  By December 31 each year, OCO must report to the Governor 
and the General Assembly specified information regarding investigations conducted by 
OCO, specified actions taken or rejected by an agency, and information on any death of an 
individual confined by or under the care of an agency. 
 
By December 31, 2024, OCO and the Commission on Correctional Standards must submit 
a joint report to the Governor and the General Assembly detailing how the office and the 
commission will coordinate in order to avoid overlap in their duties. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 134/ Page 5 
By December 31, 2024, the Mediation and Conflict Resolution Office must report to OCO, 
the Governor, and the General Assembly on best practices for mediating grievances in the 
corrections system. 
 
OCO must also provide to the Governor and the General Assembly any other reports that 
the Governor or the General Assembly may require. 
 
Specified reports must be published on OCO’s website. 
 
Audit:  The bill states the intent of the General Assembly that, in its first year of operation, 
OCO conduct an audit of programming and services provided by the Division of Correction 
(DOC) since fiscal 2019. The audit must include, among other things, an examination of 
(1) rates of participation by incarcerated individuals in specified programs and (2) any 
obstacles to participation by incarcerated individuals in programs provided by DOC. 
 
Correctional Ombudsman Advisory Board 
 
The purposes of the Correctional Ombudsman Advisory Board are to (1) provide 
information to OCO and (2) assist the office in identifying appropriate matters to 
investigate and developing processes by which complaints are submitted, reviewed, 
investigated, and resolved. The board’s members are appointed by the Governor, and OCO 
must provide staff for the board. 
 
Current Law:   
 
The Maryland Commission on Correctional Standards 
 
The Maryland Commission on Correctional Standards is an existing entity within DPSCS 
that includes the Attorney General, the Secretary of General Services, and the Secretary of 
Budget and Management. With the advice of the Commission on Correctional Standards, 
the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services has set, by regulation, minimum 
mandatory standards applicable to security and incarcerated individual control, 
incarcerated individual safety, incarcerated individual food services, incarcerated 
individual housing and sanitation, incarcerated individual rights, classification, hearings, 
and administrative recordkeeping. Such standards apply to all State and local correctional 
facilities. In addition, the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, with the 
advice of the commission, has adopted regulations that establish approved standards 
applicable to personnel, training, administration, management, planning and coordination, 
research and evaluation, physical plant, special management incarcerated individuals, rules 
and discipline, mail and visiting, reception and orientation, property control, work 
programs, educational and vocational training, library services, religious services, 
recreational activities, counseling, release preparation, and volunteers. These standards 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 134/ Page 6 
apply to all State facilities and may be adopted, in whole or in part, by a local correctional 
facility. All mandatory minimum standards and approved standards adopted must be 
consistent with State and federal law. 
 
If the commission determines that a correctional facility is in violation of the minimum 
mandatory standards, the commission must send a compliance plan, with specified 
information, to the correctional facility. If, after sending a compliance plan and 
reinspecting a correctional facility, the commission determines that the correctional facility 
is in violation of the minimum standards, the commission must send a letter of reprimand, 
with specified information, to the correctional facility. If, after sending a letter of reprimand 
and reinspecting a correctional facility, the commission determines that the correctional 
facility is in violation of the minimum mandatory standards, the commission must 
(1) conduct a full standards and performance audit of the correctional facility or 
(2) periodically inspect the correctional facility until compliance is attained and send a 
report of each inspection to the executive and legislative bodies responsible for the 
correctional facility. As part of a full standards and performance audit, the commission 
must examine (1) the physical condition of the correctional facility; (2) the safety and 
treatment of incarcerated individuals at the correctional facility; (3) whether the 
correctional facility has policies and procedures in place as required; and (4) whether the 
correctional facility is following the required policies and procedures. When conducting 
the full standards and performance audit, the commission must have unrestricted access to 
the personnel and records of the correctional facility. After completion of a full standards 
and performance audit, the commission must send a letter with specified information to the 
correctional facility. 
 
The Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit 
 
The function of JJMU, within OAG, is to investigate and determine whether the needs of 
the children under the jurisdiction of the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) are being 
met in compliance with State law, their rights are being upheld, and they are not being 
abused. JJMU’s duties include (1) evaluating the child advocacy grievance process, the 
DJS monitoring process, the treatment of and services to youth, the facility’s physical 
conditions, and the adequacy of staffing at each facility owned or operated by DJS; 
(2) reviewing all reports of disciplinary actions, grievances, and grievance dispositions 
received from each facility and alterations in the status or placement of a child that result 
in more security, additional obligations, or less personal freedom; (3) performing 
unannounced site visits and on-site inspections of facilities; (4) receiving and reviewing all 
incident reports submitted to DJS from facilities; and (5) receiving reports of the findings 
of child protective services investigations of allegations of abuse or neglect of a child in 
facilities. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 134/ Page 7 
Justice Reinvestment Act 
 
Chapter 42 of 2015 established JRCC within the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention 
and Policy. JRCC was required to use a data-driven approach to develop a statewide policy 
framework for sentencing and corrections policies to further reduce the State’s incarcerated 
population, reduce spending on corrections, and reinvest in strategies to increase public 
safety and reduce recidivism. The council and its subcommittees met numerous times in 
2015 to analyze criminal justice data and review relevant research. Based on its findings, 
JRCC developed a comprehensive set of recommendations intended to focus prison 
resources on serious and violent offenders, strengthen community supervision efforts, 
improve and enhance release and reentry practices, support local corrections systems, and 
ensure oversight and accountability. 
 
Chapter 515 of 2016, the Justice Reinvestment Act, generally implemented many of the 
recommendations of JRCC by altering provisions relating to sentencing, corrections, 
parole, and offender supervision. In addition, the Justice Reinvestment Act, among other 
things, provided for the reinvestment of savings from changes in incarceration policies. 
Chapter 515 also established the Performance Incentive Grant Fund, a special fund 
intended to make use of the savings from the implementation of the Justice Reinvestment 
Act to provide grants for specified programs and services, including providing for pretrial 
risk assessments, services to reduce pretrial detention, specialty courts, and ensuring that 
the rights of crime victims are protected and enhanced.   
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes  
$1.0 million in special funds from the Performance Incentive Grant Fund for OCO 
contingent on the enactment of this bill or its cross file (House Bill 297). As the bill 
effectuates the contingent appropriation, special fund expenditures increase by $1.0 million 
in fiscal 2025. Future year estimates reflect the use of general funds and are annualized, 
adjusted for inflation, and reflect minimum ongoing costs. General fund expenditures could 
also increase for DPSCS, as discussed below.  
 
The bill expresses legislative intent that funding for OCO begin in fiscal 2025, in an amount 
sufficient to fund the provisions of the bill and provide for at least two staff members in 
fiscal 2025 and at least seven staff members in fiscal 2026 and annually thereafter. As 
shown below, the aforementioned funding included in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly is sufficient to facilitate the hiring of seven staff members in 
fiscal 2025. The bill also requires the transfer of four positions and specified general funds 
from OAG to OCO; these positions (and related funding) are associated with 
existing/continuing responsibilities and are not assumed to satisfy the legislative intent 
expressed in the bill.  
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 134/ Page 8 
Office of the Correctional Ombudsman   
 
Special fund expenditures for OCO increase by $1.0 million in fiscal 2025, which reflects 
the contingent funding in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly; this 
estimate assumes a July 1, 2024 start date for the correctional ombudsman and a 60-day 
start-up delay for remaining staff assumed to be hired in fiscal 2025. The estimate reflects 
the cost of hiring the correctional ombudsman, one assistant Attorney General, 
four investigators, and one administrative aide to establish and carry out the duties of OCO 
and provide staff support to the Correctional Ombudsman Advisory Board. It includes 
salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, contractual services, and standard ongoing 
operating expenses (including rental space), with additional budgeted funding available to 
generally effectuate the purpose of the bill. 
 
Positions 
7.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$677,110 
Contractual Services (Experts) 
30,000 
Rental Space 
32,670 
Other Standard Operating Expenses 
51,580 
Additional Budgeted Funding for Expenses 
208,640 
Budgeted FY 2025 OCO Expenditures  
$1,000,000 
 
The above estimate reflects only new State expenditures for OCO that are assumed in this 
analysis. Under the bill, effective July 1, 2024, the entire JJMU is transferred from OAG 
to OCO, including $603,067 in general funds and four permanent positions. As this 
represents budgeted funding that otherwise would have been expended by a different 
agency, it is not included above.  
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries for all staff with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses, including 
rent. Future year expenditures also include ongoing contractual services for the assistance 
of experts in carrying out the duties of OCO. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) further notes that the above estimates are 
preliminary only, as an accurate determination of the expenditures associated with creating 
OCO cannot be reliably determined before the function commences, particularly when 
expenditures depend in large part on the scope of the activities undertaken by the office 
and the number of complaints that are received. However, DLS also advises that the matters 
subject to the purview of the new OCO are extensive. Accordingly, even though the 
expenditures above represent only a preliminary estimate, DLS advises that the 
establishment of OCO has a significant impact on State expenditures. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 134/ Page 9 
Furthermore, although this analysis assumes that special funds are used for implementation 
in the first year, consistent with the funding provided in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly, and that general funds are required in the out-years, the bill 
authorizes (1) OCO to apply for relevant funding sources (and requires the review of 
potential federal funding sources) and (2) for fiscal 2025 only, JROB to distribute a portion 
of the annual savings from the implementation of the recommendations of JRCC to OCO. 
Should any federal grant revenues be awarded to the State, the need for general funds in 
the out-years likely decreases (with a corresponding increase in federal fund expenditures). 
Because OCO is already funded with special funds from the Performance Incentive Grant 
Fund in fiscal 2025, this analysis assumes that JROB does not distribute any additional 
savings to OCO in fiscal 2025.  
 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
 
DPSCS advises that in order to meet the bill’s requirements, additional permanent staff 
(one part-time attorney general, one paralegal, and two administrative officers, with 
estimated costs of approximately $370,000 annually) are needed; overtime costs may also 
be incurred. However, without actual experience under the bill, it is not possible to reliably 
estimate the number of times that a complaint will be filed with OCO, the extent of any 
investigations, or the number of hours of overtime needed for DPSCS staff. Thus, while 
the need for additional staff may occur and overtime costs may be incurred, any such 
impact cannot be reliably estimated at this time. To the extent that additional staffing 
resources are required, DPSCS may request them through the annual budget process.  
 
Judiciary 
 
The Judiciary notes that the bill’s requirements may lead to an increase in court filings, 
which will have an operational impact on the courts. In addition, the Mediation and 
Conflict Resolution Office may need to convene a small workgroup to research and 
evaluate best practices and to assist with completion of the required report. However, any 
potential minimal increase in expenditures due to additional clerical and court time, as well 
as costs associated with producing the required report, are not anticipated to materially 
affect the finances of the Judiciary and the circuit courts.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 87 and HB 64 of 2023; SB 512 and HB 604 of 2022; and SB 809 and 
HB 1188 of 2021. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 134/ Page 10 
Designated Cross File:  HB 297 (Delegate Davis, et al.) - Judiciary and Health and 
Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department of Budget 
and Management; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Moody’s 
Analytics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10