START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 776

Chapter 776

(Senate Bill 191)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County ~~–~~ ~~Property~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~Credit~~ – Public School Employees
Property Tax Credit and Office of Integrity and Compliance

PG 503–24

FOR the purpose of authorizing the governing body of Prince George’s County to grant, by
law, a property tax credit against the county property tax imposed on dwellings that
are owned by certain eligible employees of the Prince George’s County Public School
System; providing for the maximum amount of the credit; authorizing the governing
body of Prince George’s County to provide, by law, for certain matters relating to the
credit; requiring the Prince George’s County government to submit a certain report
concerning the credit to certain persons on or before a certain date; providing that
the Office of Integrity and Compliance is an independent unit within the school
system; specifying the independent nature and contractual relationship of the
Integrity and Compliance Officer and other employees within the Office; and
generally relating to ~~a~~ ~~property~~ ~~tax~~ ~~credit~~ ~~in~~ ~~Prince~~ ~~George’s~~ ~~County~~ ~~for~~ ~~certain~~
~~eligible~~ ~~employees~~ Prince George’s County Public School System employees and the
Office of Integrity and Compliance.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 4–404(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 4–404(c), (d), and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–318(j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 776 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4–404.

(b) This section applies only in Prince George’s County.

(c) (1) There is an Office of Integrity and Compliance in the local school system.

(2) THE OFFICE IS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT WITHIN THE LOCAL
SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(3) (i) The County Council of Prince George’s County shall select [and],
appoint, AND CONTRACT WITH an Integrity and Compliance Officer.

(ii) The County Council shall select the Integrity and Compliance
Officer solely on the basis of professional ability and personal integrity, without regard to
political affiliation.

(iii) The Integrity and Compliance Officer must be qualified
professionally by experience or education in auditing, government operations, or financial
management.

(d) (1) The term of the Integrity and Compliance Officer is 4 years beginning on
the date of appointment.

(2) An individual may not serve as Integrity and Compliance Officer for
more than three terms.

(3) The Integrity and Compliance Officer continues to serve until a successor
is appointed.

(4) If a vacancy occurs for the Integrity and Compliance Officer, the County
Council shall appoint an Interim Integrity and Compliance Officer to serve for the remainder
of the unexpired term.

(5) The County Council may remove the Integrity and Compliance Officer
only through a majority vote of the County Council for neglect of duty, malfeasance,
conviction of a felony, or other good cause.

(6) THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER SHALL SERVE AS AN
INDEPENDENT EMPLOYEE WITHIN THE LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM.

(7) The Integrity and Compliance Officer shall discharge the duties of office
on a full–time basis and with no secondary employment of any nature during the Integrity
and Compliance Officer’s term.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 776

(e) (1) The Office shall:

(i) Assist the County Council and the local school system by
providing independent evaluation and recommendations regarding opportunities to:

1. Preserve the local school system’s reputation; and

2. Improve the effectiveness, productivity, or efficiency of local
school system programs, policies, practices, and operations;

(ii) Ensure public accountability by preventing, investigating, and
reporting instances of fraud, waste, and abuse of property or funds of the local school system;

(iii) Examine, evaluate, and report on the adequacy and effectiveness
of the systems of internal controls and their related accounting, financial, technology, and
operational policies; and

(iv) Report noncompliance with and propose ways to improve
employee compliance with applicable law, policy, and ethical standards of conduct.

(2) (I) THE OFFICE MAY EMPLOY STAFF IN ORDER TO EXECUTE THE
DUTIES OF THE OFFICE.

(II) STAFF EMPLOYED BY THE OFFICE SHALL SERVE UNDER THE
SUPERVISION AND DIRECTION OF THE INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE OFFICER.

(3) In developing recommendations, the Office may:

(i) Conduct administrative investigations, budgetary analyses, and
financial, management, or performance audits and similar reviews;

(ii) Provide management advisories; and

(iii) Utilize the assistance from any other government agency or
private party to complete a project initiated by the Office.

[(3)] (4) When applicable, the Integrity and Compliance Officer shall
comply with generally accepted government auditing standards.

[(4)] (5) (i) Except as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
the Integrity and Compliance Officer shall publish on the Office’s website, in a readily
available location:

1. [Periodic reports] A REPORT AT LEAST ONCE EVERY 2
YEARS, BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2025, that [summarize] SUMMARIZES the activities,
findings, recommendations, and accomplishments of the Office; and
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 776 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. Any official written comments or responses offered by the
local school system administration with any report published by the Office.

(ii) The Integrity and Compliance Officer:

1. May not disclose any record, report, or related information
that is protected from disclosure under the Public Information Act;

2. May provide an oral report if appropriate under generally
accepted government auditing standards; and

3. Shall establish and follow procedures for safeguarding the
identity of confidential sources and protecting privileged and confidential information.

[(5)] (6) If reasonable grounds exist to believe that a serious violation of
federal, State, or local law has occurred, the Integrity and Compliance Officer shall report
the allegation to:

(i) An appropriate law enforcement agency;

(ii) The State Ethics Commission; or

(iii) Any other agency with jurisdiction to enforce the law.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

9–318.

(J) (1) (I) IN THIS SUBSECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE
MEANINGS INDICATED.

(II) “DWELLING” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 9–105 OF THIS
TITLE.

(III) 1. “ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE” MEANS AN EMPLOYEE OF THE
PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM WHO HAS BEEN A FULL–TIME
EMPLOYEE FOR AT LEAST 2 YEARS AND OWNS A DWELLING IN PRINCE GEORGE’S
COUNTY.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 776

2. “ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEE” DOES NOT INCLUDE
INDIVIDUALS WHO SUPPLY GOODS OR SERVICES TO THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY
PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM ON A CONTRACTUAL BASIS.

(2) THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY MAY
GRANT, BY LAW, A PROPERTY TAX CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION AGAINST THE
COUNTY PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON A DWELLING THAT IS OWNED BY AN ELIGIBLE
EMPLOYEE WHO:

(I) DID NOT RESIDE IN THE COUNTY BEFORE PURCHASING THE
DWELLING FOR WHICH THE CREDIT IS CLAIMED; AND

(II) IS OTHERWISE ELIGIBLE FOR THE CREDIT AUTHORIZED
UNDER § 9–105 OF THIS TITLE.

(3) FOR ANY TAXABLE YEAR, THE CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
MAY NOT EXCEED THE LESSER OF:

(I) $2,500; OR

(II) THE AMOUNT OF THE PROPERTY TAX IMPOSED ON THE
DWELLING.

(4) THE GOVERNING BODY OF PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY MAY
ESTABLISH, BY LAW:

(I) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT UNDER THIS SUBSECTION;

(II) THE DURATION OF THE CREDIT;

(III) ADDITIONAL ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR ELIGIBLE
EMPLOYEES TO QUALIFY FOR THE CREDIT;

(IV) PROCEDURES FOR THE APPLICATION AND UNIFORM
PROCESSING OF REQUESTS FOR THE CREDIT; AND

(V) ANY OTHER PROVISION NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THIS
SUBSECTION.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before the date that
is 5 years after the effective date of a local law passed by the Prince George’s County Council
that establishes the tax credit authorized by Section 2 of this Act, the Prince George’s
County government shall submit a report, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 776 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Government Article, that states the number of Prince George’s County Public School
System employees who received the tax credit authorized by Section 2 of this Act in the
preceding 5 years to the Prince George’s County Delegation, the Prince George’s County
Senators, the Prince George’s County Council, and the Prince George’s County Executive.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
June 1, 2024, ~~and.~~ Section 2 of this Act shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning
after June 30, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6