START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 640

Chapter 640

(Senate Bill 135)

AN ACT concerning

Workgroup to Study Funding for the Westernport Wastewater Treatment
Facility – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Workgroup to Study Funding for the Westernport
Wastewater Treatment Facility; and generally relating to the Workgroup to Study
Funding for the Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Workgroup to Study Funding for the Westernport Wastewater
Treatment Facility.

(b) The Workgroup consists of the following members:

~~(1)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Senate~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland,~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~President~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~Senate;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~two~~ ~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~House~~ ~~of~~ ~~Delegates,~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Speaker~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~House;~~

~~(3)~~ (1) the Secretary of Health, or the Secretary’s designee;

~~(4)~~ (2) the Secretary of the Environment, or the Secretary’s designee;

~~(5)~~ (3) the Secretary of Budget and Management, or the Secretary’s designee;

~~(6)~~ (4) the Mayor of Westernport;

~~(7)~~ (5) one member from the Board of County Commissioners for Allegany
County;

~~(8)~~ (6) the Director of Public Works for Allegany County;

~~(9)~~ (7) the Chair of the Upper Potomac River Commission; and

~~(10)~~ (8) a member of the Upper Potomac River Commission who is not
the Chair.

(c) The Chair of the Upper Potomac River Commission shall designate the chair
of the Workgroup.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 640 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) The Department of the Environment shall provide staff for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) The Workgroup shall:

(1) identify and study the existing funding sources that support the
Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility;

(2) study whether increased funding could enhance operations at the
Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility;

(3) study the funding sources of comparable wastewater treatment
facilities in the mid–Atlantic region;

(4) study available and potential federal, State, and local funding sources
for the Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility; and

(5) make recommendations regarding:

(i) whether additional funding could improve the operations of the
Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility; and

(ii) the existing and prospective federal, State, and local funding
sources for the Westernport Wastewater Treatment Facility.

(g) On or before December 1, 2024, the Workgroup shall report its findings and
recommendations to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 1 year and, at the end of June 30, 2025, this
Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and of no
further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2