START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

Chapter 836

(Senate Bill 134)

AN ACT concerning

Office of the ~~Attorney~~ ~~General~~ ~~–~~ Correctional Ombudsman ~~Unit~~ – Establishment
and Funding

FOR the purpose of establishing the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman ~~Unit~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~
~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~ ~~General;~~ authorizing the Justice Reinvestment Oversight
Board to make a recommendation for the distribution of money from the Performance
Incentive Grant Fund to the Office for a certain fiscal year; requiring the ~~Unit~~ Office
to conduct investigations, reviews, and assessments of administrative acts taken by
the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services, the Department of
Juvenile Services, or in relation to individuals confined by ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ either
department; requiring the ~~Unit~~ Office to refer certain matters for criminal charges
or disciplinary proceedings; providing for the confidentiality of certain
communications with the Ombudsman; establishing the Correctional Ombudsman
Advisory Board; transferring the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit of the Office of
the Attorney General into the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman; authorizing
the Unit to subpoena an individual to give sworn testimony or produce documentary
evidence; prohibiting certain reprisals against employees of the Department of
Public Safety and Correctional Services or the Department of Juvenile Services who
provide certain information to the ~~Unit~~ Office; requiring the ~~Unit~~ Office to conduct
certain activities; and generally relating to the Office of the Correctional
Ombudsman ~~Unit.~~

BY renumbering
Article – State Government
Section 6–401 through 6–406 and the subtitle “Subtitle 4. Juvenile Justice
Monitoring Unit”
to be Section 9–3811 through 9–3816, respectively, and the part “Part II. Juvenile
Justice Monitoring Unit”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–3201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–3207(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section ~~6–901~~ ~~through~~ ~~6–907~~ 9–3801 through 9–3808 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle ~~9.~~ 38. Office of the Correctional Ombudsman ~~Unit”~~ and the part “Part
I. Established”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–3811 through 9–3813 and 9–3815
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–3814 and 9–3816(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 5–305
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 6–401 through 6–406 and the subtitle “Subtitle 4. Juvenile Justice
Monitoring Unit” of Article – State Government of the Annotated Code of Maryland be
renumbered to be Section(s) 9–3811 through 9–3816, respectively, and the part “Part II.
Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit”.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – State Government

9–3201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the Justice Reinvestment Oversight Board.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(c) “Executive Director” means the Executive Director of the Governor’s Office of
Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services.

(d) “Fund” means the Performance Incentive Grant Fund established in § 9–3209
of this subtitle.

9–3207.

(b) (1) In collaboration with the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services, the Board shall determine the annual savings from the implementation of the
recommendations of the Justice Reinvestment Coordinating Council based on the
difference between the prison population as measured on October 1, 2017, the baseline day,
and the prison population as measured on October 1, 2018, the comparison day, and the
variable cost of incarceration.

(2) If the prison population on the comparison day is less than the prison
population on the baseline day, the Board shall determine a savings based on the difference
in the prison population multiplied by the variable cost.

(3) The Board annually shall determine the difference between the prison
population on October 1, 2017, and the prison population on October 1 of the current year
and calculate any savings in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection.

(4) If a prison population decline causes a correctional unit, wing, or facility
to close, the Board shall conduct an assessment to determine the savings from the closure
and distribute the savings, realized annually, according to the schedule in paragraph (5) of
this subsection.

(5) The Board annually shall recommend that the savings identified in
paragraphs (2) through (4) of this subsection be distributed as follows:

(i) up to 50% of the savings shall be placed in the Performance
Incentive Grant Fund for purposes established under § 9–3209(b)(1) of this subtitle; and

(ii) subject to paragraph (6) of this subsection, the remaining savings
shall be used for additional services identified as reinvestment priorities in the Justice
Reinvestment Coordinating Council’s Final Report.

(6) The Board may recommend that a portion of the remaining savings
identified under paragraph (5)(ii) of this subsection be:

(I) used for the development and implementation of a
post–secondary education and workforce training program for each correctional institution
in the Division of Correction that provides inmates with the requisite training,
certifications, and experience to obtain careers in in–demand job sectors; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 ONLY, DISTRIBUTED TO THE OFFICE
OF THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN.

SUBTITLE 9. 38. OFFICE OF THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN UNIT.

PART I. ESTABLISHED.

~~6–901.~~ 9–3801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ADMINISTRATIVE ACT” MEANS ANY ACTION, DECISION,
ADJUDICATION, FAILURE TO ACT, OMISSION, RULE OR REGULATION,
INTERPRETATION, RECOMMENDATION, POLICY, PRACTICE, OR PROCEDURE OF AN
AGENCY.

(C) (1) “AGENCY” MEANS:

(I) THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES OR THE DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE SERVICES;

(II) ANY OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES OR THE DEPARTMENT OF
~~JUVENILE~~ ~~SERVICES;~~

(III) ANY PERSON PROVIDING SERVICES UNDER A CONTRACT
WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES OR
THE DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE SERVICES TO INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE CONFINED
BY OR UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF THE DEPARTMENT EITHER DEPARTMENT THE
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES; OR

(IV) ANY OFFICER, EMPLOYEE, OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
EXAMINER OF THE STATE OR A UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT WHO IS ACTING OR
PURPORTING TO ACT IN RELATION TO INDIVIDUALS CONFINED BY OR UNDER THE
SUPERVISION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL
SERVICES OR THE DEPARTMENT OF JUVENILE SERVICES.

(2) “AGENCY” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) A JUDGE, AS DEFINED IN § 1–101 OF THE COURTS ARTICLE,
OR ANY OTHER EMPLOYEE OF THE JUDICIARY;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(II) THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OR ANY MEMBER, EMPLOYEE, OR
COMMITTEE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY; OR

(III) THE GOVERNOR OR THE GOVERNOR’S PERSONAL STAFF.

(D) (1) “COMPLAINT” MEANS ANY COMMUNICATION:

(I) FROM OR ON BEHALF OF AN INDIVIDUAL CONFINED BY OR
UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF AN AGENCY; AND

(II) ALLEGING A VIOLATION OF THE INDIVIDUAL’S RIGHTS OR
ANY APPLICABLE LAW, REGULATION, OR STANDARD:

1. BY THE AGENCY; AND

2. THAT IMPACTED THE INDIVIDUAL.

(2) “COMPLAINT” DOES NOT INCLUDE A DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDING
OF AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL.

(E) “OFFICE” MEANS THE OFFICE OF THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN.

(F) “RECORDS” MEANS ALL MATERIALS, REGARDLESS OF PHYSICAL FORM
OR CHARACTERISTICS, CREATED, GENERATED, RECORDED, RECEIVED, POSSESSED,
OR CONTROLLED BY OR ON BEHALF OF ANY AGENCY.

(F) “UNIT” MEANS THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN UNIT IN THE OFFICE
OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.

~~6–902.~~ 9–3802.

THERE IS A AN OFFICE OF THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN UNIT IN THE
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL ESTABLISHED AS AN INDEPENDENT UNIT OF
STATE GOVERNMENT.

~~6–903.~~ 9–3803.

(A) THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL INCLUDE:

(1) A FULL–TIME CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN; AND

(2) STAFF AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE JUVENILE JUSTICE MONITORING UNIT ESTABLISHED IN §
9–3812 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THE ATTORNEY GENERAL GOVERNOR SHALL APPOINT THE
CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN WITH THE ADVICE AND CONSENT OF THE SENATE.

(2) THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN SHALL SERVE FOR A TERM OF
5 YEARS.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN
CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(C) SALARIES OF THE OMBUDSMAN AND STAFF AND EXPENSES FOR RENT,
EQUIPMENT, SUPPLIES, AND GENERAL OPERATING EXPENSES NECESSARY FOR THE
WORK OF THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL BE AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(D) IN COOPERATION WITH THE SECRETARY OF BUDGET AND
MANAGEMENT, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL SET MINIMUM SALARIES,
QUALIFICATIONS, AND STANDARDS OF TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE FOR POSITIONS
WITH THE UNIT.

~~6–904.~~ 9–3804.

(A) THE UNIT OFFICE, IN RESPONSE TO A COMPLAINT OR ON THE
OMBUDSMAN’S INITIATIVE, SHALL:

(1) INVESTIGATE ANY ADMINISTRATIVE ACT THAT THE OMBUDSMAN
DETERMINES MAY BE:

(I) CONTRARY TO LAW OR REGULATION;

(II) BASED ON A MISTAKE OF FACT;

(III) UNSUPPORTED BY SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE;

(IV) PERFORMED IN AN INEFFICIENT MANNER;

(V) UNREASONABLE UNDER THE TOTALITY OF THE
CIRCUMSTANCES; OR

(VI) OTHERWISE ERRONEOUS;

(2) CONDUCT INDEPENDENT REVIEWS AND ASSESSMENTS OF:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(I) HEALTH SERVICES, INCLUDING SUBSTANCE ABUSE USE
DISORDER ASSESSMENTS AND TREATMENT, PROVIDED TO INDIVIDUALS CONFINED
BY ANY AGENCY;

(II) MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDED TO INDIVIDUALS
CONFINED BY ANY AGENCY;

(III) PLANS BY AGENCIES TO EXPAND, RENOVATE, OR CLOSE
FACILITIES;

(IV) EDUCATIONAL AND VOCATIONAL PROGRAMS FOR
INDIVIDUALS CONFINED BY ANY AGENCY; AND

(V) AGENCY POLICIES ON RESTRICTIVE OR PROTECTIVE
HOUSING;

(3) COOPERATE WITH ANY AGENCY IN EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THE
FUNCTIONING OF ANY AGENCY OR PREVENT ABUSES BY AGENCIES;

(4) INSPECT ANY FACILITIES OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY ANY
AGENCY TO MONITOR CONDITIONS IN THE FACILITIES;

(5) SEEK TO RESOLVE COMPLAINTS AGAINST AN AGENCY THROUGH
MEDIATION OR OTHER CONFLICT RESOLUTION METHODS;

(6) MAINTAIN A WEBSITE THAT:

(I) SUBJECT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF SUBSECTION (E) (F) OF
THIS SECTION, MAKES CURRENT AND PAST REPORTS AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC;
AND

(II) PROVIDES CONTACT INFORMATION FOR THE UNIT OFFICE;
AND

(7) ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) (1) THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL INVESTIGATE EACH COMPLAINT ABOUT
AN ADMINISTRATIVE ACT, UNLESS THE UNIT OFFICE DETERMINES THAT:

(I) THE COMPLAINT COULD BE ADDRESSED THROUGH
ANOTHER PROCESS;

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) THE COMPLAINT IS TRIVIAL, FRIVOLOUS, VEXATIOUS, OR
NOT MADE IN GOOD FAITH;

(III) THE COMPLAINANT UNREASONABLY DELAYED IN BRINGING
THE COMPLAINT; OR

(IV) THE COMPLAINANT IS NOT PERSONALLY AFFECTED BY THE
ADMINISTRATIVE ACT; OR

(V) THE UNIT OFFICE LACKS SUFFICIENT RESOURCES TO
INVESTIGATE THE COMPLAINT.

(2) THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL PROMPTLY INFORM A COMPLAINANT OF
A DECISION NOT TO INVESTIGATE A COMPLAINT.

(3) ON REQUEST, THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL PROMPTLY INFORM A
COMPLAINANT OF THE STATUS OF AN INVESTIGATION.

(4) ON THE COMPLETION OF AN INVESTIGATION BASED ON A
COMPLAINT, THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL PROMPTLY INFORM THE COMPLAINANT OF
ANY CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND ACTIONS TAKEN IN RESPONSE TO THE
COMPLAINT.

(C) (1) IF THE UNIT OFFICE DETERMINES THAT AN EMPLOYEE OR AGENT
OF AN AGENCY ACTED IN A MANNER WARRANTING CRIMINAL CHARGES OR
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS, THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL PROMPTLY REFER THE
MATTER TO APPROPRIATE AUTHORITIES.

(2) IF THE UNIT REFERS THE MATTER TO THE OFFICE OF THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL, A SPECIAL ASSISTANT SHALL BE APPOINTED TO REVIEW THE
~~MATTER.~~

(D) THE ~~UNIT~~ OFFICE MAY:

(1) INTERVIEW AGENCY PERSONNEL OR ANY INDIVIDUAL CONFINED
BY AN AGENCY;

(2) ACCESS ANY RECORDS MAINTAINED BY AN AGENCY;

(3) PERFORM UNANNOUNCED SITE VISITS AND ON–SITE INSPECTIONS
OF FACILITIES MAINTAINED BY AN AGENCY;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(4) RECEIVE AND RESPOND TO COMPLAINTS WITHOUT
INTERCEPTION, REVIEW, OR INTERFERENCE BY AN AGENCY;

(5) SUBPOENA ANY INDIVIDUAL TO APPEAR TO GIVE SWORN
~~TESTIMONY~~ ~~OR~~ ~~PRODUCE~~ ~~DOCUMENTARY~~ ~~EVIDENCE~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REASONABLY~~
NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE UNIT’S DUTIES;

(6) REVIEW ALL REPORTS OF DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS, GRIEVANCES,
AND GRIEVANCE DISPOSITIONS BY THE AGENCY; AND

(7) (6) COLLABORATE WITH ANY AGENCY OR ANY UNIT OF STATE
GOVERNMENT TO INVESTIGATE COMPLAINTS OR ANY ALLEGED INJURY, NEGLECT,
OR DEATH OF AN INDIVIDUAL CONFINED BY OR UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF AN
AGENCY.

(E) (1) THE OFFICE MAY SUBPOENA ANY INDIVIDUAL TO APPEAR TO GIVE
SWORN TESTIMONY OR PRODUCE DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE THAT IS REASONABLY
NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE OFFICE’S DUTIES.

(2) IF AN INDIVIDUAL FAILS OR REFUSES TO COMPLY WITH A
SUBPOENA ISSUED BY THE OFFICE, A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION, ON THE
APPLICATION OF THE OFFICE, MAY ISSUE AN ATTACHMENT FOR THE INDIVIDUAL
AND COMPEL THE INDIVIDUAL TO COMPLY WITH THE SUBPOENA, APPEAR BEFORE
THE OFFICE, AND PRODUCE DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE FOR EXAMINATION AND GIVE
TESTIMONY.

(3) IF AN INDIVIDUAL DISOBEYS A SUBPOENA OR REFUSES TO
TESTIFY, THE COURT MAY PUNISH THE INDIVIDUAL FOR CONTEMPT.

(E) (F) IN PERFORMING THE DUTIES ASSIGNED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE,
THE UNIT OFFICE AND THE OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL SHALL TREAT ALL
COMPLAINTS AS CONFIDENTIAL AND MAY REVEAL THE DETAILS OF ANY
COMPLAINTS ONLY IF IT IS:

(1) NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE UNIT’S OFFICE’S DUTIES; AND

(2) DONE IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE STATE AND FEDERAL
LAW.

~~6–905.~~ 9–3805.

(A) WITHIN 30 DAYS AFTER COMPLETING AN INVESTIGATION, THE UNIT
OFFICE SHALL SUBMIT TO AN AGENCY A REPORT CONTAINING ANY CONCLUSIONS,
RECOMMENDATIONS, AND REQUESTS FOR A RESPONSE FROM THE AGENCY.
– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) IF THE REPORT SUBMITTED TO AN AGENCY UNDER THIS SECTION
CONTAINS A REQUEST FOR A RESPONSE FROM THE AGENCY, THE AGENCY SHALL
PROVIDE A WRITTEN RESPONSE WITHIN 30 45 DAYS AFTER RECEIPT OF THE
REPORT.

(C) THE UNIT OFFICE MAY PROVIDE THE REPORT REQUIRED BY THIS
SECTION, AS WELL AS ANY RESPONSES BY THE AGENCY, TO THE GOVERNOR OR, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

~~6–906.~~ 9–3806.

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 31 EACH YEAR, THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL
REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE,
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) INVESTIGATIONS CONDUCTED BY THE UNIT OFFICE;

(2) ANY ACTIONS TAKEN BY AN AGENCY AS A RESULT OF THE
CONCLUSIONS OR RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE UNIT OFFICE;

(3) ANY INSTANCE WHERE AN AGENCY REJECTS A RECOMMENDATION
OR CONCLUSION OF THE UNIT OFFICE; AND

(4) INFORMATION ON ANY DEATH OF AN INDIVIDUAL CONFINED BY OR
UNDER THE CARE OF AN AGENCY.

(B) IN ADDITION TO THE REPORT REQUIRED BY SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS
SECTION, THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL PROVIDE TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY ANY
OTHER REPORTS THAT THE GOVERNOR OR THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY MAY REQUIRE.

(C) A REPORT PREPARED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE PUBLISHED ON
THE UNIT’S OFFICE’S WEBSITE.

~~6–907.~~ 9–3807.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “BOARD” MEANS THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN
ADVISORY BOARD.

(B) THERE IS A CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN ADVISORY BOARD.

(C) THE PURPOSE PURPOSES OF THE BOARD IS ARE TO:

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(1) PROVIDE INFORMATION TO THE UNIT OFFICE; AND

(2) ASSIST THE UNIT OFFICE IN:

(I) IDENTIFYING APPROPRIATE MATTERS TO INVESTIGATE;
AND

(II) DEVELOPING PROCESSES BY WHICH COMPLAINTS ARE
SUBMITTED, REVIEWED, INVESTIGATED, AND RESOLVED.

(D) THE BOARD SHALL CONSIST OF 10 12 MEMBERS APPOINTED BY THE
~~ATTORNEY~~ ~~GENERAL~~ GOVERNOR.

(E) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE ATTORNEY GENERAL GOVERNOR
SHALL ENSURE THAT THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE BOARD INCLUDES
REPRESENTATIVES OF:

(1) FAMILY MEMBERS OF CONFINED INDIVIDUALS;

(2) RETURNING CITIZENS;

(3) NONSUPERVISORY CORRECTIONAL OFFICERS;

(4) MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WITH A DEMONSTRATED INTEREST IN
CORRECTIONS; AND

(5) INDIVIDUALS WITH BACKGROUNDS IN HEALTH CARE AND SOCIAL
WORK.; AND

(6) INDIVIDUALS WITH BACKGROUNDS IN MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND
SUBSTANCE ABUSE USE DISORDER TREATMENT.; AND

(7) AT LEAST TWO INDIVIDUALS WITH EXPERIENCE MANAGING A
LARGE GOVERNMENT AGENCY.

(F) (1) THE BOARD MAY NOT INCLUDE MORE THAN THREE MEMBERS WHO
ARE CURRENT OR FORMER EMPLOYEES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES.

(2) NO MEMBER OF THE BOARD MAY BE CURRENTLY EMPLOYED BY
THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES IN A
SUPERVISORY CAPACITY.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(F) (G) A MEMBER OF THE BOARD SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF THE
GOVERNOR.

(F) (G) (H) THE UNIT OFFICE SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE BOARD.

9–3808.

(A) THE OFFICE SHALL REVIEW POTENTIAL FEDERAL FUNDING SOURCES,
INCLUDING GRANTS OFFERED UNDER THE JUSTICE REINVESTMENT INITIATIVE
AND THE SECOND CHANCE ACT.

(B) THE OFFICE MAY APPLY FOR RELEVANT FUNDING SOURCES.

9–3809. RESERVED.

9–3810. RESERVED.

Part II. Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit.

9–3811.

(a) In this [subtitle] PART the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Department” means the Department of Juvenile Services.

(c) “Disciplinary action” means any punitive action against a child that results in
more security, additional obligations, or less personal freedom.

(d) “Deputy Director” means the Deputy Director of the Division of Children and
Youth of the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services.

(e) “Facility” means:

(1) a residential facility operated by the Department;

(2) a residential facility owned by the Department but privately operated;
and

(3) a residential facility licensed by the Department.

(f) (1) “Grievance” means a complaint made by a child or on behalf of a child
due to a circumstance or an action considered to be unjust.

(2) “Grievance” does not include an employee grievance, disciplinary
appeal, or complaint.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(g) “Juvenile justice monitor” means an individual employed by the Office of the
[Attorney General] CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN to determine whether the needs of
children under the jurisdiction of the Department are being met in compliance with State
law, that their rights are being upheld, and that they are not being abused.

(h) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Juvenile Services.

(i) “Unit” means the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit of the Office [of the
Attorney General].

9–3812.

(a) There is a Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit of the Office of the [Attorney
General] CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN.

(b) The function of the Unit is to investigate and determine whether the needs of
children under the jurisdiction of the Department of Juvenile Services are being met in
compliance with State law, that their rights are being upheld, and that they are not being
abused.

9–3813.

(a) The Unit shall include:

(1) a full–time Director of Juvenile Justice Monitoring; and

(2) staff, including juvenile justice monitors, as provided in the State
budget.

(b) Salaries of the Director and juvenile justice monitors and expenses for rent,
equipment, supplies, and general operating expenses necessary for the work of the Unit
shall be as provided in the State budget.

(c) In cooperation with the Secretary of Budget and Management, the [Attorney
General] CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN shall set minimum salaries, qualifications, and
standards of training and experience for positions with the Unit.

9–3814.

The Unit shall:

(1) evaluate at each facility:

(i) the child advocacy grievance process;

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) the Department’s monitoring process;

(iii) the treatment of and services to youth;

(iv) the physical conditions of the facility; and

(v) the adequacy of staffing;

(2) review all reports of disciplinary actions, grievances, and grievance
dispositions received from each facility and alterations in the status or placement of a child
that result in more security, additional obligations, or less personal freedom;

(3) receive copies of the grievances submitted to the Department;

(4) perform unannounced site visits and on–site inspections of facilities;

(5) receive and review all incident reports submitted to the Department
from facilities;

(6) receive reports of the findings of child protective services investigations
of allegations of abuse or neglect of a child in a facility;

(7) ensure that each facility is in compliance with the regulations
applicable to residential facilities;

(8) monitor the implementation of educational programs at each
residential facility;

(9) collaborate with the Department, the Department of Human Services,
the Maryland Department of Health, and the Division of Children and Youth of the
Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services in all matters related to
the licensing and monitoring of children’s residential facilities; and

(10) have a representative available to attend meetings of the advisory
boards established under § 9–230 of the Human Services Article and meetings of the
Juvenile Services Education Board established under § 9–502 of the Human Services
Article.

9–3815.

(A) The Unit may:

(1) review relevant laws, policies, procedures, and juvenile justice records,
including records relating to individual youth;

(2) on request, conduct interviews with staff, youth, and others;

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

(3) review investigative reports produced by the Department relating to
youth in facilities; and

(4) participate, within the context of the local department of social services’
multidisciplinary team process, in a child protective services investigation conducted under
Title 5, Subtitle 7 of the Family Law Article concerning any allegation of abuse or neglect
within any assigned facility.

(B) (1) THE UNIT MAY SUBPOENA ANY INDIVIDUAL TO APPEAR TO GIVE
SWORN TESTIMONY OR PRODUCE DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE THAT IS REASONABLY
NECESSARY TO CARRY OUT THE UNIT’S DUTIES.

(2) IF AN INDIVIDUAL FAILS OR REFUSES TO COMPLY WITH A
SUBPOENA ISSUED BY THE UNIT, A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION, ON THE
APPLICATION OF THE UNIT, MAY ISSUE AN ATTACHMENT FOR THE INDIVIDUAL AND
COMPEL THE INDIVIDUAL TO COMPLY WITH THE SUBPOENA, AND APPEAR BEFORE
THE UNIT AND PRODUCE DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE FOR EXAMINATION AND GIVE
TESTIMONY.

(3) IF AN INDIVIDUAL DISOBEYS A SUBPOENA OR REFUSES TO
TESTIFY, THE COURT MAY PUNISH THE INDIVIDUAL FOR CONTEMPT.

9–3816.

(a) The Unit shall report in a timely manner to the Deputy Director, the
Secretary, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of this article, the Speaker of the House of
Delegates and the President of the Senate:

(1) knowledge of any problem regarding the care, supervision, and
treatment of children in facilities;

(2) findings, actions, and recommendations, related to the investigations of
disciplinary actions, grievances, incident reports, and alleged cases of child abuse and
neglect; and

(3) all other findings and actions related to the monitoring required under
this subtitle.

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

5–305.

Subject to the limitations of § 5–306 of this subtitle, a supervisor, appointing
authority, or the head of a principal unit may not take or refuse to take any personnel
action as a reprisal against:
– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 836 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) an employee who discloses information that the employee reasonably
believes evidences:

(i) an abuse of authority, gross mismanagement, or gross waste of
money;

(ii) a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety; or

(iii) a violation of law;

(2) an employee of the Department of Juvenile Services who discloses
information to the Director of Juvenile Justice Monitoring or staff of the OFFICE OF THE
CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN, INCLUDING THE Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit
relating to the Unit’s duties under § 6–404(1) § 9–3814 of the State Government Article;
[or]

(3) AN EMPLOYEE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES WHO DISCLOSES INFORMATION TO THE CORRECTIONAL
OMBUDSMAN OR STAFF OF THE OFFICE OF THE CORRECTIONAL OMBUDSMAN UNIT
RELATING TO THE UNIT’S OFFICE’S DUTIES UNDER § 6–904 § 9–3804 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE; OR

[(3)] (4) an employee who, following a disclosure under item [(1) or] (1),
(2), OR (3) of this section, seeks a remedy provided under this subtitle or any other law or
policy governing the employee’s unit.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Governor shall transfer
four positions and $603,067 in general funds for the Juvenile Justice Monitoring Unit as of
July 1, 2024, from C81C00.12 Office of the Attorney General – Juvenile Justice Monitoring
Unit to the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman established under Section 2 of this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the
General Assembly that the Governor shall include in the State budget for fiscal year 2025
and each subsequent fiscal year an appropriation in an amount sufficient to fund the
provisions of this Act and to provide for at least two staff members of the Office of the
Correctional Ombudsman ~~Unit~~ in 2025 and at least seven staff members of the ~~Unit~~ Office
in 2026 and each subsequent fiscal year.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before December 31,
2024, the Office of the Correctional Ombudsman ~~Unit~~ and the Commission on Correctional
Standards shall submit a joint report to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article, the General Assembly detailing how the Office ~~Correctional~~
~~Ombudsman~~ ~~Unit~~ and the Commission will coordinate in order to avoid overlap in their
duties.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 836

SECTION ~~4.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before December 31,
2024, the Mediation and Conflict Resolution Office shall report to the Office of the
Correctional Ombudsman ~~Unit,~~ the Governor, and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly on best practices for mediating grievances in
the corrections system.

SECTION ~~5.~~ 7. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the
General Assembly that, in its first year of operation, the Office of the Correctional
Ombudsman ~~Unit~~ focus its activities primarily on those State correctional facilities located
in the area of Jessup, Maryland.

SECTION ~~6.~~ 8. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That it is the intent of the
General Assembly that, in its first year of operation, the Office of the Correctional
Ombudsman ~~Unit~~ conduct an audit of programming and services provided by the Division
of Corrections since fiscal year 2019. This audit shall include, among other things, an
examination of:

(1) rates of participation by incarcerated individuals in:

(i) educational and vocational training;

(ii) evidence–based behavioral health and substance ~~abuse~~ use
disorder counseling; and

(iii) mentoring and reentry programs; and

(2) any obstacles to participation by incarcerated individuals in programs
provided by the Division.

SECTION ~~7.~~ 9. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17