START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 119 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 119 
(Senator Lam, et al.) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations and 
Judiciary 
 
Legally Protected Health Care - Gender-Affirming Treatment 
 
   
This bill expands the definition of “legally protected health care” to include all 
gender-affirming treatment that is lawful in the State. As a result, gender-affirming 
treatment is subject to specified protections and prohibitions under current law. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and is not anticipated to materially 
affect governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapters 246 and 247 of 2023 (the Reproductive Health 
Protection Act) establish additional protections for information related to “legally protected 
health care” when that information is sought by another state. The Acts also prohibit (1) a 
health occupations board from taking specified disciplinary actions related to the provision 
of legally protected health care; (2) a medical professional liability insurer from taking 
specified adverse actions against a practitioner related to the practice of legally protected 
health care; and (3) specified State entities, agents, and employees from participating in 
any interstate investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or sanctions against a 
person for activity related to legally protected health care (with limited exception).  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 119/ Page 2 
Under § 15-151 of the Health‐General Article, “gender-affirming treatment” means any 
medically necessary treatment consistent with current clinical standards of care prescribed 
by a licensed health care provider for the treatment of a condition related to the individual’s 
gender identity. “Gender-affirming treatment” includes (1) hormone therapy, hormone 
blockers, and puberty blockers; (2) hair alteration for the purposes of altering secondary 
sex characteristics and surgical site preparation; (3) alterations to voice, voice therapy, and 
voice lessons; (4) alterations to abdomen, chest, trunk, and buttocks; (5) alterations to the 
face and neck; (6) alterations to the genitals and gonads; (7) laser treatment for scars from 
gender‐affirming treatment; (8) standard fertility preservation procedures; (9) revisions to 
previous treatments and reversal of treatments; (10) combinations of gender-affirming 
procedures; and (11) other treatments as prescribed to suppress the development of 
endogenous secondary sex characteristics, align the individual’s appearance or physical 
body with gender identity, and alleviate symptoms of clinically significant distress 
resulting from gender dysphoria. 
 
Under § 2-312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, “legally protected health care” 
means all reproductive health services, medications, and supplies related to the direct 
provision or support of the provision of care related to pregnancy, contraception, assisted 
reproduction, and abortion that is lawful in the State.  
 
The bill expands the definition of legally protected health care to include all 
gender-affirming treatment, including medications and supplies, related to the direct 
provision or support of the provision of care related to gender-affirming treatment that is 
lawful in the State. Thus, the bill applies the additional protections and prohibitions 
established under Chapters 246 and 247 to all gender-affirming treatment that is lawful in 
the State. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 691 (Delegate Moon, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations and Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Commission on Civil Rights; Office of the Attorney 
General; Maryland State Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Municipal League; Maryland Association of Counties; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 119/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - March 6, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3