START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 191 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 191 
(Senator A. Washington) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Prince George's County - Public School Employees Property Tax Credit and 
Office of Integrity and Compliance  
PG 503-24 
 
 
This bill authorizes Prince George’s County to provide a real property tax credit against 
the dwelling of an eligible employee of the Prince George’s County Public School System 
(PGCPS) who purchases a home after relocating to the county. The bill also specifies that 
(1) the Office of Integrity and Compliance (OIC) is an independent office in PGCPS and 
(2) the Integrity and Compliance Officer serves as an independent employee within 
PGCPS. The office may employ staff in order to execute the duties of the office. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County property tax revenues decrease beginning in 
FY 2025 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue 
decrease depends on the number of eligible homeowners, the taxable assessment of each 
eligible property, the amount of each property tax credit that is granted, and the county 
property tax rate. County expenditures are not directly affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Prince George’s County may grant, by law, a property tax credit against 
the county property tax imposed on a dwelling that is owned by an eligible employee who 
did not reside in the county before purchasing the dwelling for which the credit is claimed 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 191/ Page 2 
and is otherwise eligible for the homestead property tax credit. The amount of the property 
tax credit may not exceed the lesser of $2,500 or the amount of the property tax imposed 
on the dwelling. 
 
Prince George’s County may establish (1) the amount of the property tax credit; (2) the 
duration of the property tax credit; (3) additional eligibility requirements for eligible 
employees to qualify for the property tax credit; (4) procedures for the application and 
uniform processing of requests for the property tax credit; and (5) any other provision 
necessary to carry out the property tax credit. 
 
On or before the date that is five years after the effective date of a local law passed by the 
Prince George’s County Council that establishes the property tax credit, the 
Prince George’s County government must submit a report to the Prince George’s County 
Delegation, the Prince George’s County Senators, the Prince George’s County Council, 
and the Prince George’s County Executive that states the number of PGCPS employees 
who received the tax credit in the preceding five years. 
 
An eligible employee is defined as an employee of PGCPS who has been a 
full-time employee for at least two years and owns a dwelling in the county. An eligible 
employee does not include individuals who supply goods or services to PGCPS on a 
contractual basis. 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 792 of 2023 established OIC in PGCPS. OIC is required to 
(1) assist the county council and the local school system by providing independent 
evaluation and recommendations regarding opportunities to preserve the local school 
system’s reputation and improve the effectiveness, productivity, or efficiency of school 
system programs, policies, practices, and operations; (2) ensure public accountability by 
preventing, investigating, and reporting instances of fraud, waste, and abuse of school 
system property or funds; (3) examine, evaluate, and report on the adequacy and 
effectiveness of the systems of internal controls and their related accounting, financial, 
technology, and operational policies; and (4) report noncompliance with and propose ways 
to improve employee compliance with applicable law, policy, and ethical standards of 
conduct. 
 
In developing recommendations, OIC is authorized to (1) conduct administrative 
investigations; budgetary analyses; and financial, management, or performance audits and 
similar reviews; (2) provide management advisories; and (3) utilize the assistance from any 
other government agency or private party to complete a project initiated by the office. 
 
OIC must also coordinate with the school system, taking into consideration requests from 
specified members of the community, to develop a written work plan and to establish 
periodic goals and priorities for OIC based on an assessment of relative risks. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 191/ Page 3 
Prince George’s County advises that the salary and fringe benefits of the Integrity and 
Compliance Officer is paid by PGCPS. The salary and fringe benefits for OIC total 
$316,502 for fiscal 2024 and $324,415 for fiscal 2025. 
 
Local Revenues:  Prince George’s County property tax revenues decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2025 to the extent the property tax credit is granted. The amount of the revenue 
decrease depends on the number of eligible homeowners, the taxable assessment of each 
eligible property, the amount of each property tax credit that is granted, and the county 
property tax rate. 
 
As a point of reference, the Maryland State Department of Education indicates that as of 
October 2022, PGCPS had 17,880 employees. The Prince George’s County real property 
rate for fiscal 2024 is $1.374 per $100 of assessment. In fiscal 2023, the median residential 
sales price in Prince George’s County was $430,000. 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the County 
Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the Department 
of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Maryland State Department of Education; Prince George’s County Public 
Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - February 21, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3