START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 194 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 194 
(Senators Hayes and M. Washington) 
Budget and Taxation 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Procurement - Preferred Provider Requirements - Waiver 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Pricing and Selection Committee for Preferred Providers to grant a 
waiver, under specified conditions, to a State or State-aided or -controlled entity from the 
statutory requirement to purchase supplies or services first from Maryland Correctional 
Enterprises (MCE). It also requires MCE to report annually on the length of time between 
each order and delivery of supplies and services. The Department of General Services 
(DGS) must adopt regulations to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant nonbudgeted revenue decrease to the extent that waivers 
result in a significant decrease in total sales by MCE, potentially in excess of $1.0 million, 
but a reliable estimate is not feasible. Potential significant decrease in expenditures (all 
funds) to the extent that agencies receive waivers and purchase goods and services at lower 
prices, but a reliable estimate is not feasible. MCE can provide the required report with 
existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Pricing and Selection Committee for Preferred Providers may, on 
request, grant a waiver from the procurement preference for MCE if:   
 
 
MCE’s price for the needed supplies or services is at least 10% above market rates 
for similar supplies and services; or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 194/ Page 2 
 
the time at which the needed supplies and services would be delivered by MCE does 
not meet the entity’s needs. 
 
Current Law:  State procurement law defines a “preferred provider” to be a provider of 
supplies or services that is given preference in specified provisions of current State 
procurement law. Chapter 313 of 2016 consolidated certain procurement preferences such 
that, currently, a State or State-aided or -controlled entity must buy supplies and services 
from MCE first, then from Blind Industries and Services of Maryland, then from the 
Employment Works Program if a community service provider or an individual with a 
disability-owned business provides the supplies or services, in that order of preference. 
Only if none of those entities produces or provides the desired supplies or services may a 
State agency issue a competitive procurement. 
 
The Pricing and Selection Committee for Preferred Providers must review and verify the 
prevailing average market prices, as proposed by MCE, when changes are made to the 
pricing of existing goods and services provided by MCE and for new goods or services that 
MCE intends to make available. DGS staffs the committee. State agencies must purchase 
goods and services from MCE only if the sale price does not exceed the prevailing average 
market price determined by the committee. If MCE is unable to provide any of the goods 
or services under the contract, MCE must notify the contracting unit so that appropriate 
alternative action may be taken. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  MCE is a self-funded entity that relies on sales of goods and services 
to fund its operations. Although it already has a waiver process, the waivers authorized by 
the bill are broader in scope and have the potential to significantly affect its sales volume. 
However, in the absence of any experience, it is not possible to estimate the potential effect, 
as the waivers are discretionary. Total MCE sales in fiscal 2023 exceeded $51.0 million, 
so the potential effect may be significant. 
 
Waivers, to the extent they are granted, may also save State agencies money if they allow 
agencies to purchase goods and services at prices lower than those offered by MCE. 
However, in the absence of any experience, it is not possible to estimate how many waivers 
will be granted or how much agencies can save. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses that offer goods and services at prices lower than 
those available from MCE may benefit from increased sales to State agencies and 
State-aided or -controlled entities. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 194/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of General Services; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
js/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3