START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 242 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 242 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board of Social Work Examiners - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Social Work 
Examiners by five years to July 1, 2030, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment 
provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). By December 1, 2024, the 
board must report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health and Government 
Operations Committee on (1) the average processing time for issuing initial and renewal 
licenses, as specified; (2) the average length of time required to resolve a complaint; and 
(3) the rate of compliance with current law requirements for timely review of applications 
and notification of applicants by the board. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2030. The board can complete the report using existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  In general, an individual must be licensed by the State Board 
of Social Work Examiners to practice social work in Maryland. To apply for a license, an 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 242/ Page 2 
applicant must submit an application to the board on the form the board requires and pay 
the application fee set by the board. 
 
The board must review each application and notify the applicant whether the application is 
complete within 15 business days after initial receipt of an application and notify the 
applicant whether the applicant has been approved to take the pertinent licensure 
examination within 60 days from the date the board received a completed application. Each 
license expires every two years, after which the licensee must pay a renewal fee, submit a 
renewal application, submit satisfactory evidence of compliance with any continuing 
education requirements, and otherwise be entitled to be licensed. 
 
The board comprises 12 members, including 1 licensed bachelor social worker, 1 licensed 
master social worker, 1 licensed certified social worker, 4 licensed certified social 
workers-clinical, 1 licensed social worker employed by the Department of Human 
Services, 1 licensed social worker who is primarily engaged in social work education, and 
2 consumer members. 
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 730 of 2023.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 242/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 242/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
State Board of Social Work Examiners – Sunset Extension 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0242 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions/Board of  Social Work 
Examiners 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 4