START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 237 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 237 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care Program Professionals - 
Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board for Certification of 
Residential Child Care Program Professionals by five years to July 1, 2030, subject to the 
evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
(MPEA). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained 
through FY 2030. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care 
Program Professionals is the State certification authority for residential child care program 
administrators (RCCPAs) and residential child and youth care practitioners (RCYCPs) 
employed by programs licensed by the Department of Human Services, the Department of 
Juvenile Services, and MDH. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 237/ Page 2 
The board consists of 11 members, including five representatives appointed by the 
secretaries of various State agencies involved in the licensing and monitoring of residential 
child care programs. The remaining six members are appointed by the Governor with the 
advice of the Secretary of Health. Of these six members, three are RCCPAs, one is an 
RCYCP, and two are consumers. 
 
The board must maintain a registry of RCCPAs and RCYCPs certified by the board, submit 
an annual report to the Governor and the Children’s Cabinet, adopt a code of ethics 
appropriate and applicable to RCCPAs and RCYCPs, establish continuing education 
requirements for RCCPAs, establish training and continuing education requirements for 
RCYCPs, and adopt an official seal. According to the board’s most recent annual report, 
as of June 30, 2022, there were 959 active RCYCPs and 67 active RCCPAs. 
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025. OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 731 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2024 
Third Reader - January 31, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 237/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
State Board for Certification of Residential Child Care Program 
Professionals – Sunset Extension 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0237 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions/Board for Certification of 
Residential Child Care Program Professionals 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 3