START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 386

Chapter 386

(Senate Bill 245)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Community Health Resources Commission – Sunset Extension and
Program Evaluation

FOR the purpose of adding the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission to the
governmental activities and units subject to the Maryland Program Evaluation Act;
extending the termination date for certain provisions of law related to the
Commission; ~~stating~~ ~~that~~ ~~it~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~intent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~
~~Program~~ ~~Evaluation~~ ~~and~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Accountability~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~
~~Legislative~~ ~~Services~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~an~~ ~~evaluation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~date;~~ and generally relating to the Maryland Community Health Resources
Commission.

BY renumbering
Article – State Government
Section 8–403(13) through (64)
to be Section 8–403(14) through (65), respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–2102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 8–403(13)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Chapter 280 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2005, as amended by Chapter 21
of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2006, Chapters 624 and 625 of the Acts
of the General Assembly of 2008, and Chapter 368 of the Acts of the General
Assembly of 2014
Section 14

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 8–403(13) through (64) of Article – State Government of the Annotated
Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 8–403(14) through (65), respectively.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 386 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–2102.

(a) There is a Maryland Community Health Resources Commission.

(b) The Commission is an independent commission that operates within the
Department.

(c) The purpose of the Commission is to increase access to health care through
community health resources.

Article – State Government

8–403.

This subtitle applies only to the following governmental activities and units:

(13) COMMUNITY HEALTH RESOURCES COMMISSION, MARYLAND (§
19–2102 OF THE HEALTH – GENERAL ARTICLE);

Chapter 280 of the Acts of 2005, as amended by Chapter 21 of the Acts of 2006,
Chapters 624 and 625 of the Acts of 2008, and Chapter 368 of the Acts of 2014

SECTION 14. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to Section 13 of this
Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2005. Section 3 of this Act shall remain effective for a
period of [20] 23 30 years and, at the end of June 30, [2025] 2028 2035, with no further
action required by the General Assembly, Section 3 of this Act shall be abrogated and of no
further force and effect. Section 5 of this Act shall remain effective for a period of 2 years
and, at the end of June 30, 2007, with no further action required by the General Assembly,
Section 5 of this Act shall be abrogated and of no further force and effect.

~~SECTION~~ ~~3.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~it~~ ~~is~~ ~~the~~ ~~intent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~
~~Assembly~~ ~~that,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~January~~ ~~1,~~ ~~2025,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Program~~ ~~Evaluation~~ ~~and~~
~~Government~~ ~~Accountability~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Legislative~~ ~~Services~~ ~~shall~~ ~~conduct~~ ~~an~~
~~evaluation~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Community~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Resources~~ ~~Commission.~~

SECTION ~~4.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2