START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 288 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 288 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Individual Tax Preparers - Sunset Extension and Report 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Individual Tax 
Preparers within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by one year, to July 1 2027, 
subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program 
Evaluation Act (MPEA). It also requires MDL to submit a report to the Joint Audit and 
Evaluation Committee (JAEC) by July 1, 2025, with information – regarding the State 
Board of Individual Tax Preparers – to be determined by JAEC. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2027. MDL can likely prepare the required report with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The General Assembly established the State Board of 
Individual Tax Preparers to protect the public from incompetent, unqualified, and corrupt 
tax preparers and to establish standards for the field of tax preparation. Chapter 623 of 2008 
(the Maryland Individual Tax Preparers Act) established the eight-member board to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 288/ Page 2 
register qualified individuals to provide individual tax preparation services. The Act also 
established the Individual Tax Preparers Fund to cover the costs associated with 
administration and enforcement of the Maryland Individual Tax Preparers Act. 
Chapter 623 requires an individual to be registered by the board before providing 
individual tax preparation services in the State and specifies the qualifications for an 
applicant to qualify for registration (the individual must be 18 years of age or older, possess 
a high school diploma or have passed an equivalency examination, and pass an examination 
administered by the board). Registration is valid for two years; a continuing education 
requirement must be fulfilled for renewal. 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2026. OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 288/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Board of Individual Tax Preparers – Sunset Extension  
 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0288 
 
PREPARED BY: Christopher Dorsey 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x___ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3