START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 208

Chapter 208

(Senate Bill 250)

AN ACT concerning

County Public Libraries – ~~Overdue~~ ~~Library~~ ~~Materials~~ ~~–~~ ~~Minors~~ Minors,
Children, and Teens – Prohibited Practices

FOR the purpose of prohibiting a county public library from charging ~~a~~ ~~minor~~ a fine for
overdue library materials borrowed by a minor or intended for children or teens;
prohibiting a county public library from charging a reserve fee for library materials
reserved by a minor or intended for children or teens; prohibiting a county public
library from prohibiting the borrowing of library materials by a minor or the
borrowing of library materials intended for children or teens because of previous
overdue library materials; prohibiting a county public library from charging ~~a~~ ~~minor~~
a replacement fee for overdue library materials, except under certain circumstances;
requiring a county public library to cancel or refund replacement fees under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to ~~fines~~ ~~and~~ ~~fees~~ ~~levied~~ ~~against~~ ~~minors~~ ~~for~~
~~overdue~~ library materials borrowed by a minor or intended for children or teens.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 23–409
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

23–409.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

[(2) “Fee” means an amount charged by a public library to an individual for
the replacement of library materials that have not been returned.

(3) “Fine for overdue library materials” includes any fine charged by a
public library to an individual for not returning library materials by the due date.

(4) “Special collections” includes items such as cake pans, tools, and frame
art.]

(2) “MINOR” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 208 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) (2) “OVERDUE FINE” MEANS ANY AMOUNT CHARGED BY A
PUBLIC LIBRARY TO AN INDIVIDUAL FOR FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY MATERIALS
BY THE END OF THE LOAN PERIOD.

(4) (3) “REPLACEMENT FEE” MEANS ANY AMOUNT CHARGED BY A
PUBLIC LIBRARY TO AN INDIVIDUAL FOR THE REPLACEMENT OF LIBRARY
MATERIALS THAT HAVE NOT BEEN RETURNED OR HAVE BEEN RETURNED IN A
DAMAGED CONDITION AT THE TIME THE FEE IS ISSUED.

(4) “RESERVE FEE” MEANS ANY AMOUNT CHARGED BY A PUBLIC
LIBRARY TO AN INDIVIDUAL FOR FAILURE TO COLLECT LIBRARY MATERIALS THAT
HAVE BEEN PLACED ON HOLD OR RESERVED.

(5) “SPECIAL COLLECTIONS” INCLUDES LIBRARY MATERIALS SUCH
AS CAKE PANS, TOOLS, FRAMED ART, AND OTHER GROUPS OF LIBRARY MATERIALS
THAT POSSESS UNIQUE VALUE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR USE, AS DESIGNATED BY
THE PUBLIC LIBRARY.

(b) This section does not apply to special collections.

(c) (1) A public library may not charge a MINOR AN OVERDUE fine [for
overdue library materials on a minor’s library materials]:

(I) TO A MINOR; OR

(II) FOR LIBRARY MATERIALS INTENDED FOR CHILDREN OR
TEENS.

(2) A PUBLIC LIBRARY MAY NOT CHARGE A RESERVE FEE:

(I) TO A MINOR; OR

(II) FOR RESERVED LIBRARY MATERIALS INTENDED FOR
CHILDREN OR TEENS.

(3) (I) THIS PARAGRAPH APPLIES TO PREVIOUSLY BORROWED
LIBRARY MATERIALS THAT WERE:

1. BORROWED BY A MINOR; OR

2. INTENDED FOR CHILDREN OR TEENS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 208

(II) A PUBLIC LIBRARY MAY NOT PROHIBIT AN INDIVIDUAL
FROM BORROWING LIBRARY MATERIALS BECAUSE THE INDIVIDUAL FAILED TO
RETURN PREVIOUSLY BORROWED LIBRARY MATERIALS UNTIL 21 DAYS OR MORE
AFTER THE DATE THE LIBRARY MATERIALS WERE DUE.

(2) (4) (i) A public library may not charge a MINOR A
REPLACEMENT fee [for a minor’s overdue library materials] until 21 days after the date
on which the library materials were due:

1. TO A MINOR; OR

2. FOR LIBRARY MATERIALS INTENDED FOR CHILDREN
OR TEENS.

(ii) If a minor’s overdue library materials BORROWED BY A MINOR
OR INTENDED FOR CHILDREN OR TEENS are returned IN A NONDAMAGED CONDITION
after a public library has charged a REPLACEMENT fee, the public library shall cancel the
REPLACEMENT fee.

(III) IF A MINOR’S OVERDUE LIBRARY MATERIALS BORROWED BY
A MINOR OR INTENDED FOR CHILDREN OR TEENS ARE RETURNED IN A NONDAMAGED
CONDITION WITHIN 6 MONTHS AFTER A REPLACEMENT FEE HAS BEEN PAID, THE
PUBLIC LIBRARY IS NOT REQUIRED TO SHALL REFUND THE REPLACEMENT FEE.

(d) A public library SHALL WAIVE AND may not attempt to collect any
~~outstanding~~ ~~fees~~ ~~for~~ ~~overdue~~ ~~library~~ ~~materials~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~incurred~~ ~~by~~ ~~a~~ ~~minor~~ ~~after~~ ~~June~~ ~~30,~~
~~2021.~~

~~(e)~~ Each board of library trustees shall adopt regulations to carry out this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3