START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 71

Chapter 71

(Senate Bill 209)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Maryland Economic Development Commission –
Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering certain requirements relating to industry representation on
the Maryland Economic Development Commission and the purpose of the
Commission; repealing a requirement that the Office of International Trade make a
certain report to the Commission; repealing a requirement that the Maryland
Tourism Development Board submit certain plans to the Commission; and generally
relating to the Maryland Economic Development Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 2.5–201, 3–301, and 4–201(a) and (b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 2.5–203, 2.5–206, 4–211, and 4–212(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing
Article – Economic Development
Section 3–309
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

2.5–201.

In this subtitle, “Commission” means the Maryland Economic Development
Commission.

2.5–203.

(a) (1) (i) The Commission consists of:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 71 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

1. not more than 21 voting members appointed by the
Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate;

2. two voting members appointed by the President of the
Senate of Maryland;

3. two voting members appointed by the Speaker of the
House of Delegates;

4. A. one member of the Senate of Maryland, designated
by the President of the Senate; and

B. one member of the House of Delegates, designated by the
Speaker of the House; and

5. the following representatives of State units and
instrumentalities of the State:

A. the Executive Director of the Maryland Economic
Development Corporation, or the Executive Director’s designee;

B. the Chief Executive Officer of the Maryland Technology
Development Corporation, or the Chief Executive Officer’s designee;

C. the Secretary or the Secretary’s designee; and

D. the Secretary of Labor, or the Secretary’s designee.

(ii) The Secretary and the Secretary of Labor or their designees,
State unit or instrumentality representatives, and members of the General Assembly are
nonvoting ex officio members of the Commission.

(iii) A designee under subparagraph (i)5 of this paragraph may be an
administrator or a senior official of the unit or instrumentality.

(2) The geographic representation of the Commission shall cover the entire
State and shall include at least one representative from:

(i) the upper Eastern Shore;

(ii) the lower Eastern Shore;

(iii) Calvert County, Charles County, or St. Mary’s County;

(iv) Allegany County or Garrett County; and

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 71

(v) Carroll County, Frederick County, or Washington County.

(3) [When appointing Commission members, the Governor shall consider
geographic and industry representation.] THE INDUSTRIES REPRESENTED BY
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION SHALL:

(I) BE DIVERSE; AND

(II) INCLUDE AT LEAST ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM:

1. THE LIFE SCIENCES INDUSTRY; AND

2. THE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY.

(4) The members appointed shall reflect the racial and gender diversity of
the population of the State.

(b) The appointed members of the Commission shall have substantial interest or
experience in business or knowledge of business and economic development.

(c) The Commission and its members are subject to the Maryland Public Ethics
Law.

(d) (1) The term of an appointed member is 3 years.

(2) At the end of a term, an appointed member continues to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualifies.

(3) A member appointed after a term has begun serves only for the
remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

(4) The terms of the appointed members are staggered as required by the
terms provided for members of the Commission on October 1, 2008.

(5) A member may be removed by the Governor with or without cause.

2.5–206.

(a) The Commission may:

(1) adopt bylaws for the conduct of its business;

(2) hire consultants; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 71 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) do anything necessary or convenient to carry out its powers and the
purposes of this subtitle.

(b) The Commission shall:

(1) develop and update an economic development strategic plan for the
State;

(2) seek ideas and advice from each region of the State to develop the
economic development strategic plan;

[(3) incorporate into the economic development strategic plan the Maryland
Port Administration strategic plan developed for the Helen Delich Bentley Port of
Baltimore;]

[(4)] (3) recommend to the Governor and the Secretary the program and
spending priorities needed to implement the economic development strategic plan;

[(5)] (4) review the allocation of financing incentives;

[(6)] (5) participate in encouraging new businesses to locate in the State;

[(7) seek contributions from the private sector to supplement economic
development programs and financial incentives to business;]

[(8)] (6) conduct periodic reviews of the economic development activities
of the Department, the Maryland Economic Development Corporation, the Maryland
Technology Development Corporation, and the Maryland Public–Private Partnership
Marketing Corporation for compliance with the economic development strategic plan;

[(9)] (7) make recommendations to the Governor and the Secretary to
improve economic development activities that fail to achieve economic development
strategic goals or are inconsistent with priorities under the economic development strategic
plan; and

[(10)] (8) carry out other economic development activities that the
Governor or the Secretary requests.

[(c) The Commission may spend money raised under subsection (b) of this section
only in accordance with the State budget.

(d) Departmental regulations that pertain to financing programs shall be
approved by the Commission before adoption.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 71

(e) The Department may not submit a budget request before the Commission
reviews the request.]

3–301.

In this subtitle, “Office” means the Office of International Trade.

[3–309.

The Office shall report at least twice each year to the Maryland Economic
Development Commission on the status of the State’s international activities.]

4–201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Board” means the Maryland Tourism Development Board.

4–211.

The Board shall[:

(1)] draft and implement a 5–year strategic plan for the promotion and
development of tourism in the State[; and

(2) submit the strategic plan to the Maryland Economic Development
Commission for its review].

4–212.

(a) The Board shall[:

(1)] draft and implement an annual marketing plan consistent with the
strategic plan developed under § 4–211 of this subtitle[; and

(2) submit the marketing plan to the Maryland Economic Development
Commission for its review].

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5