START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 222 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 222 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board of Environmental Health Specialists – Quorum, Examination, and 
Apprenticeships 
 
   
This departmental bill (1) authorizes applicants seeking licensure as an environmental 
health specialist (EHS) to complete an approved “apprenticeship” instead of an 
environmental health specialist-in-training (EHSIT) program; (2) clarifies that an EHSIT 
participating in an EHSIT program or an individual participating in an apprenticeship are 
exempt from the licensure requirement; (3) authorizes the State Board of Environmental 
Health Specialists (BEHS) to approve an examination provider to administer the licensure 
examination; and (4) clarifies what represents a quorum for BEHS. The board must adopt 
regulations that include the requirements for board approval of an apprenticeship and the 
minimum and maximum duration of an apprenticeship.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements, including adopting regulations, can be handled with 
existing budgeted resources. To the extent the number of EHS licenses issued increases 
under the bill, BEHS special fund revenues increase by an indeterminate amount beginning 
as early as FY 2025, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does is not anticipated to materially affect local government 
operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 222/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Under current law, with specified exceptions, an individual 
must be licensed by BEHS before the individual may practice as an EHS in the State. An 
EHSIT is exempt from the licensure requirement.  
 
The bill specifies that an individual may practice as an EHS if they are an EHSIT 
participating in an EHSIT program or an individual participating in an apprenticeship. The 
bill defines “apprenticeship” as a program of training and experience under the supervision 
of a licensed EHS that is part of the requirements for a board-approved bachelor’s degree 
from an accredited college or university. 
 
Educational and Experience Requirements 
 
Chapters 318 and 319 of 2023 altered the educational and experience requirements for 
applicants seeking licensure as an EHS. Two possible combinations of education and 
experience can lead to licensure as an EHS.  
 
Option 1: 
Training:  12 months in an EHSIT program, and  
Education:  a bachelor’s degree that includes (1) 30 semester credit hours or equivalent 
quarter credit hours of chemical, physical, biological, or environmental sciences acceptable 
to BEHS; (2) a course in mathematics; and (3) laboratory coursework as required in 
regulations adopted by BEHS. 
 
Option 2:  
Training:  a 3-month internship approved by BEHS, and 
Education:  a master’s degree in public or environmental health science that includes 
(1) 30 semester credit hours or 45 quarter credit hours of chemical, physical, biological, or 
environmental sciences – obtained at the baccalaureate or master’s level – including 
laboratory coursework as required in regulations adopted by BEHS and (2) a course in 
mathematics. 
 
For Option 1, the bill authorizes an individual to train for 12 months in an EHSIT program 
or complete a board-approved apprenticeship.  
 
Licensing Examination 
 
Under current law, BEHS must give an examination to applicants at least once a year and 
notify all qualified applicants of the time and place an examination is to be held. The bill 
authorizes BEHS to approve an examination provider to administer the required 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 222/ Page 3 
examination, under which circumstance the board must notify each qualified applicant of 
the registration procedure.  
 
State Board of Environmental Health Specialists Quorum 
 
BEHS comprises nine members appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Secretary 
of Health, and the advice and consent of the Senate. Of the nine members, seven must be 
licensed EHS and two must be consumer members. Under current law, a majority of the 
board is a quorum. The bill clarifies that a majority of appointed members of the board is 
a quorum to do businesses.  
 
Background:  MDH advises that authorization of an apprenticeship program as a means 
to gain experience for EHS licensure will help BEHS recruit qualified applicants and may 
allow potential applicants to complete education requirements while practicing under the 
supervision of a licensed EHS. MDH further advises that efforts to create a template for an 
approved apprenticeship program are underway. According to the Maryland Association 
of County Health Officers, an apprenticeship program would improve the pipeline for 
licensed EHSs and address the critical workforce shortage, especially at local health 
departments.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  To the extent the number of EHS licenses issued by BEHS increases 
under the bill, BEHS special fund revenues increase to reflect additional applicable 
licensure fees beginning as early as fiscal 2025. Any such increase is indeterminate but is 
anticipated to be minimal.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 26, 2024 
Third Reader - February 13, 2024 
 
js/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 222/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
State Board of Environmental Health Specialists – Quorum, 
Examination, and Apprenticeships 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
 
PREPARED BY: 
 
SB 222 
 
Linda Beyer 
 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions/State Board of 
Environmental Health Specialists 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
 
OR 
 
 WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 4