START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 292 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 292 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Secretary of 
State) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Government - Deputy Secretary of State - Title 
 
 
This departmental bill renames the title of Assistant Secretary of State to Deputy Secretary 
of State. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is technical in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Secretary of State has determined that this bill has minimal 
or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
The Secretary of State – Generally 
 
The Secretary of State is responsible for a variety of executive functions, including 
attesting to the Governor’s signature on public documents such as executive orders, 
extraditions, and pardons, and certifying candidates for nomination to appear on the 
presidential primary ballot. Other duties include administering the State’s notary public 
laws and processing notary commissions, regulating charitable organizations, 
administering the Address Confidentiality Program, publishing administrative regulations 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 292/ Page 2 
in the Maryland Register and the Code of Maryland Regulations, and overseeing specified 
responsibilities delegated by the Governor. The Office of the Secretary of State advises 
that the title “Deputy Secretary of State” has been used for many years, so the bill is 
conforming statute to current practice. 
 
Specified Provisions Regarding the Assistant Secretary of State 
 
Suspension and Termination of Special Police Officer Commissions:  Under the Public 
Safety Article, the Governor may appoint and deputize an individual as a special police 
officer. Such a commission includes arrest powers, but the scope of each commission is 
limited to the property cited in the commission. The Governor may also suspend or 
terminate a commission, as specified. Among other things, the Governor may delegate the 
power to suspend or terminate a commission to the Secretary of State, the Assistant 
Secretary of State, or both. 
 
Appointment of an Assistant Secretary of State:  The Governor may appoint an Assistant 
Secretary of State. If the Secretary of State is absent from the seat of the State government 
or ill, the Assistant Secretary of State may carry out any duty that is imposed by law on the 
secretary. 
 
Denial, Revocation, and Suspension of Commissions for Notaries Public:  Generally, the 
Governor may deny, refuse to renew, revoke, suspend, or impose conditions on a 
commission as a notary public for any act or omission that demonstrates the individual 
lacks the honesty, integrity, competence, or reliability to act as a notary, as specified. In 
addition, the Governor may delegate to the Secretary of State or the Assistant Secretary of 
State the authority to take specified actions regarding the sanction of a notary public. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - January 31, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 292/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Government - Deputy Secretary of State - Title 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0292 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Lore 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
N/A 
 

END OF PAGE 3