START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 258 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 258 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - General 
Services) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of General Services - State Buildings and Facilities - Energy 
Conservation and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions 
 
 
This departmental bill codifies and implements the provisions of the Governor’s 
Executive Order 01.01.2023.07, which requires that the State reduce energy consumption 
in State-owned buildings by 20% by 2031 compared with a fiscal 2018 baseline. It also 
repeals obsolete statutory language related to a rescinded executive order. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill codifies an existing executive order, any financial costs or benefits 
associated with implementing the bill’s requirements are attributable to the executive order, 
not the bill, as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of General Services (DGS) has determined that 
this bill has a meaningful impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) disagrees with this assessment, as discussed below.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 289 of 2020 codified Executive Order 
01.01.2019.08, which required that the State reduce energy consumption in State-owned 
buildings by 10% by 2029 compared with a fiscal 2018 baseline. Executive Order 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 258/ Page 2 
01.01.2023.07 rescinds the 2019 executive order and instead requires that the State reduce 
energy consumption in State-owned buildings by 20% by 2031, compared with the 
fiscal 2018 baseline. In addition, the bill repeals statutory language that implemented the 
2019 executive order and instead codifies provisions from the 2023 executive order that 
implement the new goal. 
 
Implementation of the Executive Order 
 
The bill mirrors the requirements of Executive Order 01.01.2023.07, including the 
following provisions: 
 
 
the Maryland Green Building Council (MGBC) must update the High-Performance 
Green Building Program to ensure that all new buildings and major renovations 
align with the State’s goal to achieve net zero greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 
2045;  
 
DGS must identify potential candidates for energy savings performance contracts 
(EPCs) at State-owned facilities, and agencies must provide on-site support to DGS; 
 
annually, DGS must analyze all State-owned buildings to identify the buildings with 
the highest energy use per square foot and the greatest GHG emissions; 
 
annually, DGS must conduct an energy and GHG emissions audit of at least 
2 million square feet of State-owned buildings; 
 
the audits must include best practices and identify low-cost measures for increasing 
energy efficiency and reducing GHG emissions; 
 
State agencies that receive energy audits must implement the identified measures to 
the fullest extent practicable; 
 
for one year following implementation, DGS must monitor each agency’s energy 
use and GHG emissions, track changes resulting from the measures, and calculate 
any energy cost savings; 
 
reductions in energy consumption and GHG emissions resulting from energy-saving 
initiatives must be recorded in a Comprehensive Utility Records Management 
Database; 
 
each unit of State government must, each month or by request, provide DGS with 
access to available data about its facility and copies of the unit’s utility bills;  
 
DGS must gather the data and information necessary to fully populate, update, and 
maintain the database; 
 
all units of State government must, in support of their core missions, implement 
projects and initiatives to conserve energy and reduce their GHG emissions; and 
 
provisions promoting the State’s energy efficiency GHG emissions goals must be 
included in requests for proposals for space to be leased to the State that would 
obligate the State to pay utility bills for the leased space. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 258/ Page 3 
Likewise, the bill includes a related reporting requirement for DGS. 
 
Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022 
 
The Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022 (Chapter 38 of 2022) explicitly requires the State 
to reduce statewide GHG emissions by 60% from 2006 levels by 2031. The bill also 
explicitly requires the State to achieve net-zero statewide GHG emissions by 2045. 
 
High-performance Buildings  
  
Chapter 124 of 2008 requires most new or renovated State buildings to be constructed as 
high-performance buildings, subject to waiver processes established by the Department of 
Budget and Management (DBM) and DGS. 
 
Chapter 124 defines a high-performance building as one that:   
 
 
meets or exceeds the U.S. Green Building Council Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) certification criteria for a silver rating; 
 
achieves a comparable numeric rating according to a nationally recognized, 
accepted, and appropriate standard approved by DBM and DGS; or 
 
complies with a nationally recognized and accepted green building code, guideline, 
or standard reviewed and recommended by MGBC and approved by DBM and 
DGS. 
 
Based on a unanimous recommendation from MGBC, in 2017, DGS and DBM approved 
the use of the Green Globes rating system developed by the Green Building Initiative as an 
alternative to LEED silver. 
 
Only new or renovated State buildings that are at least 7,500 square feet and are built or 
renovated entirely with State funds are subject to the high-performance requirement. 
Additionally, building renovations must include the replacement of heating, ventilation, 
air conditioning, electrical, and plumbing systems and must retain the building shell. 
Unoccupied buildings are exempt from the high-performance mandate, including 
warehouses, garages, maintenance facilities, transmitter buildings, and pumping stations. 
Also, community college capital projects must be constructed or renovated as 
high-performance buildings. 
 
Background:  The State has already achieved energy savings of 13% compared with the 
fiscal 2018 baseline due to ongoing efforts to upgrade building systems using EPCs in 
accordance with current law.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 258/ Page 4 
DGS’s Energy Office purchases energy for all State agencies and is funded entirely with 
reimbursable funds. To support the office’s operations, agencies pay a per-kilowatt fee to 
the office, which represents a fraction of the savings in energy costs that they have realized 
due to the office’s energy purchases. As a result, the office no longer charges fees for other 
services it provides, including management of EPCs for State agencies.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DGS advises that it requires 6.5 additional full-time equivalent (FTE) 
staff to implement the bill; DLS notes that the need for additional staff stems from the 
Governor’s executive order, not the bill. As the bill only codifies the executive order, any 
costs associated with its implementation are attributable to the executive order, not the bill.  
 
More specifically, DGS advises that it requires one additional staff person to manage the 
likely increase in the number of EPCs it initiates and manages to meet the higher goal. It 
anticipates being able to enter into two additional EPCs annually for several years to help 
further reduce the State’s energy costs. The cost of that position is likely covered by the 
office’s fee. 
 
In addition, DGS advises it requires additional architects and project managers (5.5 FTE 
positions) to design and oversee new decarbonization/electrification projects to reduce 
GHG emissions in accordance with the Climate Solutions Act. The increased energy 
purchasing fees paid by State agencies to the Energy Office are sufficient to enable the 
office to carry out the bill’s requirements. These positions will also help monitor whether 
buildings are complying with the net-zero emissions goal established in the Act. 
 
The Comprehensive Utility Records Management Database required by the bill has already 
been developed and is in operation. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DGS advises that the increase in EPCs and decarbonization 
projects likely results in more contracting opportunities for small businesses that specialize 
in energy efficiency projects. As with State costs, any benefits for small businesses are 
attributable to the executive order, not the bill.          
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 130 (Chair, Environment and Transportation Committee)(By 
Request - Departmental - General Services) - Environment and Transportation. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 258/ Page 5 
Information Source(s):  Department of Information Technology; Maryland Department 
of Aging; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Maryland State Department of Education; University System of Maryland; Maryland 
Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Department of Human 
Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland 
Department of Planning; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Veterans Affairs; Department of Service and Civic Innovation; Maryland Energy 
Administration; Maryland Insurance Administration; State Retirement Agency; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 258/ Page 6 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
Potentially provides opportunities for small construction businesses as buildings are updated to 
increase their energy efficiency. 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Department of General Services - State Buildings and Facilities - Energy 
Conservation and Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions 
 
BILL NUMBER:  
SB 258 
 
PREPARED BY:  
David St. Jean, Office of Energy and Sustainability 
 
 
 
Department of General Services  
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
____    WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
__X_  WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Increasing the energy savings goal for 110 million square feet of State buildings from 10% to 
20% will require buildings to undergo construction and renovation projects to reduce their 
energy use. Trades such as HVAC mechanics, plumbers, insulation contractors, glazing 
installers, roofers and electricians could all benefit from these projects. 
 

END OF PAGE 6