START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 396

Chapter 396

(Senate Bill 261)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Barbers – Sunset Extension and Report

FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board of Barbers in accordance with the provisions
of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law) by extending to a certain date
the termination provisions relating to the statutory and regulatory authority of the
Board; requiring the Maryland Department of Labor to submit a certain report to
the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee on or before a certain date; and generally
relating to the State Board of Barbers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 4–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 4–702
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

4–201.

There is a State Board of Barbers in the Department.

4–702.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
be of no effect after July 1, [2024] 2034 2027.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, 2025, the
Maryland Department of Labor shall submit a report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee with information regarding the State Board of Barbers as determined by the
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 396 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2