START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 273 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 273 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Public Safety and Correctional Services) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
State and Local Correctional Facilities - Operation of Unmanned Aircraft - 
Image Recording and Delivery of Contraband 
 
 
This departmental bill prohibits a person from intentionally operating an “unmanned 
aircraft” (UA) over a correctional facility for the purpose of photographing or recording 
images of the correctional facility through the use of the UA unless authorized by the 
managing official of the correctional facility or the Secretary of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services. The bill also prohibits a person from using a UA to deliver any 
contraband to a person detained or confined in a place of confinement. A violator of either 
of these prohibitions is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum penalties of 
imprisonment for three years and/or a $1,000 fine. A correctional facility must post signage 
warning of the bill’s provisions on the exterior of the property in an area visible to the 
public. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential minimal increase in general fund revenues and expenditures due to 
the bill’s penalty provisions.  
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in revenues and expenditures due to the bill’s 
penalty provisions.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The 
attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 273/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Unmanned Aircraft:  Chapter 164 of 2015 established that only the State may enact a law 
or take other official action to restrict, prohibit, or otherwise regulate the testing or 
operation of UAs. The authority of a county or municipality to prohibit, restrict, or 
otherwise regulate the testing or operation of UAs is preempted by this law, and any prior 
enacted local laws are superseded. 
 
Contraband:  A person may not (1) deliver any contraband to a person detained or confined 
in a place of confinement; (2) possess any contraband with intent to deliver it to a person 
detained or confined in a place of confinement; or (3) knowingly possess contraband in a 
place of confinement. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to maximum 
penalties of imprisonment for three years and/or a fine of $1,000. A sentence imposed for 
a contraband offense may be imposed as consecutive to or concurrent with a sentence for 
any crime based on the act establishing the offense.  
 
Place of Confinement:  “Place of confinement” means (1) a correctional facility; (2) a 
facility of the Maryland Department of Health; (3) a detention center or facility for 
juveniles, as specified; (4) a place identified in a juvenile community detention order; or 
(5) any other facility in which a person is confined under color of law. “Place of 
confinement” does not include a place identified in a home detention order or agreement. 
 
Background:  Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), or drones, have become increasingly 
popular. UAVs come in various sizes, ranging from the size of an insect (nanodrones or 
micro-UAVs) to the size of a jetliner. Drones are operated by remote control with personnel 
on the ground and/or autonomous programming. The entire system required to operate a 
drone – the personnel, the programming or digital network, and the aircraft – is referred to 
as an unmanned aerial system. 
 
DPSCS advises that individuals are increasingly using UAVs to deliver contraband (such 
as cell phones, controlled dangerous substances, and weapons) into correctional facilities, 
which places the incarcerated population and correctional officers at heightened risk. 
 
The Federal Aviation Administration adopted regulations in 2018 prohibiting the operation 
of UAVs within 400 feet of 20 federal Bureau of Prisons facilities. DPSCS advises that 
while it can prohibit the use of UAVs above State correctional facilities through policy, 
there is no statute specifically prohibiting the activity and, therefore, no associated criminal 
penalty.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 273/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 702 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Garrett, and Howard 
counties; Maryland State Commission on Criminal Sentencing Policy; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the Public Defender; Maryland State’s 
Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 1, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 273/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT OF SMALL BUSINESS 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State and Local Correctional Facilities - Operation of Unmanned Aircraft - 
Image Recording and Delivery of Contraband 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 273 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Jennifer Beskid 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The bill seeks to clean up existing language within the Public Safety Article deleting outdated 
language and clarifying existing language.  There will be no economic 
impact as a result of the changes to the language.  
 

END OF PAGE 4