START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 297 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 297 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board for Professional Engineers - Engineer Members - Qualifications 
 
 
This departmental bill reduces the number of years (from 12 to 10) that an engineer member 
of the State Board of Professional Engineers must have practiced engineering. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Altering the qualifications of board members does not affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Professional Engineers consists of 
eight members (six engineers and two consumer members). Among other specified 
requirements, each engineer member of the board must have (1) practiced engineering for 
at least 12 years and (2) been in responsible charge of important engineering work for at 
least 5 years. 
 
MDL advises that the current 12-year requirement could be considered a barrier to allowing 
younger individuals to serve on the board. By allowing earlier-career professionals to 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 297/ Page 2 
qualify for service on the board, the pool of qualified candidates could expand, thus 
resulting in greater racial, ethnic, and/or gender diversity on the board. 
 
Furthermore, MDL notes that the modification will bring the board into closer alignment 
with recent requirements established by the National Council of Examiners for Engineering 
and Surveying (the national organization that develops and scores the exams for 
professional engineers and surveyors). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; National Council of Examiners 
for Engineering and Surveying; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 297/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Board for Professional Engineers - Engineer Members - 
Qualifications 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0297 
 
PREPARED BY:  Zevi Thomas 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 

END OF PAGE 3