START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 202 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 202 
(Senator Benson) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Department of Aging - Caregiver Expense Grant Program - Established 
 
 
This bill establishes a Caregiver Expense Grant Program within the Maryland Department 
of Aging (MDOA) to award grants for qualified expenses paid or incurred by an individual 
who provides care to a qualified family member and whose federal adjusted gross income 
does not exceed $75,000 ($150,000 if a joint tax filer). An eligible caregiver may apply for 
a grant equal to 30% of the amount of qualified expenses that exceeds $2,000, up to a 
maximum grant of $2,500 per fiscal year. The Governor may include an appropriation in 
the annual budget bill of up to $5.0 million for the program for any fiscal year. MDOA 
may adopt regulations to implement the bill’s provisions. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Assuming the program is funded at the contemplated level, general fund 
expenditures increase by $5.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
5.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 202/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Qualified expenses” means expenses paid or incurred by a caregiver for 
goods or services that relate directly to the care or support of a qualified family member. 
Qualified expenses include, for example, adult day care, specialized transportation, legal 
or financial services, or assistive care technology, among other things. A “qualified family 
member” is an individual who requires assistance with one or more daily living activities, 
as certified by a licensed physician, physician assistant, or registered nurse practitioner, 
and (1) is at least 60 years old or has Alzheimer’s Disease or a related disorder and is cared 
for by an adult relative or informal caregiver who is at least 18 years old or (2) is a child 
or an adult with developmental or functional disabilities and is cared for by a parent, 
grandparent, or other relative that is at least 55 years old. 
 
Current Law:  State law does not specifically provide for a direct grant program for 
expenses incurred by family and informal caregivers similar to the program contemplated 
by the bill. The State does offer a child and dependent care credit for taxpayers who claim 
the federal child and dependent care credit and meet specified eligibility requirements. A 
taxpayer may be eligible to claim the federal credit if the taxpayer paid expenses for the 
care of one or more qualifying individuals during the taxable year and the expenses were 
incurred to enable the taxpayer to work or look for employment. A qualifying individual 
may include a spouse, dependent, or other specified individual who is physically or 
mentally incapable of self-care and lived with the taxpayer for more than half of the year. 
 
For information regarding programs administered by MDOA and other programs serving 
aged and disabled individuals, see “Chapter 11. Human Services” of Volume II – 
Government Services in Maryland of the 2022 Legislative Handbook Series. 
 
State Expenditures:  As discussed above, the bill specifies that the Governor may include 
up to $5.0 million in the annual budget bill for the program. The fiscal 2025 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly does not include funding for the program; this fiscal and 
policy note assumes that funding is provided at the contemplated level beginning in 
fiscal 2026 and that such funding may be used to cover MDOA administrative expenses.  
 
Thus, general fund expenditures for MDOA increase by $5.0 million annually beginning 
in fiscal 2026 to provide grants and for related administrative expenses. As shown below, 
MDOA administrative expenses total approximately $181,000 in fiscal 2026, which 
reflects the cost of hiring a full-time, regular program manager and administrative officer 
and assumes a July 1, 2025 start date. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 202/ Page 3 
Positions 
2 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$165,562 
Grants 
4,819,364 
Other Operating Expenses 
     15,074 
Total FY 2026 State Expenditures 
$5,000,000 
 
Future year administrative expenses ($175,000 in fiscal 2027 and $191,000 in fiscal 2029) 
reflect annual salary increases and employee turnover as well as annual increases in 
ongoing operating expenses.  
 
To the extent the program is funded at a lower level, general fund expenditures are less.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Aging; Comptroller’s Office; Internal 
Revenue Service; American Association of Retired Persons; National Alliance for 
Caregiving; Moody’s Analytics; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3