START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 236 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 236 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Acupuncture Board – Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Acupuncture Board by 
five years to July 1, 2030, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2030.  
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Chapter 620 of 1994 created the State Acupuncture Board. 
The board (1) licenses acupuncturists, registers auricular detoxification specialists (ADS), 
and issues certificates to practice acupuncture on animals; (2) receives and resolves 
complaints regarding acupuncturists; and (3) sets standards for the practice of acupuncture. 
The board’s mission is to protect the public through the licensure and regulation of 
acupuncturists; ensuring that those seeking licensure and those continuing to practice 
acupuncture and East Asian medicine in Maryland meet State standards, and investigating 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 236/ Page 2 
complaints when a violation is alleged. As of September 2023, the board regulated 
1,213 active acupuncturists and 32 active ADS. 
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025. OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2024 
Third Reader - January 31, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 236/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
State Acupuncture Board – Sunset Extension 
BILL NUMBER: SB0236 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions/Acupuncture Board 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 3