START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 283 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 283 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Homeowners' Property Tax Credit - Application - Attestation of Gross Income 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes an applicant for the homeowners’ property tax credit to 
attest to gross income on an application in lieu of providing an income tax return to the 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) under certain circumstances. The 
bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill will not significantly impact SDAT operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The homeowners’ property tax credit program is a State-funded program 
that provides credits against State and local real property taxation for homeowners who 
qualify based on a sliding scale of property tax liability and income. Counties and 
municipalities have the authority to enact local supplements to the program; the cost of 
such supplemental credits must be borne by the local governments. The fiscal 2024 State 
budget includes $56.5 million in funding for the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 283/ Page 2 
Generally, homeowners must apply to SDAT each year in order to be eligible for the 
property tax credit. The application is available on the department’s website; current 
applications may be filed through October 1, 2024. 
 
Chapters 528 and 529 of 2023 altered the application requirements for the homeowners’ 
property tax credit program for individuals who receive income only from social security, 
a pension, or an annuity. In these situations, the homeowner must submit a regular 
application in the first year that the individual applies for the property tax credit and a more 
abbreviated certification for the next two years. In the following third year, the homeowner 
will once again have to submit a regular application in order to remain eligible for the 
property tax credit. 
 
Approximately 45,000 individuals receive the property tax credit each year. 
 
Background:  SDAT reports that homeowners with income below the amount requiring 
them to file an income tax return have a difficult time documenting their income in order to 
qualify for the homeowners’ property tax credit. The department requires a detailed 
accounting of all the applicant’s income and expenses and reviews bank statements and other 
supporting documents to determine income amounts and eligibility. This process can require 
additional time and multiple attempts by the applicant to fulfill current requirements. 
 
The bill would allow applicants to submit a statement signed under penalties of perjury as 
to their income, provided they were not required by law to submit a tax return and did not 
file a tax return. Under the bill, the signed attestation would satisfy income documentation 
requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - February 21, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 283/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit - Application - Attestation of 
Gross Income 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0283 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Bob Yeager 
  
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 3