START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

Chapter 263

(Senate Bill 205)

AN ACT concerning

University System of Maryland – Board of Regents – Membership

FOR the purpose of requiring that certain appointing officials in making appointments to
the Board of Regents of the University System of Maryland ensure that one member
of the Board is a graduate of a historically Black college or university in the ~~State~~
University System of Maryland; and generally relating to the membership of the
Board of Regents of the University System of Maryland.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Education
Section 12–102(b) and (e)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 12–102(c) and (d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

12–102.

(b) The government of the University System of Maryland is vested in the Board
of Regents of the University System of Maryland.

(c) The Board of Regents consists of 21 members as follows:

(1) (i) Except as provided in item (ii) of this item, two members shall be
full–time students in good academic standing at an institution under the jurisdiction of the
Board; and

(ii) A student member who is in good academic standing at the
University of Maryland Global Campus shall be exempt from the full–time student
requirement in item (i) of this item;

(2) One member shall be the Secretary of Agriculture ex officio;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 263 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) One member shall be the Secretary of Commerce ex officio;

(4) One member shall be appointed by the President of the Senate;

(5) One member shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House; and

(6) The remaining members of the Board shall [be]:

(I) BE residents of the State[, shall be];

(II) BE appointed from the general public[, and shall include]; AND

(III) INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING INDIVIDUALS:

[(i)] 1. One individual with a background in higher education
administration;

[(ii)] 2. One individual with a background in finance; and

[(iii)] 3. One individual with a background in diversity and
workplace inclusion.

(d) In making appointments to the Board, the Governor, the President of the
Senate, and the Speaker of the House shall [consider]:

(1) ENSURE THAT ONE MEMBER OF THE BOARD IS A GRADUATE OF A
HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY IN THE STATE UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM OF MARYLAND; AND

(2) CONSIDER representation from all parts of the State.

(e) (1) Each member of the Board appointed under subsection (c)(1) and (6) of
this section shall be appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate.

(2) After the 40th day, and before the 80th day, from the commencement of
each regular session of the General Assembly, the Senate shall consider each year’s
appointees to the Board collectively to ensure adequate balance of membership.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and applies only after the next vacancy occurs on the Board of
Regents of the University System of Maryland after the effective date of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 263

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3