START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 252 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 252 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland 
Emergency Management Agency) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Public Safety - 9-1-1 Trust Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This emergency departmental bill clarifies that money collected from the State 9-1-1 fee 
may not be used to pay the salaries of public safety answering point (PSAP) personnel or 
county personnel, while money collected from the local 9-1-1 fee may be used for those 
purposes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying in nature and conforms statute to current practice. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is clarifying in nature and conforms statute to current 
practice. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM) 
has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The 
Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland’s 9-1-1 System and the Maryland 9-1-1 Board 
 
The State’s 9-1-1 system operates primarily through PSAPs, which are generally owned 
and operated by local governments. 9-1-1 specialists working within PSAPs answer, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 252/ Page 2 
redirect, and take action on 9-1-1 calls received based on the location of the originating  
9-1-1 call. State and local governments are preparing for “next generation” 
9-1-1 technology that will allow PSAPs to access not only more accurate information about 
caller location but also other information that will assist emergency personnel in 
communicating with callers and responding more efficiently. Legislation has been enacted 
in recent years to, among other things:   
 
 
transfer the Maryland 9-1-1 Board that is responsible for administering the 
9-1-1 Trust Fund and overseeing the State’s 9-1-1 system from the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services to MDEM; 
 
expand the uses of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to include providing funding for 
9-1-1 specialist training activities; and 
 
increase funding for the State’s 9-1-1 system. 
 
The Maryland 9-1-1 Board’s other responsibilities include (1) dispersing funds to local 
governments from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund for authorized costs; (2) reviewing and approving 
or disapproving requests for reimbursement of the costs of enhancing 9-1-1 systems; 
(3) ensuring the inspection of PSAPs; (4) auditing counties to ensure that 9-1-1 Trust Funds 
are being used for authorized purposes; (5) establishing training standards for PSAP 
personnel based on national best practices and related to Next Generation 9-1-1; and 
(6) consulting with MCC to establish cybersecurity standards for PSAPs. 
 
9-1-1 Trust Fund – State and Local Fees 
 
The 9-1-1 Trust Fund is funded through a State 9-1-1 fee and county 9-1-1 fee. Telephone 
companies, wireless carriers, and other 9-1-1 accessible service providers collect and remit 
the fees monthly to the Comptroller for deposit into the fund. The State 9-1-1 fee is 
distributed to counties at the discretion of the Maryland 9-1-1 Board in response to county 
9-1-1 system enhancement requests. The county fee, the prepaid wireless 9-1-1 fee 
remittances, and any investment earnings of the fund are all distributed quarterly to each 
county in prorated amounts according to the level of fees collected in each jurisdiction. 
 
Directly related to the bill, included in the stated purpose of the 9-1-1 Trust Fund is a 
prohibition against using the 9-1-1 Trust Fund to pay the salary of PSAP personnel or 
county personnel, as discussed in the following section. 
 
Background:  MDEM advises that the aforementioned prohibition against using the 
9-1-1 Trust Fund to pay the salary of PSAP personnel or county personnel has historically 
been interpreted to apply only to funding from the State 9-1-1 fee and not funding the  
local 9-1-1 fee (which also accrues to and is disbursed from the 9-1-1 Trust Fund). 
However, MDEM has recently received questions from some counties related to this 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 252/ Page 3 
prohibition and advises that the bill is necessary to add clarity and avoid similar questions 
and confusion about the use of local 9-1-1 fee revenues in the future. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; 
Comptroller’s Office; Maryland Association of Counties; Kent, Washington, and 
Worcester counties; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - February 13, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 252/ Page 4 
Analysis of Economic Impact on Small Businesses 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Public Safety – 9-1-1 Trust Fund – Alterations 
BILL NUMBER: SB0252 
PREPARED BY: Anna Sierra, MDEM 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
OR 
 
___ WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
This bill proposes a technical fix to 9-1-1 Trust Fund statute to reflect current practice 
and will not alter fee collection or distribution methods. 
 

END OF PAGE 4