START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 161

Chapter 161

(Senate Bill 202)

AN ACT concerning

~~Income~~ ~~Tax~~ Department of Aging – Caregiver ~~Tax~~ ~~Credit~~ Expense Grant
Program – Established

FOR the purpose of ~~allowing~~ ~~certain~~ ~~caregivers~~ ~~a~~ ~~credit~~ ~~against~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~income~~ ~~tax~~
establishing the Caregiver Expense Grant Program in the Department of Aging to
award grants to certain caregivers for certain qualified expenses paid or incurred
~~during~~ ~~a~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~year~~ by the caregivers to provide care or support to certain qualified
family members; and generally relating to ~~an~~ ~~income~~ ~~tax~~ ~~credit~~ ~~for~~ ~~caregivers~~ the
Caregiver Expense Grant Program.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~10–758~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 10–1202
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ Human Services

~~10–758.~~ 10–1202.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CAREGIVER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL WHO PROVIDES CARE OR
SUPPORT TO A QUALIFIED FAMILY MEMBER.

(3) “LICENSED PHYSICIAN” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 14–101
OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE.

(4) “PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 15–101
OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 161 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE CAREGIVER EXPENSE GRANT
PROGRAM.

(6) (I) “QUALIFIED EXPENSES” MEANS EXPENSES PAID OR
INCURRED BY A CAREGIVER FOR GOODS OR SERVICES THAT RELATE DIRECTLY TO
THE CARE OR SUPPORT OF A QUALIFIED FAMILY MEMBER, INCLUDING:

1. THE IMPROVEMENT OR ALTERATION OF THE
CAREGIVER’S PRIMARY RESIDENCE TO ENABLE OR ASSIST THE QUALIFIED FAMILY
MEMBER TO BE MOBILE, SAFE, OR INDEPENDENT;

2. THE PURCHASE OR LEASE OF EQUIPMENT TO ENABLE
OR ASSIST THE QUALIFIED FAMILY MEMBER TO CARRY OUT ONE OR MORE
DAY–TO–DAY ACTIVITIES;

3. EMPLOYING A HOME CARE AIDE OR PERSONAL CARE
ATTENDANT; OR

4. THE COSTS FOR:

A. ADULT DAY CARE;

B. SPECIALIZED TRANSPORTATION;

C. LEGAL OR FINANCIAL SERVICES; OR

D. ASSISTIVE CARE TECHNOLOGY.

(II) “QUALIFIED EXPENSES” DOES NOT INCLUDE:

1. UNSPECIALIZED FOOD, CLOTHING, OR
TRANSPORTATION EXPENSES;

2. ORDINARY HOUSEHOLD MAINTENANCE OR REPAIR
EXPENSES THAT ARE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO OR NECESSARY FOR THE CARE OF
THE QUALIFIED FAMILY MEMBER; OR

3. ANY AMOUNT THAT IS PAID OR REIMBURSED:

A. UNDER AN INSURANCE POLICY;

B. BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 161

C. BY THE STATE; OR

D. BY A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE.

(6) (7) “QUALIFIED FAMILY MEMBER” MEANS AN INDIVIDUAL
WHO:

(I) IS AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD ON THE LAST DAY OF THE
~~TAXABLE~~ ~~YEAR~~ ~~IN~~ ~~WHICH~~ ~~DAY~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~QUALIFIED~~ ~~EXPENSES~~ ~~WERE~~ ~~PAID~~ ~~OR~~
INCURRED BY THE CAREGIVER;

(II) (I) REQUIRES ASSISTANCE WITH ONE OR MORE DAILY
LIVING ACTIVITIES, AS CERTIFIED BY A LICENSED PHYSICIAN, PHYSICIAN
ASSISTANT, OR REGISTERED NURSE PRACTITIONER; AND

(III) IS AN IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER OF THE CAREGIVER.

(II) 1. IS AT LEAST 60 YEARS OLD AND IS CARED FOR BY AN
ADULT RELATIVE OR INFORMAL CAREGIVER WHO IS AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD;

2. HAS ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE OR A RELATED DISORDER
AND IS CARED FOR BY AN ADULT RELATIVE OR INFORMAL CAREGIVER WHO IS AT
LEAST 18 YEARS OLD; OR

3. IS A CHILD OR AN ADULT WITH DEVELOPMENTAL OR
FUNCTIONAL DISABILITIES AND IS CARED FOR BY A PARENT, GRANDPARENT, OR
OTHER RELATIVE THAT IS AT LEAST 55 YEARS OLD.

(7) (8) “REGISTERED NURSE PRACTITIONER” HAS THE MEANING
STATED IN § 8–101 OF THE HEALTH OCCUPATIONS ARTICLE.

(B) THERE IS A CAREGIVER EXPENSE GRANT PROGRAM IN THE
DEPARTMENT.

(C) SUBJECT TO THE LIMITATIONS OF THIS SECTION, A CAREGIVER THE
DEPARTMENT MAY CLAIM A CREDIT AGAINST THE STATE INCOME TAX IN THE
AMOUNT DETERMINED UNDER SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION AWARD A GRANT
TO A CAREGIVER FOR QUALIFIED EXPENSES PAID OR INCURRED ~~DURING~~ ~~THE~~
TAXABLE YEAR BY THE CAREGIVER IF THE CAREGIVER’S FEDERAL ADJUSTED GROSS
INCOME DOES NOT EXCEED:

(1) $75,000 IF THE CAREGIVER IS FILING AN INDIVIDUAL TAX
RETURN; OR

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 161 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) $150,000 IF THE CAREGIVER IS FILING A JOINT TAX RETURN.

(C) (D) A CAREGIVER SHALL APPLY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM
IN THE FORM AND MANNER THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES.

(E) (1) SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE AMOUNT
OF THE TAX CREDIT GRANT ALLOWED UNDER SUBSECTION (B) (C) OF THIS SECTION
IS EQUAL TO 30% OF THE QUALIFIED EXPENSES PAID OR INCURRED DURING THE
TAXABLE YEAR BY THE CAREGIVER THAT EXCEED $2,000.

(2) FOR ANY TAXABLE FISCAL YEAR, THE AMOUNT OF THE TAX
CREDIT GRANT MAY NOT EXCEED $2,500. THE LESSER OF:

(I) $5,000; OR

(II) THE STATE INCOME TAX IMPOSED FOR THAT TAXABLE
~~YEAR.~~

(3) THE UNUSED AMOUNT OF THE CREDIT MAY NOT BE CARRIED
OVER TO ANY OTHER TAXABLE YEAR.

(D) (F) FOR ANY FISCAL YEAR, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF UP TO $5,000,000 TO THE PROGRAM.

(G) THE COMPTROLLER DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS TO
CARRY OUT THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SECTION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024, ~~and~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~applicable~~ ~~to~~ ~~all~~ ~~taxable~~ ~~years~~ ~~beginning~~ ~~after~~ ~~December~~ ~~31,~~ ~~2023.~~

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4