START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 219 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 219 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program – Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date of the Senior Prescription Drug 
Assistance Program (SPDAP) by six years through December 31, 2030. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  SPDAP revenues and expenditures are maintained through the first half of 
fiscal 2031. The Governor’s proposed fiscal 2025 budget includes $11.7 million for 
SPDAP. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Established under Chapters 281 and 282 of 2005 (as the 
successor to another program under the Maryland Health Insurance Plan), SPDAP provides 
financial assistance to moderate-income Maryland residents (household income at or below 
300% of federal poverty guidelines) who are eligible for Medicare and are enrolled in a 
Medicare Part D prescription drug plan. 
 
In calendar 2023, SPDAP provided a premium subsidy benefit of up to $60 per month to 
24,950 enrollees. The SPDAP subsidy covered 100% of the total Medicare Part D premium 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 219/ Page 2 
for 74% of enrollees. In calendar 2024, SPDAP will provide a premium subsidy benefit of 
up to $75 per month. 
 
SPDAP is supported by special funds from the CareFirst premium tax exemption under 
§ 14-106 of the Insurance Article. SPDAP is scheduled to terminate December 31, 2024. 
The bill allows SPDAP to continue providing enrollees with a premium subsidy benefit to 
assist in offsetting their Medicare Part D prescription drug premium costs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the past 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Insurance 
Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 28, 2024 
Third Reader - February 13, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 219/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE:  Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program – Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0219 
 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit):  Office of Innovation, Research and Development – Medical Care 
Programs Administration – Office of Health Care Financing 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X       WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
 
 
OR 
 
            WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
SPDAP provides subsidies to help low- and moderate-income Medicare beneficiaries pay 
their Medicare Part D prescription drug premium costs.  The Program does not have any 
impact on small businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 3