START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 79

Chapter 79

(Senate Bill 283)

AN ACT concerning

Homeowners’ Property Tax Credit – Application – Attestation of Gross Income

FOR the purpose of authorizing an applicant for the homeowners’ property tax credit to
attest to gross income on an application in lieu of providing an income tax return to
the State Department of Assessments and Taxation under certain circumstances;
and generally relating to the homeowners’ property tax credit.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Tax – Property
Section 9–104(l), (m), and (u)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Tax – Property

9–104.

(l) (1) On or before the February 15 that precedes the taxable year in which
the property tax credit under this section is sought, the Department shall make available
that year’s property tax credit application form.

(2) (I) Except as provided in subsections (m), (u), and (v) of this section,
on or before October 1 of the taxable year in which the property tax credit under this section
is sought, a homeowner may apply to the Department for a property tax credit under this
section.

(II) The application shall be made on the form that the Department
provides.

(3) (i) For good cause, the Department may accept an application after
October 1 but on or before October 31 of the taxable year.

(ii) The Department shall notify the homeowner in writing of its
acceptance or rejection of a late application.

(4) The homeowner shall state under oath that the facts in the application
are true.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 79 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) (I) [To] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, TO substantiate the application, the applicant may be required to provide a
copy of an income tax return, or other evidence detailing gross income or net worth.

(II) AN APPLICANT WHO IS REQUIRED TO SUBSTANTIATE AN
APPLICATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY, UNDER
PENALTIES OF PERJURY, ATTEST TO GROSS INCOME IN LIEU OF PROVIDING AN
INCOME TAX RETURN IF THE APPLICANT WAS NOT REQUIRED TO AND DID NOT FILE
AN INCOME TAX RETURN.

(m) (1) A home purchaser may apply to the Department for a property tax
credit under this section after the execution of a contract of sale on the dwelling or
settlement on the dwelling by filing an application on the form that the Department
provides.

(2) The home purchaser shall state under oath that the facts in the
application are true.

(3) (I) [To] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, TO substantiate the application, the Department may require the applicant
to provide a copy of an income tax return, or other evidence detailing gross income or net
worth.

(II) AN APPLICANT WHO IS REQUIRED TO SUBSTANTIATE AN
APPLICATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY, UNDER
PENALTIES OF PERJURY, ATTEST TO GROSS INCOME IN LIEU OF PROVIDING AN
INCOME TAX RETURN IF THE APPLICANT WAS NOT REQUIRED TO AND DID NOT FILE
AN INCOME TAX RETURN.

(4) If the home purchaser files an application for a credit under this section
prior to settlement, the purchaser must file this application within 7 working days after
the execution of a contract of sale.

(5) Upon receipt of an application prior to settlement, the Department:

(i) may further require the applicant to provide a copy of the
executed sale agreement;

(ii) shall determine the amount, if any, of the credit for which the
home purchaser is eligible under this section; and

(iii) shall notify the home purchaser in writing of its decision within
5 working days from receipt of the application.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 79

(6) The Department shall adopt regulations governing the application for
and granting of a credit before settlement as provided under this section.

(7) On certification by the Department, the Comptroller shall pay to the
home purchaser the property tax credit due under this section unless the credit was used
to adjust the home purchaser’s final tax liability paid at settlement under subsection (r) of
this section.

(u) (1) Under the conditions set forth in this subsection, the Department may
accept an application from a homeowner within:

(i) 1 year after April 15 of the taxable year for which the property
tax credit under this section is sought, if the homeowner:

1. is applying for the first time; or

2. has filed an application on or before October 1 in each of
the 3 taxable years immediately preceding the taxable year for which the credit is sought;
or

(ii) 3 years after April 15 of the taxable year for which a credit is
sought, if the homeowner:

1. is at least 70 years old as of the taxable year for which a
credit is sought; and

2. was eligible for the credit under this section for the taxable
year for which the credit is sought.

(2) A homeowner may apply to the Department for a property tax credit
under this section by filing an application on the form that the Department provides.

(3) The homeowner shall state under oath that the facts in the application
are true.

(4) (I) [To] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, TO substantiate the application, the Department may require the
homeowner to provide a copy of an income tax return, or other evidence detailing gross
income or net worth.

(II) A HOMEOWNER WHO IS REQUIRED TO SUBSTANTIATE AN
APPLICATION UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY, UNDER
PENALTIES OF PERJURY, ATTEST TO GROSS INCOME IN LIEU OF PROVIDING AN
INCOME TAX RETURN IF THE HOMEOWNER WAS NOT REQUIRED TO AND DID NOT FILE
AN INCOME TAX RETURN.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 79 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(5) On certification by the Department, the Comptroller shall pay to the
homeowner the property tax credit due under this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024, and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4