START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 96

Chapter 96

(Senate Bill 292)

AN ACT concerning

State Government – Deputy Secretary of State – Title

FOR the purpose of altering the title of the Assistant Secretary of State to be “Deputy
Secretary of State”; and generally relating to the title of the Deputy Secretary of
State.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 3–313(b)(2)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 7–102 and 18–104(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety
3–313.

(b) (2) The Governor may delegate the power to suspend or terminate a
commission to the Secretary of State, the [Assistant] DEPUTY Secretary of State, or both.

Article – State Government

7–102.

(a) The Governor may appoint [an Assistant] A DEPUTY Secretary of State.

(b) If the Secretary of State is absent from the seat of the State government or ill,
the [Assistant] DEPUTY Secretary may carry out any duty that is imposed by law on the
Secretary.

18–104.

(b) (1) The Governor may delegate to the Secretary of State or the [Assistant]

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 96 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

DEPUTY Secretary of State the authority to take an action under subsection (a) of this
section.

(2) Subject to subsection (c) of this section, the Secretary of State or
[Assistant] DEPUTY Secretary of State shall give the notary notice and an opportunity for
a hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this section, but is not required to submit a
recommendation to the Governor before acting under this subsection.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2