START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 264 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 264 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Cosmetologists - Sunset Extension and Report 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Cosmetologists 
within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by three years to July 1, 2027, subject 
to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
(MPEA). It also requires MDL to submit a report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation 
Committee (JAEC) by July 1, 2025, with information – regarding the State Board of 
Cosmetologists – to be determined by JAEC. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2027. MDL can likely prepare the required report with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Cosmetologists issues two full-service 
licenses (cosmetologist and senior cosmetologist) and four limited licenses (hairstylist, 
blow-drying, nail technician, and esthetician). A cosmetologist or senior cosmetologist 
license authorizes the licensee to provide hair, nail, and esthetic services. The other licenses 
authorize the licensee to provide just that service. The board also registers apprentices and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 264/ Page 2 
conducts health and safety inspections of salons. Applicants for licensure must pass a 
written and a practical examination and have successfully completed either a registered 
apprenticeship program or 1,500 hours of training at an approved cosmetology school. 
 
Effective July 1, 2018, Chapter 256 of 2017 established the State Barbers and 
Cosmetologists Boards’ Fund and redirected licensing revenue associated with both boards 
from the general fund to the new special fund. The Act also repealed statutory fees and 
instead authorized the boards to set fees by regulation. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
Additional Comments:  Absent reauthorization of the board during the 2024 legislative 
session, regulation of the practice of cosmetology in Maryland ceases July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 264/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Board of Cosmetologists - Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 264 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Nicole Fletcher 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__x__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 

END OF PAGE 3