START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 225 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 225 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Labor) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board – Sunset Extension 
 
   
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the Maryland Occupational Safety 
and Health (MOSH) Advisory Board within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by 
10 years to July 1, 2034, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The bill takes effect June 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2034.     
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/ Background:  The Division of Labor and Industry within MDL administers 
the MOSH program. The requirements of the MOSH program are codified by the MOSH 
Act. In general, these requirements parallel the safety standards established by the federal 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) within the U.S. Department of 
Labor. OSHA specifies that states may elect to assume the responsibility for development 
and management of a state occupational safety and health program as long as the standards 
under the state program are “at least as effective as” OSHA standards. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 225/ Page 2 
The MOSH Advisory Board must advise, consult with, and recommend to the 
Commissioner of Labor and Industry reasonable regulations related to protecting and 
improving the safety and health of employees and preventing conditions that are 
detrimental to safety and health in employment. The board must propose or recommend 
occupational safety and health standards that are or will be at least as effective in providing 
safe and healthful employment and places of employment as any standard adopted under 
OSHA and does not put an undue burden on interstate commerce under specified 
conditions.   
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2024 
Third Reader - January 31, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 225/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Occupational Safety and Health Advisory Board – 
Sunset Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER: SB 225 
 
PREPARED BY: Devki Virk, Commissioner Labor & Industry 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON 
MARYLAND SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
N/A 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3