START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 78

Chapter 78

(Senate Bill 216)

AN ACT concerning

Workers’ Compensation – Failure to Insure – Penalties

FOR the purpose of altering the penalties for an employer’s failure to secure required
workers’ compensation insurance or comply with an order of the State Workers’
Compensation Commission regarding an employer’s failure to secure required
workers’ compensation insurance; and generally relating to penalties under workers’
compensation law.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Labor and Employment
Section 9–407
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Labor and Employment

9–407.

(a) If an employer fails to secure compensation for all covered employees of the
employer as required by § 9–402 of this subtitle, the Commission shall:

(1) issue an order directing the employer to attend a hearing to show cause
as to why the employer should not be:

(i) required to secure compensation for all covered employees of the
employer;

(ii) found in violation of § 9–402 of this subtitle; and

(iii) assessed a penalty for noncompliance with § 9–402 of this
subtitle; and

(2) set the hearing as soon as practicable.

(b) If, following the hearing, the Commission finds that the employer failed to
secure compensation for all covered employees of the employer as required by § 9–402 of
this subtitle, the Commission shall:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 78 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) order the employer to:

(i) secure and maintain insurance for all covered employees of the
employer through an authorized insurer; and

(ii) submit proof of insurance coverage to the Commission; and

(2) order the employer to pay a penalty [not to exceed $10,000] OF $25,000
to the Uninsured Employers’ Fund.

(c) (1) If an employer fails to comply with an order to insure with an
authorized insurer issued under subsection (b) of this section or under § 9–404(j) or §
9–405(f) of this subtitle, within 30 days after the Commission issues the order, the
Commission shall set a hearing as soon as practicable.

(2) If, following the hearing, the Commission finds that the employer failed
to comply with an order issued under subsection (b)(1) of this section, the Commission may
order the employer to pay a penalty [not to exceed $10,000] OF $25,000 to the Uninsured
Employers’ Fund.

(d) (1) An employer’s failure to pay a penalty under this section constitutes a
default in payment of compensation and judgment shall be entered as in a case of default
in payment of compensation.

(2) (i) A penalty that is payable under this section is a lien against the
assets of the employer that is liable for the penalty.

(ii) A lien under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph is subordinate to
claims for unpaid wages and prior recorded liens.

(3) The Uninsured Employers’ Fund may bring a civil action to collect any
penalty ordered under this section or any assessment ordered under Subtitle 10 of this
article.

(4) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the uninsured
employer is a corporation the assets of which are not sufficient to satisfy any penalty
ordered under this section, any officer of the corporation who has responsibility for the
general management of the corporation in the State is jointly and severally liable for the
penalty if the corporate officer knowingly failed to secure compensation for the covered
employees of the employer.

(ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the uninsured
employer is a limited liability company the assets of which are not sufficient to satisfy any
penalty ordered under this section, any member of the limited liability company who has
responsibility for the general management of the limited liability company in the State is
jointly and severally liable for the penalty if a member of the limited liability company who

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 78

has general management responsibility knowingly failed to secure compensation for the
covered employees of the employer.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3