START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 77

Chapter 77

(Senate Bill 255)

AN ACT concerning

Public Safety – Volunteer Company Assistance Fund – Alterations

FOR the purpose of transferring certain duties relating to the Volunteer Company
Assistance Fund from the Military Department to the Maryland Department of
Emergency Management; and generally relating to the Volunteer Company
Assistance Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 8–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 8–206
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

8–201.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Association” means the Maryland State Firemen’s Association.

(c) “Department” means the [Military Department] MARYLAND DEPARTMENT
OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.

(d) “Fund” means the Volunteer Company Assistance Fund.

(e) “Volunteer company” means a volunteer ambulance, fire, or rescue company:

(1) located in the State; or

(2) located outside the State if the company:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 77 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) has been a member of the Association for at least the past 10
years; and

(ii) has a first due response area in the State.

8–206.

(a) On or before August 30 of each fiscal year, the Association shall submit to the
Department, the Legislative Auditor, and to the Board of Public Works an annual report
that includes:

(1) the number and total amount of grants and the number and total
amount of loans made in the previous fiscal year;

(2) for each grant or loan made:

(i) the volunteer company that received the grant or loan;

(ii) the amount of the grant or loan; and

(iii) the specific purpose of making the grant or loan;

(3) for each volunteer company that received a grant or loan:

(i) the financial statement of the volunteer company for the previous
fiscal year or the year in which the grant or loan was received, whichever is available; and

(ii) documentation of the volunteer company’s actual expenditures
from the grant or loan;

(4) for each loan made, the terms of the loan, including origination date,
loan term, payment terms, payment amount, payments made to date, outstanding balance,
and loan status; and

(5) summary listings of grants and loans made during the previous fiscal
year and outstanding loans, by county.

(b) The Department shall:

(1) review the documentation submitted in accordance with subsection (a)
of this section on an annual basis to determine if each grant or loan was spent in accordance
with this subtitle and the request approved by the Board of Public Works; and

(2) report the findings to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee and
the House Appropriations Committee on an annual basis.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 77

(c) The Legislative Auditor may:

(1) review the documentation submitted in accordance with subsection (a)
of this section to determine if each grant or loan was spent in accordance with this subtitle
and the requests approved by the Board of Public Works; and

(2) report the findings to the Department and, subject to § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee of the General
Assembly.

(d) The Comptroller may audit the financial affairs of the Association to ensure
compliance with this subtitle.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3