START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 298 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 298 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board of Electricians - Licensing - Penalties 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the State Board of Electricians to assess a licensee a civil 
penalty of up to $5,000 for each violation of the licensing statute. The civil penalty can be 
assessed instead of or in addition to other penalties, including a reprimand or the suspension 
or revocation of a license. In determining the amount of the penalty, the board must 
consider the seriousness of the violation, the good faith of the licensee, and other related 
factors. Revenues from civil penalties assessed by the board are paid to the general fund. 
The bill also requires the board to submit a report on its practices and processes for the 
timely resolution of complaints filed against licensees. The bill’s provisions related to 
the report take effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s penalty provisions are not expected to materially affect State 
finances. The board can prepare the required report with existing resources.    
  
Local Effect:  None.     
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not 
reflect amendments to the bill.)  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required report must include, for each year from 2018 through 2023: 
 
 
the number and types of complaints filed against State licensees; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 298/ Page 2 
 
the dates on which each complaint was received and resolved by the board; 
 
the number of investigators employed by the board; 
 
a determination by the board as to whether there was a complaint backlog; and 
 
the average length of time to approve a license. 
 
The report must also include a detailed explanation of the plan and strategies adopted by 
the board to systematically address the complaint backlog and prevent future backlogs. 
 
The board must complete the report by October 1, 2024, and submit it to specified 
committees of the General Assembly. 
 
Current Law:  An individual must be licensed by the State Board of Electricians as a 
master, journeyperson, or apprentice electrician, as appropriate, before engaging in the 
activities covered by each license. However, a local jurisdiction may issue local 
registrations for those classifications, subject to specified requirements. Local jurisdictions 
may establish a local board and require permits, fees, and inspections. Among other 
requirements, the Maryland Electricians Act:   
 
 
requires the State board to adopt specified continuing education requirements for 
electricians;  
 
requires the State board to enforce minimum standards for the provision of electrical 
services; and 
 
establishes specified consumer protections, violations, and associated fines and 
penalties. 
 
The State Board of Electricians may deny a State license to an applicant, reprimand a State 
licensee, or suspend or revoke a State license if the applicant commits any of specified 
violations of the Maryland Electricians Act. Among the violations are (1) fraudulently or 
deceptively obtaining or attempting to obtain a license; (2) fraudulently using a State 
license; (3) engaging in an unfair or deceptive trade practice; (4) failing to maintain general 
liability and property damage insurance; and (5) providing electrical services that are 
inadequate or incomplete. Licensees are entitled to a hearing prior to the assessment of a 
penalty. 
 
Authorizing statutes for the State Board of Electricians do not specify a process for 
receiving, investigating, or adjudicating consumer complaints made against licensees. 
 
Background:  MDL advises that the authority to impose civil fines that is proposed for the 
State Board of Electricians is already granted to every other occupational and professional 
licensing entity in the department. The current statewide licensing framework was enacted 
in 2021 and inadvertently omitted the authority to assess civil fines. MDL advises that the 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 298/ Page 3 
authority is necessary for instances when a license has expired or when the violation is so 
egregious that it warrants a monetary penalty.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 298/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Board of Electricians - Licensing - Penalties 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 298 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
John Bull, Executive Director, Maryland State Board of Electricians 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 4