START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 257 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 257 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board of Physical Therapy 
Examiners by five years to July 1, 2030, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment 
provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2030. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The practice of physical therapy in Maryland is regulated by 
the State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners. The board was created by the 
General Assembly in 1947 and is housed within MDH. The mission of the board is to 
protect the health, safety, and welfare of all Marylanders through the promotion and 
oversight of the Physical Therapy Practice Act. The board comprises eight members:  
five licensed physical therapists; one licensed physical therapy assistant; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 257/ Page 2 
two consumers. As of October 1, 2023, the board oversaw 9,474 active licensees, including 
7,147 physical therapists and 2,327 physical therapist assistants.  
 
The board is one of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to 
termination unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities 
may also be subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 727 of 2023 and SB 209 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - February 7, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 257/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
State Board of Physical Therapy Examiners – Sunset Extension 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0257 
PREPARED BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions/Board of Physical 
Therapy Examiners 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 3