START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 270 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 270 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Human Services) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Adult Protective Services - Review Boards - Membership and Terms 
 
 
This departmental bill alters statutory provisions regarding adult public guardianship 
review boards, including reducing (from 11 to 8) the number of required members and 
altering membership qualifications. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Human Services (DHS) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  A vulnerable adult is an adult who lacks the physical or 
mental capacity to provide for his or her daily needs. It is the policy of the State for 
vulnerable adults to have access to and be provided with needed professional services 
sufficient to protect their health, safety and welfare. 
 
If a local department of social services receives a report that an alleged vulnerable adult 
has been subjected to abuse, neglect, self-neglect, or exploitation, the department is 
required to conduct a thorough investigation. Following an investigation, if an individual 
is determined to require protective services but is unwilling or unable to accept protective 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 270/ Page 2 
services voluntarily, the director may petition the court for the appointment of a guardian. 
A director of a local department in the county where the vulnerable adult lives may be 
appointed as guardian. 
 
Every county is required to have an adult public guardianship review board. Two or more 
counties may agree to establish a single multicounty review board. The review board must 
generally review each guardianship that a public agency holds every six months. 
Guardianships that a public agency has held for more than one year must be reviewed at 
least annually, with a file review to take place at least every six months. Each time the 
review board reviews a guardianship, the board must recommend whether the guardianship 
should be continued, modified, or terminated. 
 
Under current law, except in St. Mary’s and Washington counties, each 11‐member review 
board is required to have:   
 
 
one professional representative of a local department; 
 
one physician’s assistant, nurse practitioner, or physician who is not a psychiatrist; 
 
one psychiatrist; 
 
one representative of a local commission on aging; 
 
one professional representative of a local nonprofit social service organization; 
 
one lawyer; 
 
two lay individuals; 
 
one registered nurse; 
 
one professional in the field of disabilities; and 
 
one person with a physical disability. 
 
Members are not entitled to compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses. The 
membership of the board in St Mary’s and Washington counties is identical to the listing 
above except for the psychiatrist requirement; St. Mary’s and Washington counties allow 
for a psychiatrist or psychologist on the review board. 
 
The bill repeals the provisions specific to St. Mary’s and Washington counties. The bill 
also (1) removes the requirement for the boards to include a registered nurse (instead 
requiring one physician’s assistant, nurse practitioner, registered nurse, or physician who 
is not a psychiatrist); (2) requires the membership of either a professional in the field of 
disabilities or a person with a disability; (3) requires the membership of a psychiatrist, a 
psychiatric nurse practitioner, or a professional with expertise in prescribing or oversight 
of mental health medications; and (4) requires only one lay individual on the board. 
 
Under current law, board members are appointed by specified local government officials. 
The bill requires these officials to also recruit board members. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 270/ Page 3 
Under current law, except for Charles County, the term of a member is three years. In 
Charles County, the term of a member is four years. The terms of members are to be 
staggered. At the end of a term, a member continues to serve until a successor is appointed 
and qualifies to fill the vacancy. 
 
The bill authorizes a member to serve for another term on appointment and removes the 
requirement for terms to be staggered.  
 
Background:  DHS reports that review boards are facing challenges due to vacancies. For 
instance, according to information provided in September 2023, there were 71 vacancies 
across the State. According to DHS, it is especially challenging to fill physician and 
psychiatrist positions, which are critical for assessing medical care adequacy. DHS advises 
that the legislation is intended to make it easier to recruit and maintain the multidisciplinary 
membership needed to be effective in protecting the rights and welfare of the vulnerable 
adults subject to the boards’ review. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  St. Mary’s County; Department of Human Services; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - February 21, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 270/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Adult Protective Services - Review Boards - Membership and 
Terms 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0270 
 
PREPARED BY:  Pam Luby (reviewed by Sang Kang) 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposed legislation alters the membership of Adult Public Guardianship Review 
Boards under MD Code, Family Law, § 14-402. Adult Guardianship Public Review 
Boards are volunteer entities and are not funded publicly or privately, therefore have no 
economic impact on Maryland small businesses. 

END OF PAGE 4