START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 280 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 280 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Secretary of State) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Notarial Acts - Protest Form Requirement - Repeal 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals an obsolete provision that prohibits notaries public from 
signing and issuing a protest except in the form prescribed by the Comptroller. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Repealing the specified prohibition has no effect on State operations 
or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Office of Secretary of State has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Generally, notaries public witness the signing of documents 
and witness specified events. Before being appointed as a notary public, individuals must 
(1) be at least age 18; (2) be of good moral character and integrity; (3) live or work in 
Maryland; (4) have completed and passed a specified course and examination; and (5) be 
a resident of the senatorial district in which he or she is appointed or, if living outside the 
State, be a resident of a state that allows Maryland residents working in that state to serve 
as notaries. The term of a notary public commission is four years, and notaries public must 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 280/ Page 2 
also complete and pass a course of study that covers the laws, regulations, procedures, and 
ethics relevant to notarial acts. 
 
A notarial officer who makes or notes a protest of a negotiable instrument must make or 
note the protest in accordance with specified provisions established under the Commercial 
Law Article. 
 
Generally, a protest is a certificate of dishonor of a negotiable instrument made by, among 
other individuals, a notary public. It may be made upon information satisfactory to the 
notary public. The protest must identify the instrument and certify either that presentment 
has been made or, if not made, the reason why it was not made, and that the instrument has 
been dishonored by nonacceptance or nonpayment. The protest may also certify that notice 
of dishonor has been given to some or all parties. 
 
However, under the State Government Article, it is unlawful for any notary public to sign 
and issue any protest except in the form prescribed by the Comptroller. The Comptroller’s 
Office and the Secretary of State advise that the specified form has never been created or 
used. Therefore, repealing this prohibition has no effect on State operations or finances. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Secretary of State; Comptroller’s Office; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - February 21, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 280/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Notarial Acts – Protest Form Requirement – Repeal 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0280 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Lore 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__x 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
N/A. 
 

END OF PAGE 3