START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 295 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 295 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Planning) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of Planning - Inventory Responsibilities 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals provisions that require the Maryland Department of Planning 
(MDP) to prepare and periodically revise (and provide copies of, as specified) inventory 
lists of (1) the natural resources of the State and (2) major public works and private facilities 
that are important to the development of the State as a whole. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  MDP must prepare and periodically revise inventory lists of (1) the natural 
resources of the State and (2) major public works and private facilities that are important 
to the development of the State as a whole. A copy of the inventory list must be provided 
to any State agency and the General Assembly upon request. 
 
Background:  MDP advises that the inventory lists of natural resources and major public 
works and private facilities required by the statute are not kept by MDP, and that other 
State agencies may more appropriately prepare and maintain these inventory lists. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 295/ Page 2 
Specifically, MDP indicates that the inventory lists may be best handled by (1) the 
Department of Natural Resources, for the natural resources of the State, and (2) the 
Department of Budget and Management and the Maryland Department of Transportation, 
for major public works projects. 
 
 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Planning; Department of Natural 
Resources; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - February 13, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 295/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Department of Planning - Inventory Responsibilities 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0295 
 
PREPARED BY:  Maryland Department of Planning 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
This proposal has no economic impact on small businesses. It is moving inventory 
requirements of MDP under the State Finance & Procurement Article that would be best 
executed by other State agencies. 

END OF PAGE 3