START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 214 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 214 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Commerce) 
Finance 
Ways and Means 
 
Maryland Military Installation Council - Membership 
 
 
This departmental bill increases the membership of the Maryland Military Installation 
Council (MMIC) and updates obsolete references. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for new MMIC members are assumed to be 
minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Commerce has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  To address an excess capacity of military facilities, the U.S. Congress 
created a process in 1990 known as Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC). The most 
recent round of plans regarding military installations nationwide became effective in 
November 2005. Chapter 335 of 2003 created the Maryland Military Installation Strategic 
Planning Council. After the approval of the 2005 BRAC plans, the State renamed the 
council to be MMIC. 
 
MMIC membership consists of various State Legislative and Executive Branch officials, 
members of the public, and presidents of military installation community organizations. 
The chair of MMIC may also appoint additional members and ex officio members, as 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 214/ Page 2 
specified. An MMIC member may not receive compensation as a member of the council 
but is entitled to reimbursement for travel expenses. 
 
MMIC is charged with identifying:   
 
 
public infrastructure and other community support necessary to improve mission 
efficiencies and develop existing installations in the State; 
 
existing and potential impacts of encroachment on military installations in 
Maryland; 
 
potential State and community actions that may minimize the impacts of 
encroachment and enhance the long-term potential of military installations; and 
 
opportunities for collaboration among military contractors, academic institutions, 
local governments, the State, and military departments. 
 
MMIC is also charged with reviewing State policies to identify actions necessary to provide 
State and local government support to the mission of each military installation in Maryland 
and to research how jurisdictions have addressed encroachment and partnership formation. 
 
Background:  Commerce advises that the three new MMIC members will allow the 
council to better coordinate on issues relating to workforce, child care and education, 
housing, and other important issues for Maryland’s service members and their families. 
Other changes in the bill align statute with the current names of certain groups. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland State Department of 
Education; Maryland Department of Labor; Charles County; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 18, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 214/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT OF SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Maryland Military Installation Council - Membership 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0214 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael Siers 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal would add three new members to the Maryland Military Installation 
Council (MMIC). These new members (The Secretary of Labor, the State Superintendent 
of Schools, and a military spouse representative) will allow MMIC to better coordinate 
on issues relating to workforce, childcare and education, housing, and other important 
issues for Maryland’s servicemembers and their families. This increased coordination 
should indirectly improve outcomes for Maryland small businesses (e.g., solving 
workforce barriers for military spouses could increase labor supply), though these 
outcomes are not the primary focus of MMIC. 

END OF PAGE 3