START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 205 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 205 
(Senator Hayes) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
University System of Maryland - Board of Regents - Membership 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House 
to ensure that one member of the Board of Regents of the University System of 
Maryland (USM) is a graduate of a historically Black college or university (HBCU) in 
USM (i.e., Bowie State University, Coppin State University, and the University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore). This requirement only applies after the next vacancy on the 
board that occurs after July 1, 2024. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Requiring one member of the board to be a graduate of an HBCU in 
USM after the next vacancy does not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Board of Regents of USM is composed of 21 members, including 
two student members. Each student member must be a full-time student in good academic 
standing at a USM institution, except that the full-time requirement does not apply to a 
student at the University of Maryland Global Campus. There are two ex officio members 
(the Secretaries of Agriculture and Commerce), one member appointed by the President of 
the Senate, and one member appointed by the Speaker of the House. The remaining 
members must be residents of the State, appointed from the general public, and include 
(1) one individual with a background in higher education administration; (2) one individual 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 205/ Page 2 
with a background in finance; and (3) one individual with a background in diversity and 
workplace inclusion. Further, in making appointments, the Governor, the President of the 
Senate, and the Speaker of the House must consider representation from all parts of the 
State. 
 
Except for the student members, each appointed member serves for a term of five years 
from July 1 of the year of appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. 
These members may be reappointed. A student member serves a two-year term, beginning 
on July 1, and may be reappointed if the student remains a student at any campus of USM. 
A member appointed to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term serves only for the remainder 
of that term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies. Members are appointed by the 
Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate. 
 
Board members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under the standard State travel regulations. 
 
Only one of the student members may be a voting member of the board each year. Further, 
a student member can be a voting member in only one year of a two-year term. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2