START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 210 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 210 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services 
Systems) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Emergency Medical Services - Paramedics - Immunization Administration - 
Effective Date 
 
   
This departmental bill extends by five additional years, until January 1, 2030, the 
provisions of law that authorize a paramedic to administer influenza and COVID-19 
immunizations as part of a population health outreach effort conducted by the appropriate 
local health department (LHD) or a hospital or health system in the State. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not substantively change State activities or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems 
(MIEMSS) has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on small business 
(attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. (The 
attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 799 of 2021, among other things, authorizes a paramedic to 
administer influenza and COVID-19 immunizations as part of a population health outreach 
effort conducted by the appropriate LHD or a hospital or health system in the State. This 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 210/ Page 2 
authorization was initially set to terminate January 1, 2023, but was extended to 
January 1, 2025, under Chapter 404 of 2022.  
 
Influenza and COVID-19 immunizations must be (1) provided under the direction of the 
emergency medical services (EMS) operational program medical director, ambulance 
service medical director, or other qualified physician and authorized by MIEMSS and 
(2) provided in accordance with a written agreement between the paramedic’s EMS 
operational program or ambulance service and the LHD or a hospital or health system. A 
written agreement must include provisions for (1) the administration of a vaccine to an 
individual at least 18 years of age; (2) storage and inventory of medication; (3) distribution 
of appropriate vaccine information statements; (4) documentation of patient consent; 
(5) recognition of adverse effects; (6) referral and follow-up; and (7) appropriate 
documentation of vaccine administration.   
 
Background:  Chapter 799, which went into effect during the height of the COVID-19 
pandemic, was designed to permit paramedics to assist LHDs and hospitals and health 
systems in vaccination initiatives to address population health needs, including by 
administering COVID-19 immunizations. MIEMSS advises that administration of 
influenza and COVID-19 immunizations to members of the public continues to be a critical 
component of public health for the foreseeable future. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 286 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 210/ Page 3 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Emergency Medical Services - Paramedics - Immunization 
Administration - Effective Date 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB 210 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY:  Patricia Gainer, Government Affairs  
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
XX 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
N/A 

END OF PAGE 3