START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 224 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 224 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Labor) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Cemeteries - Burial-Transit Permits - Required Information 
 
 
This departmental bill requires the person in charge of a cemetery (which includes a 
crematory or other place for final disposition) to write the name and physical address of 
the cemetery on the burial-transit permit. In addition, the person in charge must also include 
on the burial-transit permit either (1) the burial, inurnment, or scattering section and the lot 
and space number or (2) if the body or fetus was cremated and an authorizing agent takes 
control of the cremains, the name and address of the authorizing agent and the authorizing 
agent’s relationship to the deceased or fetus. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural and clarifying in nature and does not directly 
affect governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Within 72 hours after death or delivery in a fetal death and before final 
disposition or removal of the body or fetus from the State, the mortician who first takes 
custody of the body or fetus must obtain a burial-transit permit. If the death or fetal death 
certificate is on a multicopy form, one copy of which is designated as the burial-transit 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 224/ Page 2 
permit and is signed by the attending physician or medical examiner, that copy must 
provide for the later entry of final disposition information and serves as a burial-transit 
permit. 
 
A person in charge of a cemetery (including a crematory or other place for final disposition) 
may not permit the final disposition of a body or fetus unless it is accompanied by a 
burial-transit permit. The person in charge of a cemetery must write on the permit the date 
of final disposition, sign the permit, and within 10 days after final disposition, return the 
permit to the Secretary of Health. If there is no person in charge of the cemetery, the 
mortician must fill out the burial-transit permit. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 09.34.08.08), a crematory authority must provide a 
certificate of disposition of cremated human remains to the authorizing agent or funeral 
establishment that arranged for the cremation that contains, among other things, the name 
and address of the person who received the cremated human remains, and if ascertainable, 
the location, manner, and date of the disposition of the cremated human remains. The 
crematory authority must maintain a copy of every record as permanent records. 
 
In Maryland, cremation is regulated either by the Office of Cemetery Oversight (OCO) 
within MDL or the State Board of Morticians and Funeral Directors within the Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), based on ownership of the crematory. Specifically, OCO 
and the board each regulate facilities in which their registrants/permit holders or licensees 
hold majority ownership. Independent (or free-standing) crematories are subject to the 
jurisdiction of OCO. 
 
Background:  OCO advises that when an individual seeks their ancestor’s burial location, 
they request a death certificate from MDH’s Division of Vital Records to identify the name 
of the cemetery. However, if their ancestor was cremated, the final disposition on the death 
certificate may only identify the name of the crematory. The bill is intended to ensure that 
specific information about the final disposition of cremated human remains, including who 
took custody of the human remains, is included on all burial-transit permits. 
 
MDH advises that the expanded information required under the bill is typically collected 
on burial-transit permits filed on paper and when death certificates and burial-transit 
permits are entered into the Maryland Electronic Death Registration System. Thus, the bill 
ensures that this information is included. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 224/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - February 7, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 224/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Cemeteries - Burial-Transit Permits - Required Information 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0224 
 
PREPARED BY:  Deborah Rappazzo, Executive Director, Office of Cemetery Oversight 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
     
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4