START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 430

Chapter 430

(Senate Bill 271)

AN ACT concerning

Election Law – Revisions

FOR the purpose of altering the information that clerks of the circuit court for each county
and administrative clerks for each District Court are required to report to the State
Administrator of Elections; altering the information that the State Administrator is
required to make arrangements to obtain from the clerk of the United States District
Court for the District of Maryland; requiring a public official responsible for the use
of a public building requested by a local board of elections for an early voting center
to make the building available to the local board in accordance with a certain
provision of law; requiring ~~each~~ ~~local~~ ~~board~~ the State Board of Elections to ~~establish~~
adopt regulations establishing an appeals process regarding certain requests to use
public buildings as early voting centers; authorizing an incumbent member of a
political party central committee who is a candidate for party office to act as any
responsible officer, rather than only the treasurer, of that central committee; and
generally relating to election law.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 3–504(a)(1)(i) and 13–215(b)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Election Law
Section 3–504(a)(1)(iii) and (2), 10–301.1(e), and 13–215(b)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Election Law

3–504.

(a) (1) (i) Information from the agencies specified in this paragraph shall
be reported to the State Administrator in a format and at times prescribed by the State
Board.

(iii) The EACH MONTH, THE clerk of the circuit court for each county
and the administrative clerk for each District Court shall report the names and addresses
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 430 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

of all individuals convicted, in the respective court, of a felony AND CURRENTLY SERVING
A COURT–ORDERED SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR THE CONVICTION since the
date of the last report SENTENCED TO IMPRISONMENT WITH COMMITMENT PAPERS.

(2) The State Administrator shall make arrangements with the clerk of the
United States District Court for the District of Maryland to receive reports of names and
addresses, if available, of individuals convicted of a felony in that court AND CURRENTLY
SERVING A COURT–ORDERED SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT FOR THE CONVICTION
SENTENCED TO IMPRISONMENT WITH COMMITMENT PAPERS.

10–301.1.

(e) (1) Each early voting center shall satisfy the requirements of § 10–101 of
this title.

(2) THE SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE
PUBLIC OFFICIAL RESPONSIBLE FOR THE USE OF A PUBLIC BUILDING REQUESTED
BY A LOCAL BOARD FOR AN EARLY VOTING CENTER SHALL MAKE THE PUBLIC
BUILDING AVAILABLE TO THE LOCAL BOARD IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 10–101(A)(3)
OF THIS TITLE.

(3) (I) EACH LOCAL BOARD THE STATE BOARD SHALL ADOPT
REGULATIONS THAT ESTABLISH AN APPEALS PROCESS FOR PUBLIC OFFICIALS
RESPONSIBLE FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS REQUESTED FOR USE UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)
OF THIS SUBSECTION TO CONTEST THE AVAILABILITY OF THE PUBLIC BUILDING
DURING THE PERIOD OF TIME THE BUILDING WOULD BE USED AS AN EARLY VOTING
CENTER.

(II) AN THE APPEALS PROCESS ESTABLISHED UNDER THIS
PARAGRAPH SHALL INCLUDE:

1. REQUIRE A PUBLIC OFFICIAL TO FILE AN APPEAL
WITHIN 14 DAYS AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE FROM THE LOCAL BOARD OF THE
~~REQUEST~~ ~~TO~~ ~~MAKE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PUBLIC~~ ~~BUILDING~~ ~~AVAILABLE~~ ~~AS~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EARLY~~ ~~VOTING~~
~~CENTER;~~

2. ALLOW THE PUBLIC OFFICIAL AN OPPORTUNITY TO
BE HEARD PUBLICLY BEFORE THE LOCAL BOARD; AND

3. CONCLUDE THE APPEALS PROCESS AT LEAST 8
~~MONTHS~~ ~~BEFORE~~ ~~A~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~SUBMIT~~ ~~THE~~ ~~LOCATIONS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ITS~~
EARLY VOTING CENTERS TO THE STATE BOARD.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 430

1. AN INITIAL APPEAL TO THE LOCAL BOARD THAT
SELECTED THE PUBLIC BUILDING FOR USE AS AN EARLY VOTING CENTER;

2. AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A PUBLIC OFFICIAL TO BE
HEARD PUBLICLY AT A MEETING OF THE LOCAL BOARD BEFORE THE LOCAL BOARD
MAKES A DECISION ON THE APPEAL;

3. AN APPEAL BY A PUBLIC OFFICIAL OF AN ADVERSE
DECISION OF THE LOCAL BOARD TO THE STATE BOARD;

4. AN OPPORTUNITY FOR A PUBLIC OFFICIAL TO BE
HEARD PUBLICLY AT A MEETING OF THE STATE BOARD BEFORE THE STATE BOARD
MAKES A FINAL DECISION ON THE APPEAL; AND

5. A FINAL DECISION AT LEAST 8 MONTHS BEFORE THE
PRIMARY ELECTION FOR WHICH THE LOCAL BOARD SEEKS TO USE THE PUBLIC
BUILDING AS AN EARLY VOTING CENTER.

(III) THE DECISION OF THE STATE BOARD REGARDING AN
APPEAL UNDER THIS PARAGRAPH IS FINAL.

13–215.

(b) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, a candidate may not act:

(i) as the treasurer of a campaign finance entity of the candidate; or

(ii) with respect to any other campaign finance entity:

1. as the campaign manager or treasurer; or

2. in any other position that exercises general overall
responsibility for the conduct of the entity.

(2) (i) An incumbent member of a central committee who is a candidate
for election to party office may act as [the treasurer] A RESPONSIBLE OFFICER of that
central committee.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
January 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3