START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 289 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 289 
(Chair, Budget and Taxation Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - Assessments and Taxation) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Office of the Director - 
Administrative Expenses 
 
   
This departmental bill increases, from 5% to 15%, the percentage of a specified special 
fund that may be used for administrative expenses by the Office of the Director of the State 
Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not affect overall funding for the Office of the Director; 
however, SDAT will be authorized to use additional funding from an existing special fund 
for certain administrative expenses.     
  
Local Effect:  None.    
  
Small Business Effect:  SDAT has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  There is a continuing, nonlapsing fund within SDAT that, subject to the 
appropriation process in the State budget, must be used by the department:  (1) for the costs 
of reviewing, processing, and auditing specified documents that are filed or requested; 
(2) to pay redemption or extinguishment amounts to former owners of ground rents 
redeemed or extinguished; and (3) for other costs incurred by the department to administer 
the provisions of the Tax – Property Article. Beginning in fiscal 2015, the department may 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 289/ Page 2 
not use the fund to pay more than 5% of the administrative expenses of the Office of the 
Director.  
 
Background:  The department advises that the current 5% cap that is allowed for 
administrative expenses limits the ability to effectively address the procurement needs 
within the Office of the Director. The increase specified by the bill will provide additional 
funds for certain administrative expenses without increasing the department’s overall 
budget. The bill will allow the department to allocate existing funds more efficiently based 
on the needs of the department.      
 
The Office of the Director has a fiscal 2024 budget of $4.9 million, which includes 
$1.5 million in operating expenses.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
km/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 289/ Page 3 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
State Department of Assessments and Taxation - Office of the Director - 
Administrative Expenses 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 289 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Bob Yeager 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3