START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 394

Chapter 394

(Senate Bill 242)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Social Work Examiners – Sunset Extension

FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board of Social Work Examiners in accordance
with the provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act by extending to a
certain date the termination provisions relating to the statutory and regulatory
authority of the Board; requiring the Board to report certain information relating to
the issuance of licenses and the resolution of complaints to certain committees of the
General Assembly; and generally relating to the State Board of Social Work
Examiners.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 19–502
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

19–201.

There is a State Board of Social Work Examiners in the Department.

19–502.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act, this title and all rules and regulations adopted under this title shall
terminate and be of no effect after July 1, [2025] 2028 2030.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2024, the State Board of Social Work Examiners shall report to the Senate Finance
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 394 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the following information for the
immediately preceding 6–month period:

(1) the average processing time, calculated from the date that the last
required document was received, for issuing:

(i) initial licenses; and

(ii) renewal licenses;

(2) the average length of time required to resolve a complaint; and

(3) the rate of compliance with the requirements of § 19–303(b) of the
Health Occupations Article.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2