START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 50

Chapter 50

(Senate Bill 243)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists – Behavior Analyst
Advisory Committee – Sunset Extension

FOR the purpose of continuing the Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee within the State
Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists in accordance with the provisions
of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law) by extending to a certain date
the termination provisions relating to the statutory and regulatory authority of the
Committee; and generally relating to the Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee
within the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 17–201 and 17–6A–05
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health Occupations
Section 17–6A–31
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health Occupations

17–201.

There is a State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists.

17–6A–05.

There is a Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee within the Board.

17–6A–31.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the MARYLAND
Program Evaluation Act, this subtitle and all rules and regulations adopted under this
subtitle shall terminate and be of no effect after July 1, [2024] 2026.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 50 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2