START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 271 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 271 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Board of 
Elections) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Election Law - Revisions 
 
 
This departmental bill makes changes to State election law relating to (1) information that 
clerks of specified courts report to the State Administrator of Elections; (2) use of public 
buildings for early voting centers; and (3) the ability of an incumbent member of a political 
party central committee who is a candidate for party office to act as a responsible officer 
of the central committee. The bill takes effect January 1, 2025. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures are expected to increase by $170,000 in FY 2025 
only, for the Judiciary. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
170,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($170,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  Local government expenditures are expected to decrease annually in certain 
counties beginning in FY 2026. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The State Board of Elections (SBE) has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 271/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
The bill modifies the information that the clerk of the circuit court for each county and the 
administrative clerk for each District Court must report to the State Administrator of 
Elections (in a format and at times prescribed by SBE) regarding individuals convicted of 
a felony. Under the bill, each month, the clerks must report the names and addresses of all 
individuals convicted, in the respective court, of a felony and sentenced to imprisonment 
with commitment papers (instead of reporting all individuals convicted of a felony). 
Similarly, arrangements made by the State Administrator of Elections with the clerk of the  
United States District Court for the District of Maryland must be for the receipt of reports 
of names and addresses, if available, of individuals convicted of a felony in that court and 
sentenced to imprisonment with commitment papers (instead of reports of all individuals 
convicted of a felony). 
 
Use of a Public Building for an Early Voting Center 
 
The bill requires the public official responsible for the use of a public building requested 
by a local board of elections for an early voting center to make the building available to 
the local board in accordance with existing provisions that (1) require a public building 
(including light, heat, and custodial and janitorial services) to be made available for a 
polling place without charge and (2) require that electioneering and campaign signs be 
allowed on the premises of the public building to a specified extent. 
 
SBE must adopt regulations that establish an appeals process for a public official 
responsible for a public building requested for use by a local board of elections to contest 
the availability of the public building during the period of time the building would be used 
as an early voting center. The appeals process must include (1) an initial appeal to the local 
board that selected the public building for use as an early voting center; (2) an opportunity 
for a public official to be heard publicly at a meeting of the local board before the local 
board makes a decision on the appeal; (3) an appeal by a public official of an adverse 
decision of the local board to SBE; (4) an opportunity for a public official to be heard 
publicly at a meeting of SBE before SBE makes a final decision on the appeal; and (5) a 
final decision at least eight months before the primary election for which the local board 
seeks to use the public building as an early voting center. The decision of SBE regarding 
an appeal is final. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 271/ Page 3 
Incumbent Member of a Political Party Central Committee 
 
The bill also alters an existing authorization for an incumbent member of a political party 
central committee who is a candidate for election to party office to act as the treasurer of 
the central committee, so that the incumbent member who is a candidate for party office 
may instead act as a responsible officer (chairman or treasurer) of the central committee. 
 
Current Law/Background: 
 
Reports on Individuals Convicted of a Felony 
 
The clerk of the circuit court for each county and the administrative clerk for each 
District Court must report to the State Administrator of Elections the names and addresses 
of all individuals convicted, in the respective court, of a felony. The information must be 
reported in a format and at times prescribed by SBE. In addition, the State Administrator 
of Elections must make arrangements with the clerk of the U.S. District Court for the 
District of Maryland to receive reports of names and addresses, if available, of individuals 
convicted of a felony in that court. 
 
SBE advises that the reports it currently receives are overinclusive and do not align with 
§ 3-102 of the Election Law Article (governing qualifications for voter registration) since 
ineligibility for voter registration is based on incarceration. Current reporting requirements 
refer to all citizens convicted of felonies, regardless of whether they are currently 
incarcerated. 
 
Early Voting Centers 
 
The number of required early voting centers in a county is based on the number of 
registered voters in the county, as shown in Exhibit 1. In addition to the required early 
voting centers, each county may establish one additional center if the local board of 
elections and the governing body of the county agree to establish an additional center and 
SBE approves the establishment of the center. A local board of elections must take into 
account specified factors when determining the location of an early voting center relating 
to the accessibility of the location for voters, including historically disenfranchised 
communities, and equitable distribution of early voting centers throughout the county. 
 
Each early voting center must satisfy the requirements of §10-101 of the Election Law 
Article (governing polling place sites), including a requirement that a polling place be in a 
public building, unless suitable space in a public building is not available, in which case a 
local board may pay a reasonable fee for the use of a privately owned building. Also, under 
§ 10-101, the public official responsible for the use of any public building requested by a 
local board of elections for a polling place must make available to the local board, without 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 271/ Page 4 
charge, the space that is needed in the building for the proper conduct of an election. Light, 
heat, and custodial and janitorial services for the space must be provided to the local board 
without charge. Electioneering and campaign signs must also be allowed on the premises 
of the public building, as specified. 
 
Early voting centers are open, in a regular primary or general election, from the 
second Thursday before the election through the Thursday before the election during the 
hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. each early voting day. 
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Required Early Voting Centers 
 
Registered Voters in a County 
Early Voting Centers* 
<50,000 
1 
50,000-100,000 
2 
100,000-200,000 
3 
200,000-300,000 
5 
300,000-400,000 
7 
400,000-500,000 
9 
500,000-600,000 
11 
≥600,000 
13 
 
* Counties may also establish one additional early voting center (in addition to the required centers). 
 
 
Incumbent Member of a Political Party Central Committee 
 
In general, a candidate may not act (1) as the treasurer of a campaign finance entity of the 
candidate or (2) with respect to any other campaign finance entity, as the campaign 
manager or treasurer, or in any other position that exercises general overall responsibility 
for the conduct of the entity. However, an incumbent member of a political party central 
committee who is a candidate for election to party office may act as the treasurer of that 
central committee.  
 
SBE advises that allowing an incumbent member of a central committee who is a candidate 
for party office to act as a responsible officer (which includes the chairman and treasurer) 
of the committee allows a central committee chair to seek re-election for that position. A 
chair of a central committee would still be prohibited from seeking a public office while 
serving as chair. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 271/ Page 5 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures are expected to increase by $170,000 in 
fiscal 2025 only. This estimate reflects one-time programming costs for the Judiciary to 
make modifications to its current reporting, to include only individuals who are convicted 
of a felony and sentenced to imprisonment with commitment papers. 
 
The bill is not expected to materially affect SBE expenditures but results in operational 
efficiencies for the board. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local government expenditures are expected to decrease in certain 
counties, beginning in fiscal 2026 (accounting for the bill’s January 1, 2025 effective date), 
to the extent that local boards of elections are able to use additional public buildings for 
early voting centers in place of private (rented) alternatives, beginning with the 
2026 primary election. The extent of the decrease depends in part on the suitability of any 
additional public buildings for use as early voting centers, taking into account various 
factors (mentioned above) that govern the selection of early voting centers, and the extent 
to which this bill affects the availability of any suitable public buildings. 
 
For illustrative purposes, several counties, below, have provided estimates of cost savings 
if the bill allows the local boards to use additional suitable public buildings for early voting 
centers, at no cost, in place of the private facilities that they currently rent: 
 
 
Anne Arundel County estimates a decrease in expenditures of $22,000 per 
fiscal year, consisting of cost savings resulting from no longer needing to rent 
three private facilities; 
 
Carroll County estimates a decrease in expenditures of $3,900 per fiscal year, 
consisting of cost savings resulting from no longer needing to rent one private 
facility; 
 
Charles County estimates a decrease in expenditures of $17,800 per fiscal year, 
consisting of cost savings resulting from no longer needing to rent three private 
facilities; and 
 
Harford County estimates a decrease in expenditures of $3,000 per fiscal year, 
consisting of cost savings resulting from no longer needing to rent one private 
facility. 
 
DLS notes that local board of elections savings resulting from using additional public 
buildings for early voting may be offset to some extent by local government costs 
associated with the use of the public buildings for early voting; however, presumably the 
savings are greater than the costs. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 271/ Page 6 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 14 (Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Board of Elections) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Cecil, Charles, Frederick, 
Harford, and Montgomery counties; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland State Board of Elections; 
Maryland Association of Election Officials; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 24, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 16, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 271/ Page 7 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Election Law – Revisions 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 271 
 
PREPARED BY:  
Jennifer McLaughlin, Maryland State Board of Elections 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
✓  
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
  
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7