START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 383

Chapter 383

(Senate Bill 290)

AN ACT concerning

Certified Local Farm and Fish Program – Annual Waiver Reports – Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the annual deadline for the Office for the Certified Local Farm
and Fish Program to submit to the Board of Public Works a report of waivers
requested and waivers granted under the Certified Local Farm and Fish Program;
altering the annual deadline for the Board of Public Works to submit to certain
standing committees a copy of a record of information regarding any waivers
requested under the Certified Local Farm and Fish Program; and generally relating
to the Certified Local Farm and Fish Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 14–703(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 14–703(e) and (f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

14–703.

(a) (1) Each unit shall structure procurement procedures, consistent with the
purposes of this subtitle, to try to achieve an overall percentage goal of 20% of the unit’s
total dollar value of procurement contracts for food being made directly or indirectly to
certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive species providers.

(e) (1) (i) If a unit does not achieve the certified local farm and certified
Chesapeake invasive species provider participation goals on a procurement contract for
food, the unit shall demonstrate to the Office that the unit took all necessary and
reasonable steps to achieve the goals.

(ii) A waiver of any part of the certified local farm and certified
Chesapeake invasive species provider goals for a procurement contract for food shall be
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 383 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

granted if a unit provides to the Office a reasonable demonstration of good faith efforts to
achieve the goals.

(2) The Office may waive any of the requirements of this subsection
relating to the establishment, use, and waiver of certified local farm and certified
Chesapeake invasive species provider goals for a sole source, expedited, or emergency
procurement in which the public interest cannot reasonably accommodate use of those
requirements.

(3) Except for waivers granted in accordance with paragraph (2) of this
subsection, when a waiver determination is made, the Office shall issue the determination
in writing.

(4) On or before [July 31] DECEMBER OCTOBER 31 each year, the Office
shall submit directly to the Board an annual report of waivers requested and waivers
granted under this subsection.

(5) The report required under paragraph (4) of this subsection shall contain
the following information on those procurement contracts for food where the Office
considered a unit’s request for waiver of all or a portion of the local farm and Chesapeake
invasive species provider goals:

(i) the contract titles, numbers, and dates;

(ii) the number of waiver requests received;

(iii) the number of waiver requests granted; and

(iv) any other information specifically requested by the Board.

(f) The Board shall keep a record of information regarding any waivers requested
in accordance with this section and submit a copy of the record to the Senate COMMITTEE
ON Education, [Health, and Environmental Affairs Committee] ENERGY, AND THE
ENVIRONMENT and the House Health and Government Operations Committee on or
before [October 1] FEBRUARY 1 DECEMBER 31 each year, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2