START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 398

Chapter 398

(Senate Bill 288)

AN ACT concerning

State Board of Individual Tax Preparers – Sunset Extension and Report

FOR the purpose of continuing the State Board of Individual Tax Preparers in accordance
with the provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (sunset law) by
extending to a certain date the termination provisions relating to the statutory and
regulatory authority of the Board; requiring the Maryland Department of Labor to
submit a certain report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee on or before a
certain date; and generally relating to the State Board of Individual Tax Preparers.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 21–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 21–502
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

21–201.

There is a State Board of Individual Tax Preparers in the Department.

21–502.

Subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program
Evaluation Act, this title and all regulations adopted under this title shall terminate and
be of no effect after July 1, [2026] 2036 2027.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before July 1, 2025, the
Maryland Department of Labor shall submit a report to the Joint Audit and Evaluation
Committee with information regarding the State Board of Individual Tax Preparers as
determined by the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 398 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2