START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 250 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 250 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - State Library) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
County Public Libraries - Minors, Children, and Teens - Prohibited Practices 
 
   
This departmental bill prohibits a public library from charging an overdue fine or a “reserve 
fee” (i.e., any amount charged by a public library to an individual for failure to collect 
materials that have been placed on hold or reserved) to minors (or for library materials that 
are intended for children or teens). With regard to previously borrowed materials that were 
borrowed by a minor (or intended for children or teens), a public library may not prohibit 
an individual from borrowing library materials because the individual failed to return 
previously borrowed materials until 21 days or more after the date the materials were due. 
A public library may not charge a replacement fee to a minor (or for library materials 
intended for children or teens) until 21 days after the date on which the library materials 
were due. If overdue library materials borrowed by a minor (or intended for children or 
teens) are returned in a nondamaged condition after a replacement fee has been charged, 
the public library must cancel the replacement fee. If the materials are returned in a 
nondamaged condition within six months after a replacement fee has been paid, the public 
library must refund the replacement fee. The bill does not apply to special collections, as 
defined by the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Minimal decrease in local library fine revenues in three counties in 
Western Maryland. Other local library systems are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland State Library Agency has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 250/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Chapter 27 of 2021 prohibits a public library from charging 
a fee for a minor’s overdue library materials until 21 days after the date on which the library 
materials were due. If a minor’s overdue library materials are returned after a public library 
has charged a fee, the public library must cancel the fee. Chapter 27 prohibits a public 
library from attempting to collect any outstanding fees for overdue library materials that 
are incurred by a minor after June 30, 2021. The bill provides other clarifying definitions 
for “overdue fine,” “replacement fee,” and “special collections.” Each board of library 
trustees must adopt regulations to carry out relevant provisions of current law and of the 
bill. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The Maryland State Library Agency advises that only three public 
library systems (Allegany, Garrett, and Washington) are affected by the bill. In total, fine 
revenues for the library systems in those counties decrease by an estimated $18,500 on an 
annual basis once the bill takes effect. The bill does not otherwise materially affect other 
local library systems. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1246 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 208 (Chair, Ways and Means Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental - State Library) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Charles, Dorchester, Garrett, and 
Howard counties; Maryland State Library Agency; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 15, 2024 
Third Reader - January 31, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 250/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  County Public Libraries – Overdue Library Materials – Minors 
BILL NUMBER:  SB 250 
PREPARED BY:  Irene Padilla, State Librarian 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
__X__  WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
OR 
_____ WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3