START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 243 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 243 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists - Behavior Analyst 
Advisory Committee - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the Behavior Analyst Advisory 
Committee within the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists (and 
provisions governing behavior analysts) by two years to July 1, 2026, subject to the 
evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
(MPEA). This aligns the termination date for the advisory committee (and provisions 
governing behavior analysts) with the termination date for the board (and provisions 
governing all other professions regulated by the board). The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the Behavior Analyst Advisory 
Committee and board regulatory duties associated with behavior analysts are maintained 
through FY 2026. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health has determined that this bill 
has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative 
Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists 
licenses and certifies professional counselors, alcohol and drug counselors, marriage and 
family therapists, professional art therapists, and behavior analysts; receives and resolves 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 243/ Page 2 
complaints; and sets standards for the practice of counseling and therapy. The board’s 
current termination date is July 1, 2026. 
 
The Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee is charged with developing and recommending 
to the board regulations, a code of ethics, requirements for licensure as a behavior analyst, 
and continuing education requirements for license renewal as well as providing the board 
with recommendations concerning the practice of behavior analysis. The committee has 
five members appointed by the board, four of whom must be behavior analysts certified by 
the Behavior Analyst Certification Board and have at least five years of clinical experience. 
The fifth must be a consumer. 
 
Both the board and the Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee are among approximately 
60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination unless reauthorized periodically 
through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be subject to an evaluation by the 
Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior 
to their termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an evaluation only if directed by 
specified entities or by legislation. 
 
The Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee (and provisions governing behavior analysts) 
is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation of 
the advisory committee prior to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested 
reauthorizing legislation for the Behavior Analyst Advisory Committee that aligns with the 
current termination date of the board. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 12, 2024 
Third Reader - February 7, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 243/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists – Behavior 
Analyst Advisory Committee – Sunset Extension 
PREPARED 
BY: 
(Program\Unit): 
Health Occupations Boards & Commissions/Professional Counselors and 
Therapists Board 
 
Bill number:  SB0243 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal has no economic impact.  
 

END OF PAGE 3