START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 209 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 209 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Commerce) 
Finance 
Ways and Means 
 
Economic Development – Maryland Economic Development Commission – 
Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters several administrative requirements related to the Maryland 
Economic Development Commission (MEDC). The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. The changes 
to responsibilities and requirements of MEDC generally align statute with current practice 
or allow for additional flexibilities; altering the membership of MEDC does not affect 
commission expenditures. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Commerce has determined that this bill has 
minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS) concurs with this assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MEDC must include at least one representative from the life sciences 
industry and one representative from the manufacturing industry. The requirement that the 
Governor consider geographic and industry representation when making appointments is 
replaced with the requirement that the industries represented by MEDC members be 
diverse. Overall commission membership is unchanged. Additionally, the bill repeals the 
requirements that:   
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 209/ Page 2 
 
MEDC incorporate the strategic plan that the Maryland Port Administration 
developed for the Helen Delich Bentley Port of Baltimore into the State economic 
development strategic plan; 
 
MEDC seek contributions from the private sector to supplement economic 
development programs and financial incentives for businesses and that those funds 
be expended only in accordance with the State budget;   
 
Commerce’s Office of International Trade report to MEDC at least twice per year; 
 
the Maryland Tourism Development Board (MTDB) submit its marketing and 
strategic plans to MEDC for review; 
 
regulations pertaining to financing programs be approved by MEDC before 
adoption; and 
 
MEDC review each Commerce budget request before it is submitted. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Maryland Economic Development Commission 
 
MEDC comprises 25 voting members from all regions of the State, appointed by the 
Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Delegates, plus 
6 nonvoting members. The appointed members of the commission must have substantial 
interest or experience in business or knowledge of business and economic development. 
Commerce provides staff for the commission. The purpose of MEDC is to:   
 
 
establish economic development policy in the State; 
 
advise the Secretary of Commerce on economic development policy in the State; 
 
oversee the operations of Commerce and its units, including the department’s efforts 
to support the creation of, attract, and retain businesses and jobs; and 
 
monitor the operations of specified quasi-governmental economic development 
entities, including the efforts of those entities to support the creation, attraction, and 
retention of businesses and jobs. 
 
MEDC must develop and update an economic development strategic plan for the State and 
recommend to the Governor and the Secretary of Commerce the program and spending 
priorities needed to implement the plan. In addition to the duties repealed by the bill and 
others, MEDC must:  (1) review the allocation of financing incentives; (2) participate in 
marketing the State and encouraging new businesses to locate in the State; and (3) carry 
out other economic development activities that the Governor requests.  
 
Background:  Commerce advises that the bill is partially conditioned on the repeal of 
two existing Commerce boards:  the Maryland Life Sciences Advisory Board (LSAB) and 
the Maryland Manufacturing Advisory Board (MMAB). Among other activities, LSAB 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 209/ Page 3 
works to expedite the creation of private-sector jobs through the commercialization of 
life sciences research, and MMAB advises the Secretary of Commerce on ways to 
encourage new and expanding manufacturing enterprises in the State. The boards have 
been minimally active in recent years, and Commerce believes the industries are better 
represented on MEDC. DLS notes that this bill does not repeal either board. 
 
Repealing the requirements related to private-sector contributions, MEDC regulation 
review, and budget request review conforms to existing practice and allows additional 
flexibility in setting the State’s economic development strategic plan. Repealing the 
requirement related to the Office of International Trade still allows for flexibility for the 
office to present to MEDC when necessary. Additionally, since MEDC does not have 
oversight over MTDB, Commerce believes that requiring MTDB to submit its marketing 
and strategic plans for review by MEDC is unnecessary. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 209/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Economic Development – Maryland Economic Development 
Commission – Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0209 
 
PREPARED BY:  Michael Siers 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The proposal would implement four changes to the Maryland Economic Development 
Commission (MEDC): 
1. 
Mandate that representatives from manufacturing and life sciences be included as 
commissioners; 
2. 
Remove two tasks for the commission from statute; 
3. 
Remove the requirement for the Department of Commerce’s Office of 
International Trade to report to MEDC; and 
4. 
Remove requirements for the Maryland Tourism Development Board to submit 
strategic and marketing plans to MEDC.  
 
Although one of MEDC’s objectives is to ‘establish economic development policy in the 
State,’ the changes in this proposal will have minimal impacts on Maryland small 
businesses. To the extent that small businesses are impacted, it will be through 
efficiencies in MEDC’s operations. Ensuring representation from the manufacturing and 
life sciences industries should also ensure better targeting of state policies. While these 
changes improve MEDC’s ability to improve Maryland’s economy, direct benefits to 
small businesses are not quantifiable. 

END OF PAGE 4