START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 72

Chapter 72

(Senate Bill 214)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Military Installation Council – Membership

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Maryland Military Installation Council;
and generally relating to the Maryland Military Installation Council.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 11–201
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 11–203
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

11–201.

In this subtitle, “Council” means the Maryland Military Installation Council.

11–203.

(a) The Council consists of the following members:

(1) three members selected by the President of the Senate of Maryland to
represent community interests, of which:

(i) one shall be a member of the Senate; and

(ii) two shall be citizens representing communities adjacent to
military installations;

(2) three members selected by the Speaker of the House of Delegates to
represent community interests, of which:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 72 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) one shall be a member of the House of Delegates; and

(ii) two shall be citizens representing communities adjacent to
military installations;

(3) the Secretary, or the designee of the Secretary;

(4) the Secretary of Transportation, or the designee of the Secretary of
Transportation;

(5) the Secretary of the Environment, or the designee of the Secretary of
the Environment;

(6) the Secretary of Planning, or the designee of the Secretary of Planning;

(7) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or the designee of the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs;

(8) THE SECRETARY OF LABOR, OR THE DESIGNEE OF THE
SECRETARY OF LABOR;

(9) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS, OR THE DESIGNEE
OF THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT;

[(8)] (10) the Adjutant General of the Maryland National Guard, or the
designee of the Adjutant General;

[(9)] (11) the President of the Southern Maryland Navy Alliance;

[(10)] (12) the President of the Army Alliance;

[(11)] (13) the President of the [Indian Head Defense Alliance] MILITARY
ALLIANCE COUNCIL OF CHARLES COUNTY;

[(12)] (14) the President of the Maritime TECHNOLOGY Alliance;

[(13)] (15) the President of the Fort Detrick Alliance;

[(14)] (16) the President of the Fort Meade Alliance;

[(15)] (17) the President of the Andrews Business and Community Alliance;
and

[(16)] (18) [five] SIX members selected by the Governor, OF WHICH AT
LEAST ONE IS A SPOUSE OF A SERVICE MEMBER.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 72

(b) (1) The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Delegates
shall each appoint three members representing community interests to serve as members
of the Council.

(2) The chair may appoint:

(i) additional members who are presidents of other military base
advocacy groups that are nonprofit organizations and recognized by the Department; and

(ii) ex officio members as necessary to address specific issues,
including a representative of the Maryland National Guard.

(c) (1) The term of an appointed member is 4 years.

(2) The terms of the appointed members are staggered as required by the
terms provided for appointed members of the Council on July 1, 2010.

(d) A member of the Council:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Council; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3