START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 290 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 290 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Agriculture) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Certified Local Farm and Fish Program - Annual Waiver Reports - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill alters annual reporting deadlines related to waivers granted under 
the Certified Local Farm and Fish Program. The deadline for the Maryland Department of 
Agriculture (MDA) to submit a report to the Board of Public Works (BPW) on waivers 
requested and waivers granted is altered from July 31 to October 31 of each year. In 
addition, the deadline for BPW to submit a record of each waiver requested to the 
General Assembly is altered from October 1 to December 31 each year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and has no direct effect on 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDA has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 2 and 32 of 2021 established the Certified Local Farm Enterprise 
Program and office in MDA to encourage State agencies (including public 
four-year universities) to achieve an overall goal of purchasing 20% of food from certified 
local farm enterprises. Chapters 575 and 576 of 2023 added certified Chesapeake invasive 
species providers to the calculation of the 20% goal as well as to certification requirements 
and grant-making opportunities. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 290/ Page 2 
Each State agency must structure its procurement procedures to try to achieve an overall 
percentage goal of 20% of its total dollar value of procurement contracts for food being 
made directly or indirectly to certified local farms and certified Chesapeake invasive 
species providers. An agency may achieve the goal through competitive sealed bids and 
proposals and small procurements under terms in current law. 
 
The Office for the Certified Local Farm and Fish Program within MDA administers the 
program. If an agency does not achieve the goal set for a specific contract, it must 
demonstrate to the office that it took all necessary and reasonable steps to achieve the goal. 
The office may grant a waiver if a unit provides a reasonable demonstration of good faith 
efforts to achieve the goal. Waivers may also be granted for sole source, expedited, or 
emergency procurements. The office must submit an annual report to BPW by July 31 of 
each year with specified information about waivers requested and granted. BPW must keep 
a record of waivers requested and submit a copy to specified committees of the 
General Assembly by October 1 of each year. 
 
Background:  MDA advises that food purchase reports from State agencies and 
universities are due by September 30, each year, so it is not possible to prepare the waiver 
report for BPW by July 31. Moving the reporting date to October 31 makes the reporting 
process more efficient. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Agriculture; Board of Public Works; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 1, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 290/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
  
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Certified Local Farm and Fish Program - Annual Waiver Reports - 
Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0290 
  
PREPARED BY: 
Thomas Filbert, Rachel Jones, and Karen Fedor 
  
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_x_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill has no economic impact. It only alters a reporting deadline. 
 

END OF PAGE 3