START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 255 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 255 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Maryland 
Department of Emergency Management) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Public Safety - Volunteer Company Assistance Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This departmental bill transfers the Volunteer Company Assistance Fund (VCAF) from the 
Military Department to the Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM). 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill codifies existing practice, as discussed below in the 
Current Law/Background section. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDEM has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
 
Chapters 287 and 288 of 2021 established MDEM as a principal department of the 
Executive Branch of State government and as the successor to the Maryland Emergency 
Management Agency (MEMA), which had been housed within the Military Department. 
MDEM is responsible for coordinating the State response in any major emergency or 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 255/ Page 2 
disaster. This includes supporting local governments as needed or requested and 
coordinating assistance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency and other 
federal partners. MDEM manages many of the federal grants that fund a broad range of 
initiatives leading to enhanced protection from and responses to the full range of natural 
and man-made disasters that could threaten the State’s citizens. 
 
Volunteer Company Assistance Fund 
 
VCAF is a special, nonlapsing fund, the stated purpose of which is to ensure adequate fire 
protection and rescue services in the State. A grant or loan awarded from the fund must be 
used only for purchasing, replacing, or improving (1) specified equipment and vehicles 
used for firefighting and emergency services; (2) communications equipment; (3) specified 
protective equipment; (4) any other equipment necessary to carry out the ordinary functions 
of supporting firefighting and rescue activities; or (5) facilities used to house firefighting 
equipment, ambulances, and rescue vehicles. 
 
MEMA administered the fund when it was an agency within the Military Department. 
Although 
statute 
assigns 
responsibility 
for 
administering 
the 
fund 
to 
the 
Military Department, MDEM advises that it currently controls and administers the fund 
through an interagency agreement formed with the Military Department in 2021. 
According to MDEM, the Military Department transferred the position for the employee 
who manages VCAF to MDEM following MDEM’s transition to an executive department, 
and the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced lists the fund under MDEM. MDEM advises that 
as of January 2024, the fund balance is approximately $34.1 million, with $6.1 million 
available for future loans. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Emergency Management; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 16, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 255/ Page 3 
Analysis Of Economic Impact On Small Businesses 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Public Safety - Volunteer Company Assistance Fund – Alterations 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0255 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Anna Sierra, MDEM 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This bill proposes a technical fix to codify current administrative roles related to the 
Volunteer Company Assistance Fund. Small businesses are not eligible for this funding. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3