START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 268 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 268 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Critical Area Commission) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Program - Enforcement 
 
   
This departmental bill alters the enforcement and after-the-fact application approval 
procedures required as minimum elements of a local jurisdiction’s Chesapeake and Atlantic 
Coastal Bays Critical Area Program to apply to all Critical Area violations. The bill also 
(1) repeals a 30-day waiting period before the chair of the Critical Area Commission 
(CAC) may refer certain enforcement matters to the Attorney General and (2) expands the 
authority of the Attorney General to take certain equitable actions to include Critical Area 
violations of an order, a permit, a plan, a local program, the Critical Area law, or regulations 
adopted, approved, or issued under the Critical Area law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations, as discussed 
below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations, 
as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  CAC has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 268/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law: 
 
Expansion to All Critical Area Violations 
 
Current Law:  A local jurisdiction may not issue a permit, approval, variance, or special 
exception unless the person seeking it has, in addition to having prepared a restoration or 
mitigation plan and performed required abatement measures, fully paid all administrative, 
civil, and criminal penalties imposed under the statute setting minimum elements of local 
critical area programs. 
 
A local jurisdiction may not accept an application for a variance to legalize a violation of 
the critical area law, including an unpermitted structure or development activity, unless the 
local jurisdiction first issues a notice of violation, including assessment of an 
administrative or civil penalty, for the violation. 
 
The Bill:  References to specific types of penalties are repealed. 
 
Waiting Period 
 
Current Law:  Whenever the chair of CAC has reason to believe that a local jurisdiction is 
failing to enforce the requirements of a program applicable to a particular development, 
the chair must serve notice upon the local enforcement authorities. If, within 30 days after 
service of the notice, the local authorities have failed to initiate an action to remedy or 
punish the violation, the chair may refer the matter to the Attorney General. 
 
The Bill:  The 30-day waiting period required for the chair to refer the matter to the 
Attorney General is repealed. 
 
Attorney General Remedies 
 
Current Law:  In addition to any other sanction or remedy available, the Attorney General 
may bring an action in equity to compel compliance or restrain noncompliance with the 
requirements of approved project plans and to compel restoration of lands or structures to 
their condition prior to any modification, which was done in violation of those plans. 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of § 8-1815 of the Natural Resources Article, 
whenever a development in the Critical Area is proceeding in violation of approved project 
plans and threatens to immediately and irreparably degrade the quality of tidal waters or 
fish, wildlife, or plant habitat, the Attorney General, upon request of the chair of CAC, may 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 268/ Page 3 
bring an action to restrain the violation and, as appropriate, to compel restoration of any 
land or water areas affected by the development. 
 
The Bill:  The above enforcement actions may be taken by the Attorney General based on 
noncompliance with an order, a permit, a plan, a local program, the Critical Area law, or 
regulations adopted, approved, or issued under the critical area law. 
 
Background:  The General Assembly established CAC in 1984 through the  
Chesapeake Bay Critical Area Protection Act. In 2002, the law was extended to the  
Atlantic Coastal Bays in Worcester County and Ocean City. CAC operates as an 
administrative unit within the Department of Natural Resources. The law creates a 
partnership between the State and local governments. Sixty-four Maryland jurisdictions, 
including 16 counties, Baltimore City, and 47 municipalities, have lands that border a 
portion of the Chesapeake or Atlantic Coastal bays, their tidal tributaries, or tidal wetlands. 
The purpose of this partnership is to address development in a comprehensive fashion in 
order to improve water quality, conserve wildlife habitats, and manage land uses in a 
1,000-foot-wide zone, known as the “Critical Area,” adjacent to these tidal shorelines. The 
642,000 acres in the Critical Area comprise approximately 10% of the State’s land area. 
 
Each jurisdiction is responsible for managing land use development in the Critical Area 
through a local program. The participating counties and municipalities base their programs 
on the requirements of the State law, the commission’s original program criteria, and 
regulations that the General Assembly authorized the commission to adopt under 
comprehensive statutory amendments enacted in 2008. Standard provisions in each 
program include limits on forest clearing and the amount of certain semi-impervious 
surfaces that contribute to stormwater runoff. All local critical area programs, and 
subsequent amendments, must be approved by the commission. The commission also 
reviews and comments on land development projects that are subject to local approval. 
State agencies must obtain commission approval for development projects in the 
Critical Area. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  CAC advises that the bill’s changes to enforcement provisions 
and after-the-fact variance procedures are necessary to accommodate all of the varied 
processes and procedures of local critical area programs. According to CAC, the changes 
are technical and not substantive in nature. CAC further advises that changes related to the 
three-day response period and conditions under which the Attorney General may bring an 
enforcement action are necessary to ensure effective and consistent enforcement for all 
Critical Area violations, as current provisions have, at times, constrained the commission 
and the Attorney General’s Office from being able to pursue certain enforcement matters. 
The commission advises that, while these changes may result in more actions taken by the 
Office of the Attorney General, the impacts should be minimal based on the limited number 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 268/ Page 4 
of severe local Critical Area violations. The Office of the Attorney General likewise 
indicates only a potential minimal impact. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Critical Area Commission; Department of Natural Resources; 
Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Anne Arundel, Kent, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; cities of 
Havre de Grace and Salisbury; Town of Leonardtown; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services. 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 25, 2024 
Third Reader - February 28, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 268/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  
Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays Critical Area Program - 
Enforcement 
 
BILL NUMBER:  
SB0268 
 
PREPARED BY:  
Nick Kelly, Critical Area Commission 
 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
This statutory change is intended to clarify Critical Area enforcement provisions when violations 
to Critical Area law occur. There are no immediate adverse direct or indirect impacts to small 
businesses. 
 

END OF PAGE 5