START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 296 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 296 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
State Board for Professional Land Surveyors - Sunset Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the State Board for Professional 
Land Surveyors within the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by three years to 
July 1, 2027, subject to the evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland 
Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). It also requires MDL to submit a report to the 
Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee (JAEC) by July 1, 2025, with information – 
regarding the State Board for Professional Land Surveyors – to be determined by JAEC. 
The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2027. MDL can likely submit the required report with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  Maryland has regulated the practice of land surveying since 
1939. Initially, the licensure of professional land surveyors and professional engineers was 
managed by a joint board, but in 1977, an independent board for the registration of 
professional land surveyors was established. The board’s primary purpose is to license and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 296/ Page 2 
regulate the practice of land surveying in the State, and its major functions are examining, 
licensing, and disciplining members of the profession. The board consists of six members 
appointed by the Governor with the advice of the Secretary of Labor and the Senate. Of 
the six members, three must be professional land surveyors, one must be a licensed 
property line surveyor or professional land surveyor, and two must be consumers. 
 
Chapter 227 of 2003 established the State Occupational and Licensing Design Boards’ 
Fund and redirected licensing revenue associated with five “design boards” in MDL 
(including the State Board for Professional Land Surveyors) from the general fund to the 
new special fund. The Act also repealed statutory fees and instead authorized the boards to 
set fees by regulation. 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024. OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
Additional Comments:  Absent reauthorization during the 2024 legislative session, 
regulation of professional land surveyors (including property line surveyors) in Maryland 
ceases July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 296/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  State Board for Professional Land Surveyors - Sunset Extension  
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0296 
 
PREPARED BY: Zevi Thomas  
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
OR 
 
       
WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3