START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 245 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 245 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Health) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Community Health Resources Commission – Sunset Extension and 
Program Evaluation 
 
 
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the Maryland Community Health 
Resources Commission (MCHRC) by 10 years to June 30, 2035, subject to the evaluation 
and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act (MPEA). The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for MCHRC are maintained through 
FY 2035. The FY 2025 budget includes $63.0 million for MCHRC. 
  
Local Effect:  Local governments are eligible to apply for grants from MCHRC; extending 
the termination date means these grants continue to be available. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does 
not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 245/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:   
 
Maryland Community Health Resources Commission 
 
MCHRC is an independent commission within MDH with 11 members appointed by the 
Governor. The commission was established in 2005 to expand health care access through 
community health resources. Historically, MCHRC mainly funded the State’s safety net 
providers. However, the commission’s charge has been expanded in recent years. 
 
Chapter 36 of 2021 (the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future – Implementation) established 
the Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports within MCHRC to 
(1) develop coordinated community supports partnerships to meet student behavioral 
health needs and other related challenges in a holistic, nonstigmatized, and coordinated 
manner; (2) provide technical assistance to local school systems to support positive 
classroom environments and close achievement gaps; and (3) provide expertise in 
developing best practices in the delivery of behavioral health and wraparound services. 
Part of the consortium’s charge is to administer the Coordinated Community Supports 
Partnerships grant program.  
 
Chapters 741 and 742 of 2021 required MCHRC to establish a Pathways to Health 
Equity/Health Equity Resource Community (HERC) program and provide grant funding 
to reduce health disparities, improve health outcomes, improve access to primary care, 
promote primary and secondary prevention services, and reduce health care costs and 
hospital admissions and readmissions. 
 
MCHRC’s $108.0 million fiscal 2024 appropriation provides roughly $85.0 million for the 
Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports, $15.0 million for HERC grants, and 
$7.0 million for operating grants to qualifying community health resources. 
 
MCHRC was originally established with a termination date of June 30, 2010; however, 
Chapters 624 and 625 of 2008 extended MCHRC’s termination date by five years to 
June 30, 2015. Chapter 368 of 2014 further extended MCHRC’s termination date by 
10 years to June 30, 2025.  
 
Unlike the Maryland Health Care Commission (MHCC) and the Health Services Cost 
Review Commission (HSCRC), MCHRC is not subject to MPEA. Neither MHCC nor 
HSCRC have statutory termination dates. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 245/ Page 3 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act and the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability 
 
Approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities are subject to termination unless 
reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be subject 
to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability 
(OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may conduct an 
evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. OPEGA was not asked to 
conduct an evaluation prior to its termination. Accordingly, the MCHRC has requested 
reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 245/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
Maryland Department of Health 
Session 2024 
 
BILL TITLE: 
Maryland Community Health Resources Commission – Sunset 
Extension and Program Evaluation 
 
 
BILL 
NUMBER: 
 
PREPARED 
BY: 
 
SB 245 
(Program\Unit): 
Maryland Community Health Resources Commission 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
X WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
OR 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal will not have a fiscal or operational impact on the Maryland Department of Health. 
The Commission’s funding for its traditional RFP is covered by the Cigarette Restitution Fund 
through FY2029, and the HERC program and Consortium are already fully funded. Therefore, 
the Commission’s activities have already been funded and will not require additional investment. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4