START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 299 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 299 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural 
Resources) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Coast Smart Council - Duties and Authority 
 
   
This departmental bill expands the duties of the Coast Smart Council to include developing 
eligibility criteria, standards, and procedures for categorical exemptions from Coast Smart 
requirements for specified proposed capital projects. The projects must have been designed 
to include adaptation and resiliency features to prevent or mitigate damage to the maximum 
extent practicable. The bill also authorizes the council to recommend regulations for 
adoption by the Secretary of Natural Resources.   
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations, as discussed 
below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations, 
as discussed below.    
  
Small Business Effect:  The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) has determined that 
this bill has minimal or no impact on small business (attached). The Department of 
Legislative Services concurs with this assessment.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Coast Smart” means a construction practice in which preliminary 
planning, siting, design, construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of a structure or 
highway facility avoids or minimizes future impacts associated with coastal flooding and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 299/ Page 2 
sea level rise inundation. It includes design criteria and siting criteria that are applicable 
throughout the entire life cycle of a project.   
 
Generally, the Coast Smart Council in DNR must: 
 
 
study and provide analysis regarding standards and factors relevant to the 
establishment of Coast Smart siting and design criteria;  
 
develop siting and design criteria to establish and implement Coast Smart practices 
and requirements;  
 
develop eligibility criteria, standards, and procedures for applying for and obtaining 
a waiver from compliance with the Coast Smart requirements; and  
 
establish procedures for evaluating Coast Smart waiver applications that include the 
consideration of proposed capital projects with regard to (1) the anticipated need to 
prepare for, respond to, and recover from extreme weather events, sea level rise 
inundation, coastal flooding, storm surges, and shoreline erosion and (2) the need to 
prevent danger to life and property and to avoid environmental, socio-economic, 
and economic harm.  
 
Coast Smart Requirements for Specified State and State-supported Local Capital Projects 
 
The Coast Smart Council, in consultation with DNR and the Maryland Department of 
Transportation, must establish Coast Smart siting and design criteria to address sea level 
rise inundation and coastal flood impacts on State and local capital projects. The criteria 
must include: 
 
 
guidelines and any other directives applicable to the preliminary planning and 
construction of a proposed capital project; 
 
a requirement that a structure be designed and constructed or reconstructed in a 
manner to withstand the storm surge from a storm that registers as a category 2 on 
the hurricane wind scale, including a requirement for structures to be constructed or 
reconstructed at a minimum elevation above the projected storm surge; and 
 
provisions establishing a process to allow a unit of State or local government to 
obtain a waiver.   
 
Beginning July 1, 2020, if a State or local capital project costs $500,000 or more, is funded 
with at least 50% State funds, and includes the construction of a structure or highway 
facility, then the structure or highway facility must be constructed in compliance with the 
siting and design criteria established by the council to address sea level rise inundation and 
coast flood impacts such projects. The requirement also applies to the reconstruction of a 
structure with substantial damage.   
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 299/ Page 3 
Background:  DNR advises that the bill codifies the use of categorical exemptions for 
certain capital projects that have an obvious necessity to be placed or built contrary to 
Coast Smart siting and design criteria. Current exemptions listed on the Coast Smart 
Program document (page 12) are water-dependent uses, passive public access, historic 
structures, temporary structures or uses, and emergency use. The Coast Smart guidelines 
indicate projects requesting an exemption must complete a certain form for review by the 
agency funding the project. Allowing the council to recommend regulations for adoption 
by the Secretary of Natural Resources allows any future modifications to be implemented 
more quickly once a need is identified.   
 
State/Local Expenditures:  Both the State and local governments are already using 
categorical exemptions under the Coast Smart Program; the bill generally codifies the 
ability of the council to utilize such exemptions. As such, while both the State and local 
governments likely benefit from a more streamlined and potentially expedited project 
review process, the bill does not materially affect State or local government finances or 
operations.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of General 
Services; Interagency Commission on School Construction; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Kent, 
Montgomery, and Worcester counties; towns of Bel Air and Leonardtown; Maryland 
Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Department of Legislative Services. 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - February 28, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 299/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Coast Smart Council – Duties and Authority 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0299 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Sarah Lane 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
Coast Smart criteria only apply to state and local government capital projects, thus small 
business structures are not required to adhere to siting and design criteria. 

END OF PAGE 4