START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 216 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 216 
(Chair, Finance Committee)(By Request - Departmental - 
Uninsured Employers' Fund) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Workers' Compensation - Failure to Insure - Penalties 
 
   
This departmental bill increases the maximum penalty that an employer may be required 
to pay to the Uninsured Employers’ Fund (UEF) when the Workers’ Compensation 
Commission (WCC) finds that the employer failed to secure compensation for all covered 
employees or failed to comply with an order from WCC to secure and maintain insurance 
for all covered employees and submit proof of that coverage to WCC. In both cases, the 
bill establishes a penalty of up to $25,000, an increase of $15,000 over the current 
maximum penalty of $10,000. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues for UEF increase, potentially by a couple 
hundred thousand dollars or more annually, beginning in fiscal 2025, as discussed below. 
Expenditures are not materially affected.     
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances.   
  
Small Business Effect:  UEF has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) generally 
concurs with this assessment, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 216/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Workers’ Compensation – Generally  
 
Generally, each employer in the State must secure workers’ compensation for all covered 
employees of the employer by maintaining insurance with an authorized insurer or, in 
limited circumstances, through self-insurance. An individual is presumed to be a covered 
employee while in the service of an employer under an express or implied contract of 
apprenticeship or hire. To overcome the presumption of covered employment, an employer 
must establish that the individual performing services is an independent contractor in 
accordance with the common law or is specifically exempted from covered employment 
under the Maryland Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
If an employee covered under workers’ compensation insurance has suffered an accidental 
personal injury, compensable hernia, or occupational disease, the employee is entitled to 
compensation benefits paid by the employer, its insurer, the Subsequent Injury Fund (SIF), 
or UEF, as appropriate. Workers’ compensation benefits include wage replacement, 
medical treatment, and vocational rehabilitation expenses. 
 
Failure to Insure – Orders and Penalties  
 
If an employer fails to secure compensation for all its covered employees, WCC must issue 
an order directing the employer to attend a hearing to show cause as to why the employer 
should not be (1) required to secure compensation for all covered employees; (2) found in 
violation of workers’ compensation law; and (3) assessed a penalty for noncompliance with 
the law. WCC must set the hearing as soon as practicable.  
 
If, following the hearing, WCC finds the employer failed to secure compensation for all its 
covered employees, WCC must (1) order the employer to secure and maintain insurance 
for all its covered employees and submit proof of insurance coverage to WCC and (2) order 
the employer to pay a penalty of up to $10,000 to UEF.  
 
If an employer fails to comply with an order to insure within 30 days after the issuance of 
the order, WCC must set a hearing as soon as practicable. If, following the hearing, WCC 
finds that the employer failed to comply with an order, WCC may order the employer to 
pay a penalty of up to $10,000 to UEF.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 216/ Page 3 
Uninsured Employers’ Fund 
 
If an injured employee who should be receiving workers’ compensation benefits is not 
properly compensated by an employer or the employer’s insurer (which may happen 
because the employer has not purchased workers’ compensation insurance or becomes 
insolvent), UEF directly pays the claimant’s compensation benefits and medical expenses. 
The Director of UEF must use the fund to pay (1) appropriate claims awarded through the 
workers’ compensation process; (2) for certain experts and witnesses hired by UEF; 
(3) other proper authorized charges; (4) outstanding obligations of authorized self-insured 
employers that become insolvent; and (5) hearing loss claims for retirees of the 
Bethlehem Steel Corporation. 
 
In addition to the penalties being increased by the bill, UEF is funded through a 7.5% 
assessment on awards against employers or insurers for permanent disability or death and 
amounts payable by employers or insurers under settlement agreements. Specifically, 6.5% 
is distributed to SIF and the remaining 1% is distributed to UEF.  
 
UEF also retains the subrogation rights of a covered employee or the employee’s 
dependents against an uninsured employer. Through these rights, UEF may institute a civil 
action to recover the money it pays on behalf of an uninsured employer and/or refer the 
matter to the appropriate authority for prosecution.  
 
Background:  UEF advises that, in recent years, the State has experienced numerous 
employers who, for various reasons, fail to carry workers’ compensation insurance, 
resulting in significant costs for UEF to ensure these injured workers are cared for after 
they experience a workplace injury or occupational disease. UEF advises that these 
employers sometimes disappear, failing to reimburse UEF for any payments made on their 
behalf to their injured workers, and simply reestablish a new business under a new name, 
often while still failing to purchase workers’ compensation insurance.  
 
UEF believes that the State’s enforcement system, and the penalties being increased by the 
bill, have been ineffective in deterring this behavior, particularly since WCC’s imposition 
of fines has varied substantially from year to year. Thus, the bill allows for WCC to impose 
more significant fines on employers who fail to maintain compensation insurance, which 
may serve as a stronger deterrent and will provide additional funding for UEF to maintain 
its operations.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Special fund revenues for UEF may increase significantly beginning 
in fiscal 2025. A precise estimate cannot be reliably made at this time because the number 
of penalty orders made by WCC and penalties paid by uninsured employers varies 
significantly from year to year as shown below in Exhibit 1, and the bill continues to grant 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 216/ Page 4 
WCC discretion in setting the penalties. WCC advises that it most commonly sets the 
penalty at $7,000 under current law.  
 
WCC advises that this data, taken from its annual reports, does not reflect the fact that 
many of the penalties shown are ultimately rescinded by WCC (and, therefore, never paid) 
after an order is issued and the employer provides proof of coverage or other 
documentation that they are in compliance with the law. Moreover, many of the fines are 
assessed against small business limited liability companies (LLCs) wherein the owner is 
the only individual working for the LLC and has chosen to be excluded from workers’ 
compensation coverage, as permitted under current law, and are, therefore, ultimately 
rescinded.  
 
 
Exhibit 1  
Penalty and Fine Orders by the Workers’ Compensation Commission 
Fiscal 2014-2023 
 
Fiscal Year 
Penalty Orders 
Total Fines 
Fine Per Order 
 
 
 
 
2014 
19 
$136,000 
$7,158 
2015 
109 
793,500 
7,280 
2016 
53 
449,000 
8,472 
2017 
145 
1,000,000 
6,897 
2018 
180 
1,200,000 
6,667 
2019 
600 
4,400,000 
7,333 
2020 
140 
900,000 
6,429 
2021 
- 
- 
- 
2022 
61 
435,800 
7,144 
2023 
538 
3,237,106 
6,017 
 
Note:  No penalties were assessed during fiscal 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Total fines for 
fiscal 2017 through 2020 are approximates. 
 
Source:  Workers’ Compensation Commission Annual Reports:  Fiscal 2014 through 2023; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 
Nevertheless, even though a precise estimate cannot be reliably made at this time and WCC 
could chose not to modify its practices in issuing the penalties (since the bill allows WCC 
to set penalties up to $25,000), UEF anticipates, and DLS concurs, that the bill is likely to 
increase special fund revenues by at least a couple hundred thousand dollars annually, at 
least in the near term. For illustrative purposes only, if a fine is paid by only 50 employers 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 216/ Page 5 
in a single fiscal year (which is likely given the number of penalty orders issued in some 
fiscal years, even discounting many that may be rescinded by WCC) at an average penalty 
of $12,500 and WCC would have only ordered a penalty of $7,000 under current law, then 
special fund revenues for UEF would increase by $275,000.  
 
In future years, the revenue impact may be less pronounced. As noted above, application 
of the penalties has been relatively inconsistent, and to the extent that WCC increases the 
penalties, the bill may effectively “incentivize” employers to purchase and maintain 
workers’ compensation insurance when they may not have done so under current law. To 
the extent it does so, UEF revenues from fines and related expenditures to cover injured 
workers may decrease. 
 
Small Business Effect:  While DLS generally concurs that the bill has minimal or no 
impact on small businesses (since it is assumed that small businesses generally comply 
with the law), any small business that is subject to the penalty may be significantly affected 
depending on the penalty set by WCC; a penalty of $25,000 could have significant financial 
implications for the business.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Uninsured Employers’ Fund; Workers’ Compensation 
Commission; Chesapeake Employers’ Insurance Company; Subsequent Injury Fund; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 216/ Page 6 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Workers' Compensation - Failure to Insure - Penalties 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 216 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Michael W. Burns, Esq. 
 
 
 
Director 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This legislation would increase the penalty for the failure of an employer to have and maintain 
legally required workers compensation insurance from the current optional $10,000 penalty to a 
mandatory $25,000 penalty. This insurance has been required for most Maryland employers for 
decades and this legislation is an important enforcement tool needed to ensure that covered 
employers are purchasing this legally required insurance to protect their workers and are 
adequately penalized and sanctioned for their failure to obtain that insurance if they fail to 
purchase it.  
 
There would be no impact on any small business unless they are currently required to obtain this 
insurance but fail to do so, in which case they are in violation of current law and should be 
paying for the necessary required workers compensation insurance already. 
 
In general, it would have little or no economic impact except on businesses violating Maryland 
law. 

END OF PAGE 6