START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  SB 321 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 321 
(Senator Jackson) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Property Tax - Credit for Hotel or Residential Development Projects 
 
 
This bill authorizes local governments to grant, by law, a property tax credit against the 
county or municipal property tax imposed on real property that is used for specified hotel 
or residential development projects. The bill also repeals certain provisions relating to a 
similar property tax credit authorized for development projects in Wicomico County 
(Chapters 715 and 716 of 2021). However, the bill does not affect hotel or residential 
development projects in Wicomico County that began on or after July 1, 2021, but before  
June 1, 2024. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years beginning 
after June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues decrease beginning in FY 2025 
to the extent the property tax credit is authorized. The amount of the property tax revenue 
decrease depends on the number of properties that are eligible for the property tax credit, 
the assessed value of each property, and the amount of the property tax credit granted. 
Local expenditures are not directly affected. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Businesses qualifying for the property tax 
credit will pay less in county and municipal property taxes. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 321/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill authorizes county and municipal governments to grant, by law, a 
property tax credit against the county or municipal property tax imposed on real property 
that is used for a hotel or residential development project that is newly constructed or 
involves substantial rehabilitation or revitalization of existing structures. To qualify for the 
property tax credit, a hotel must substantially increase the assessed value of the property. 
For a residential development to qualify for the property tax credit, the project must 
(1) include at least 20 residential units and (2) have at least 15% of all residential units 
within the development that are affordable to households earning less than 80% of the area 
median income. 
 
Local governments may provide, by law, for (1) the amount and duration of the property 
tax credit; (2) eligibility requirements for the property tax credit; (3) application procedures 
for the property tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the property 
tax credit. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 715 and 716 authorized Wicomico County or a municipality in 
the county to grant a property tax credit for real property that is used for a hotel or 
residential development project. In order to qualify for the property tax credit, the project 
must (1) be newly constructed or involve substantial rehabilitation or revitalization of 
existing structures and (2) substantially increase the assessed value of the property. The 
county or a municipality may provide for (1) the amount and duration of the tax credit; 
(2) eligibility requirements for the tax credit; (3) application procedures for the tax credit; 
and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the tax credit. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  County and municipal property tax revenues decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2025 to the extent the property tax credit is authorized. The amount of the property 
tax revenue decrease cannot be reliably estimated and depends on the number of 
development projects that are eligible for the property tax credit in each authorizing 
jurisdiction, the assessed value of each eligible project, and the amount of the property tax 
credit granted. 
 
Additional information on local property tax rates and revenues can be found in the County 
Revenue Outlook Report – Fiscal 2024. A copy of the report is available on the Department 
of Legislative Services website. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 321/ Page 3 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Montgomery, and Wicomico counties; 
cities of College Park and Frostburg; Maryland Municipal League; State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - February 14, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3