START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 310 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 310 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Planning) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Department of Planning - State Repository and Clearinghouse for Federal and 
State Financial and Technical Assistance 
 
 
This departmental bill repeals (1) a requirement that the Maryland Department of Planning 
(MDP) serve as a repository and clearinghouse for information about federal and State 
grants, loans, and other financial and technical assistance and (2) a related requirement that 
MDP adopt specified regulations. The bill also requires MDP to annually publish 
information about State financial and technical assistance programs on the Maryland 
InfoPortal rather than in a catalog or catalogs of State assistance programs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  MDP has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  State law requires MDP to serve as a repository and clearinghouse for 
information concerning federal and State grants, loans, and other financial and technical 
assistance, and to annually publish information about State financial and technical 
assistance in a catalog or catalogs of State assistance programs. MDP is also required to 
adopt regulations that require units of State government to (1) submit financial and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 310/ Page 2 
technical assistance information to MDP and (2) publish information concerning grant 
application requirements in the Maryland Register in a timely manner. 
 
Background:  MDP has a dedicated webpage, Maryland InfoPortal, that serves as a digital 
catalog of State assistance programs and contains links to 700-plus State programs 
providing financial, nonfinancial, and technical assistance and direct development to local 
government, civic and private organizations, and individuals. 
 
MDP advises that the Governor’s Grants Office (GGO) and the federal grants.gov website, 
provide information about federal financial assistance. GGO’s website indicates that the 
office provides resources, training, research, and guidance to State agencies, local 
governments, nonprofit organizations, businesses, and academia on all aspects of federal 
grants and federal funds. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; 
Maryland State Department of Education; Maryland Higher Education Commission; 
Maryland Department of Disabilities; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Human Services; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of 
Planning; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 23, 2024 
Third Reader - February 13, 2024 
 
km/sdk 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 310/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Department of Planning - State Repository and Clearinghouse for 
Federal and State Financial and Technical Assistance 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0310 
 
PREPARED BY:  Maryland Department of Planning 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
This proposal has no economic impact on small businesses. It is updating article language 
to reflect the modern MDP practices that were initially set forth in the State Finance and 
Procurement Article § 5-508. 

END OF PAGE 3