START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 300 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 300 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural 
Resources) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Wildland Areas - Belt Woods Wildland 
 
 
This departmental bill authorizes the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to authorize 
within the Belt Woods Wildland (1) archeological inventories, studies, and research that 
involve surface examination or limited subsurface sampling; (2) salvage and excavation of 
archeological sites; and (3) stabilization and restoration of historic structures existing as of 
December 1, 1985. Any such authorization may only take place with prior approval of the 
Maryland Historical Trust and after an internal departmental review. In addition, prior to 
undertaking any activities on the Seton Belt Barn, DNR must consult with the 
Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission (M-NCPPC).  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is anticipated to be handled with existing budgeted resources, as 
discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  M-NCPPC can consult with DNR using existing resources. The bill does 
not otherwise directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  There is a State wildlands preservation system established in 
statute for the purpose of securing for the people of present and future generations the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 300/ Page 2 
benefits of an enduring resource of State wildlands. “Wildlands” are defined as limited 
areas of land or water that have retained their wilderness character, although not necessarily 
completely natural and undisturbed, or have rare or vanishing species of plant or animal 
life or similar features of interest worthy of preservation for use of present and future 
residents of the State. 
 
One such wildland specified for preservation is the Belt Woods Wildland located in 
Prince George’s County. Within the wildland, DNR has been planning a project to preserve 
two historical structures. The first, the Calvert Barn, is estimated to have been built in 1825 
as a tidewater tobacco barn; DNR advises that it is among the largest early 19th century 
tobacco barns in the county, if not the State. The second, the Seton Belt Barn, is estimated 
to have been built between 1890 and 1900; DNR advises that, due to its location, design, 
materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, it may be eligible for listing under the 
National Register of Historic Places. Both barns, however, are in need of significant repair. 
 
DNR advises that, on the advice of the Office of the Attorney General, it is not authorized 
to use motorized or mechanized equipment within the wildland to preserve historical 
structures. Under current law, DNR is limited to using mechanical or motorized equipment 
only for reforestation and the removal of existing structures and debris. As a result, DNR 
has been unable to move forward with the preservation project. The bill is intended to 
provide DNR with the authority it needs to move forward with the project. 
 
State Expenditures:  As noted above, the bill allows DNR to move forward with a 
previously planned project to restore the two barns within the Belt Woods Wildland. DNR 
estimates the total project cost at approximately $1.2 million. DNR advises that funding 
for the project was appropriated in a prior fiscal year and is still available for DNR to use 
under the bill. Accordingly, DNR can implement the bill using existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of 
Planning; Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 300/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 300/ Page 4 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Natural Resources - Wildland Areas - Belt Woods Wildland 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 300 
 
PREPARED BY: 
LeeAnne Chandler 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The change will enable the Department to move forward with a stabilization project on two barns 
at Belt Woods.  The project will be bid out via DGS on eMaryland Marketplace and may provide 
an opportunity for a small business to bid on all or a portion of the work.  However, it does not 
change the law in a way that would impact small businesses in an ongoing manner, either positively 
or negatively. 
 

END OF PAGE 4