START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 94

Chapter 94

(Senate Bill 310)

AN ACT concerning

Department of Planning – State Repository and Clearinghouse for Federal and
State Financial and Technical Assistance

FOR the purpose of repealing a requirement that the Department of Planning serve as a
repository and clearinghouse for information concerning federal and State grants,
loans, and other financial and technical assistance; repealing a requirement that the
Department adopt certain regulations requiring units of State government to submit
certain information to the Department and publish certain information in the
Maryland Register; altering a requirement that the Department publish certain
information concerning State financial and technical assistance offered through
State assistance programs; and generally relating to the Department of Planning
and information concerning certain financial and technical assistance.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 5–508
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

5–101.

(a) In this title the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Department” means the Department of Planning.

(c) “Secretary” means the Secretary of Planning.

5–508.

[(a) The Department shall serve as a repository and clearinghouse for information
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 94 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

concerning federal and State grants, loans, and other financial and technical assistance.

(b) The Department shall adopt regulations that require units of State
government:

(1) to submit financial and technical assistance information to the
Department; and

(2) to publish information concerning grant application requirements in
the Maryland Register in a timely manner.

(c)] The Department shall annually publish ON THE MARYLAND INFOPORTAL
information concerning State financial and technical assistance [in a catalog or catalogs of]
OFFERED THROUGH State assistance programs.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2