START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 303 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 303 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural 
Resources) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Aquaculture - Definition of Shellfish - Alteration 
 
 
This departmental bill modifies the definition of “shellfish” as it relates to an existing 
prohibition against importing or possessing within the State shellfish taken from waters 
outside the waters of the State for planting in the waters of the State without the approval 
of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). Under the bill, “shellfish” includes “live 
bivalves and bivalve shells” rather than “live oysters, seed oysters, oyster shells, live 
hard-shell clams, live soft-shell clams, and clam shells.” The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Under aquaculture provisions of the Natural Resources Article, a person 
may not import or possess within the State shellfish taken from waters outside the waters 
of the State for planting in the waters of the State without the approval of DNR. With 
respect to that prohibition, the word “shellfish” includes live oysters, seed oysters, oyster 
shells, live hard-shell clams, live soft-shell clams, and clam shells. 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 303/ Page 2 
Background:  DNR indicates that the broader definition of “shellfish” under the bill will 
ensure that the department can require fish health protocols for additional species, like 
scallops, that may be brought into the State for planting in waters of the State. DNR advises 
that without expanding the definition, the State remains vulnerable to imported shellfish 
with possible diseases that could be brought in and planted by leaseholders. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 303/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Aquaculture - Definition of Shellfish - Alteration 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 303 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Sarah Widman 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The bill expands the definition of shellfish. This will not result in any meaningful economic 
impacts to small businesses at this time. 
 

END OF PAGE 3