START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 379 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
Senate Bill 379 
(Senator West, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Task Force to Study Crime Classification - Renaming, Membership, and Duties 
 
 
This bill (1) renames the Task Force to Study Crime Classification to be the Task Force to 
Study Crime Reclassification and Penalties; (2) expands the membership of the task force; 
(3) alters the duties of the task force; and (4) specifies that a task force member serves at 
the pleasure of the person who appointed them to the task force. The task force must report 
its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by 
December 31, 2025. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2026. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) 
increase by $177,300 in FY 2025 and by $155,900 in FY 2026, as discussed below. Any 
expense reimbursements for members of the task force are assumed to be minimal and 
absorbable with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
177,300 
155,900 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($177,300) 
($155,900) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 379/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  Chapter 712 of 2023 established the Task Force to Study 
Crime Classification, to be staffed by OAG. The task force is required to (1) study and 
make recommendations regarding a method for classifying crimes and civil offenses under 
State law and (2) identify and logically categorize all crimes and civil offenses that exist 
under State law. Pursuant to Chapter 712, the task force was required to report its findings 
and recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 31, 2023. 
Chapter 712 terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
The bill repeals those responsibilities and instead, requires the Task Force to Study Crime 
Reclassification and Penalties (1) to review the penalties for all criminal and civil violations 
in the Criminal Law Article, Criminal Procedure Article, Public Safety Article, and 
Maryland Sentencing Guidelines and (2) make recommendations regarding the current 
scheme for criminal and civil violations in the Criminal Law Article, Criminal Procedure 
Article, Public Safety Article, and Maryland Sentencing Guidelines. The task force’s 
recommendations must include:   
 
 
whether violations should be categorized by classes of misdemeanor and felony to 
correspond with the severity of offenses; 
 
whether there are violations that should be reclassified as civil offenses, 
misdemeanors, or felonies; 
 
whether there are penalties that should be altered because they are 
disproportionately lenient or severe; 
 
whether remaining common law offenses should be codified; and 
 
whether statutory changes are needed for provisions of criminal law that lack an 
explicit mens rea. 
 
In a December 2023 letter, the Task Force to Study Crime Classification described some 
of the research it had conducted, summarized the proceedings of six meetings it held from 
September 2023 through December 2023, and made the following recommendations:  
(1) clarify the intent of the task force legislation and the scope of the reclassification of 
offenses; (2) narrow the offenses to be reviewed by the task force; (3) ensure adequate staff 
support for the task force; and (4) ensure adequate time for the task force to complete its 
responsibilities (ideally two years). 
 
State Expenditures:  OAG advises that its current staff cannot accommodate the bill’s 
requirements, and given its current workloads, the scope of the task force’s responsibilities, 
the research required, and the reporting deadline, one contractual attorney and 
one part-time paralegal are needed to implement the bill. The Department of Legislative 
Services concurs with the assessment. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 379/ Page 3 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $177,257 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a 30-day startup delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one contractual 
attorney and one contractual part-time paralegal to staff the task force and complete the 
required report. It includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing 
operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Positions 
1.5 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$162,745 
Operating Expenses 
    14,512 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$177,257 
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operations and the termination of the task force at 
the end of fiscal 2026. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 31, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 24, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3