START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 368 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 368 
(Senators Waldstreicher and Gile) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
State Retirement and Pension System - Military Service Credit - Eligibility 
 
 
This bill expands the definition of “military service” as it relates to service credit in the 
State Retirement and Pension System (SRPS) to include service after May 7, 1975, with 
(1) the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service; (2) the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); or (3) the Coast and Geodetic Survey. Any member 
with qualifying service may claim service credit for service in those branches that precedes 
or interrupts membership in SRPS, as specified in current law. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect until FY 2027; a reliable estimate of the total cost is not feasible, 
but is likely minimal, as discussed below. In FY 2027, the average cost to the State for a 
member of SRPS to claim the maximum five years of service credit ranges from $5,100 to 
$11,400, depending on the plan to which the member belongs. Out-year costs increase 
according to actuarial assumptions and are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 
20% special funds, and 20% federal and other funds. No effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  No effect until FY 2027; a reliable estimate of the total cost is not feasible, 
but is likely minimal, for the same reason as for State plans. Any per-member costs 
resulting from members claiming credit for military service under the bill are likely similar 
to those for State plans. No effect on revenues. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 368/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Military Service 
 
“Military service” means [emphasis added]:   
 
 
induction into the armed forces of the United States for training and service, as 
specified; 
 
membership in a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States (1) on 
active duty or ordered or assigned to active duty or (2) on active duty for training or 
inactive duty for training that interrupts a member’s service; 
 
enlistment into the armed forces of the United States; 
 
membership in the Maryland National Guard; or 
 
for a person separated from employment on or after July 1, 1991, active duty 
with the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, NOAA, or the 
Coast and Geodetic Survey for specified periods of time ending May 7, 1975. 
 
Credit for Military Service That Precedes Employment 
 
In general, any member or vested former member of SRPS who accrues 10 years of service 
as a member of any State plan may receive 1 year of additional service credit for each year 
of active military duty performed prior to membership in SRPS, up to a maximum of 
5 years. That credit is granted at no cost to the member or former member and is applied 
using the accrual rate in effect when the member or former member submits an application 
for the credit to the State Retirement Agency. 
 
A member of the Maryland National Guard or a reserve component of the 
U.S. Armed Forces who is not activated for military service receives service credit at the 
rate of 4 months for each full year of service in the Maryland National Guard or reserves, 
up to 36 months. 
 
However, SRPS members or vested former members who claim credit for the same military 
service from another retirement system may not receive military service credit from SRPS, 
unless they claimed credit for that military service from:  
 
 
Social Security; 
 
the National Railroad Retirement Act; or 
 
National Guard or military reserves pensions (Title 3 or Title 10 of the U.S. Code). 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 368/ Page 3 
This generally means that any SRPS member receiving a military pension after completing 
20 years of active military service cannot claim the military service credit from SRPS. 
 
Credit for Military Service That Interrupts Employment 
 
In general, a member of a State or local retirement or pension system must receive service 
credit for a period of absence from employment while in military service if (1) the member 
returns to active employment and (2) membership in a State or local retirement or pension 
system is a requirement of employment. Service credit awarded for an absence due to 
military service cannot exceed five years. For a member of a State system, the service credit 
applies to the individual’s retirement allowance using the accrual rate in effect at the time 
the individual retires. Under the bill, members whose State service is interrupted by service 
in any of the three specified services would also be eligible for service credit during that 
time, as long as they return to State employment, as specified in current law. 
 
For SRPS members, the five-year cap on military service credit applies to the combined 
total of credit earned for military service during or prior to employment. 
 
State/Local Expenditures:  Neither SRPS nor the Department of Legislative Services is 
aware of how many members or former members have served or will serve in any of the 
three specified services, so a reliable estimate of the bill’s effect is not feasible. However, 
the General Assembly’s consulting actuary has calculated the employer costs associated 
with five years of additional service credit (the maximum allowed under current law) for 
the average member of each State plan. As the cost of service credit varies by age and 
tenure (e.g., the cost of the thirtieth year of service is higher than the cost of the fifth year 
of service), this analysis covers only the average cost across current active members (the 
cost for vested former members is likely similar). Actual costs for each individual likely 
vary from the average. 
 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, but SRPS is not aware of any service credit due until a 
member or former member claims the credit, which will not occur until after the effective 
date (i.e., fiscal 2025). Any service credit awarded in fiscal 2025 is reflected in the actuarial 
valuation as of June 30, 2025, which calculates employer contributions for fiscal 2027. 
Therefore, there is no fiscal effect until fiscal 2027. 
 
The actuary advises that approximately 104,000 active and terminated vested members 
have at least 10 years of service and would be eligible for up to 5 years of service for 
qualifying service that preceded membership under the bill; more active members may 
reach 10 years of service in future years, but they are not factored into this analysis. 
Similarly, any members whose service is interrupted in the future are not factored into this 
analysis. The number of active and terminated vested members who actually claim the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 368/ Page 4 
credit is likely minimal; the State Retirement Agency advises that 259 members claimed 
military service credit in fiscal 2023. 
 
Exhibit 1 includes the average employer cost to the State for a member of each of the 
SRPS plans to receive five years of service credit under the bill. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Average Cost of Five Years of Service Credit, by Plan 
Fiscal 2027 
 
 
Average Cost 
Per Member 
Teachers’ Retirement System 
$9,500 
Teachers’ Pension System 
7,100 
Employees’ Retirement System 
7,300 
Employees’ Pension System 
5,100 
Correctional Officers’ Retirement System 
6,100 
State Police Retirement System 
9,500 
Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System 
8,200 
Judges’ Retirement System 
11,400 
 
Source:  Bolton 
 
 
The total cost to the State depends on the number and distribution of SRPS members who 
claim military service credit under the bill, and how much credit they claim. Those costs 
are assumed to be allocated 60% general funds, 20% special funds, and 20% federal and 
other funds. Out-year costs increase according to actuarial assumptions. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Bolton; State Retirement Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 368/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5