START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 345 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 345 
(Senator Waldstreicher) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Transportation - Vision Zero - Implementation 
 
 
This bill expands the responsibilities of the Vision Zero coordinator within the Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT) with respect to implementing Vision Zero. The bill 
also (1) requires the coordinator to hold a quarterly public meeting on the implementation 
of Vision Zero with specified individuals and establishes requirements for specified 
meeting participants; (2) subjects MDOT, with respect to those meetings, to specified 
enhanced Open Meetings Act requirements; (3) requires each quarterly public meeting to 
be live streamed; and (4) requires MDOT to maintain on its website a complete and 
unedited archived video recording of any such meeting for a minimum of five years after 
the date of the meeting. Finally, the bill requires the annual report submitted by MDOT by 
December 31 each year on the status of Vision Zero to also include the activities and any 
findings and recommendations of the coordinator as well as a summary of each quarterly 
public meeting held in the previous year. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled using existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 345/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Vision Zero Coordinator Duties 
 
The duties of the Vision Zero coordinator – with respect to the implementation of  
Vision Zero – are expanded to include collaborating with other State agencies and local 
authorities, including local transportation agencies, law enforcement agencies, educational 
institutions, and fire and rescue services, to:   
 
 
identify specified strategies for achieving the existing Vision Zero goal to have zero 
vehicle-related deaths or serious injuries on roadways by 2030; 
 
analyze infrastructure reviews of pedestrian and bicyclist fatalities completed by the 
State Highway Administration (SHA) pursuant to the requirements of Chapters 153 
and 154 of 2022; 
 
provide guidance on any other issue directly related to roadway safety; and  
 
advise the Governor and State and local agencies on (1) the implementation of 
Vision Zero; (2) policies, programs, and services affecting traffic safety for 
pedestrians, bicyclists, and drivers and passengers of motor vehicles; and 
(3) priorities and needs for roadway safety. 
 
Required Quarterly Public Meetings 
 
The Vision Zero coordinator must hold a quarterly public meeting on the implementation 
of Vision Zero with (1) the State Highway Administrator or the Administrator’s designee; 
(2) the Motor Vehicle Administrator or the Administrator’s designee; (3) the Executive 
Director of the Maryland Transportation Authority or the Executive Director’s designee; 
and (4) a representative of MDOT’s Office of the Secretary as designated by the Secretary 
of Transportation. The coordinator may request that any other appropriate State or local 
official participate in or take questions at a quarterly public meeting. At a quarterly public 
meeting, the required participants listed above must: 
 
 
address and make recommendations on any Vision Zero development and 
implementation issues identified by the coordinator under the bill; 
 
discuss each infrastructure review completed by SHA pursuant to the requirements 
of Chapters 153 and 154 and analyzed by the coordinator and vote to accept the 
review or return the review to the person that conducted it for a response to questions 
or comments or for further review as appropriate; and  
 
discuss and recommend any guidance or advice for the coordinator to provide 
regarding issues directly related to roadway safety.  

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 345/ Page 3 
A quarterly public meeting must be live streamed. A requirement relating to how long 
MDOT must maintain on its website a complete and unedited archived video recording of 
each meeting is described below. 
 
Enhanced Open Meetings Act Requirements 
 
The bill subjects MDOT, with respect to the quarterly public meetings held by the 
Vision Zero coordinator pursuant to the bill, to specified enhanced Open Meetings Act 
requirements that apply to certain public bodies, as discussed below in the Current Law 
section of this fiscal and policy note. 
 
MDOT must maintain on its website a complete and unedited archived video recording of 
each quarterly public meeting for a minimum of five years after the date of the meeting. 
(Other public bodies subject to the enhanced requirements under current law must maintain 
such video recordings for a minimum of one year after the date of the meeting, as 
applicable.) 
 
Current Law:   
 
Vision Zero 
 
The State’s traffic safety program was renamed Vision Zero by Chapter 377 of 2019 and 
is currently referred to as Zero Deaths Maryland. The Federal Highway Administration’s 
traffic safety program is known as the Safe System Approach. 
 
The purpose of Vision Zero is to develop strategies to make roadways safer for drivers and 
passengers of motor vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The goal of Vision Zero is to 
have zero vehicle-related deaths or serious injuries on roadways by 2030. 
 
MDOT must designate a coordinator to oversee the implementation of Vision Zero 
throughout the State. In implementing Vision Zero, the coordinator must collaborate with 
other State agencies and local authorities, including local transportation agencies, law 
enforcement agencies, educational institutions, and fire and rescue services. 
 
The implementation of Vision Zero must include specified strategies for achieving the goal 
to have zero vehicle-related deaths or serious injuries on roadways by 2030, including, 
among others, strategies for:   
 
 
identifying State and local laws, policies, and regulations that hinder the 
development and implementation of Vision Zero; 
 
proposing changes to State and local laws to allow for innovative engineering and 
traffic calming; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 345/ Page 4 
 
collecting and publishing motor vehicle collision data;  
 
reviewing existing traffic safety programs to determine their effectiveness; 
 
prioritizing resources for investment in the communities most affected by motor 
vehicle collisions;  
 
developing and publishing a long-term plan for the continued development of 
Vision Zero; and 
 
investing more resources into construction needs for high-accident intersections and 
roadway sections. 
 
Zero Deaths Maryland 
 
Zero Deaths Maryland is administered by the Maryland Highway Safety Office (MHSO), 
which is housed within the Motor Vehicle Administration. SHA partners closely with 
MHSO to implement safety programs and best practices for the program. In support of the 
program, Chapters 153 and 154 require SHA to perform an infrastructure review of each 
pedestrian or bicyclist fatality that occurs on a State highway or at an intersection of a State 
highway and another highway or municipal street. 
 
MHSO’s safety operations are divided into various program areas that include speed and 
aggressive driving, distracted driving, impaired driving, occupant protection, motorcycle 
safety, and pedestrian and bicycle safety. MHSO’s activities include data tracking and 
reporting, program development, and providing grant funding for law enforcement, 
outreach, and education. MHSO’s annual reports can be found on its website, and the 
reports include detailed highway safety data and information on MHSO’s operations and 
funding, including its progress on Vision Zero. 
 
Open Meetings Act – Generally 
 
Under Maryland’s Open Meetings Act, with limited exceptions, a public body must 
(1) meet in open session in places reasonably accessible to potential attendees and 
(2) provide reasonable advance notice of the time and location of meetings, including, 
when appropriate, whether any portion of a meeting will be in closed session. A “public 
body” is any entity that (1) consists of at least two individuals and (2) is created by the 
Maryland Constitution; a State statute; a county or municipal charter; a memorandum of 
understanding or a master agreement to which a majority of the county boards of education 
and the Maryland State Department of Education are signatories; an ordinance; a rule, 
resolution, or bylaw; or an executive order of the Governor or of the chief executive 
authority of a political subdivision. Exclusions from the definition of “public body” include 
juries, the Governor’s cabinet and Executive Council, judicial nominating commissions, 
and single-member entities, among others. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 345/ Page 5 
Guidance provided by the Office of the Attorney General indicates that when the meeting 
“place” is a conference call, the public can be provided access through a call-in number or 
by access to a meeting room with a speakerphone. 
 
Enhanced Open Meetings Act Requirements  
 
Certain economic and regional development organizations and other public bodies are 
subject to additional requirements under the Open Meetings Act. Each public body subject 
to these enhanced requirements must make publicly available on its website:  
 
 
each open meeting agenda, and other specified meeting materials, at least 48 hours 
in advance of each meeting or as far in advance as practicable under specified 
circumstances; 
 
meeting minutes from the portions of a meeting that were held in open session, not 
more than two business days after the minutes are approved; and 
 
live video streaming of each portion of a meeting that is held in open session. 
 
The public body must approve meeting minutes in a timely manner. Each meeting agenda 
must include consideration of the meeting minutes from the most recent meeting, with 
specified exceptions. To the extent practicable, each open meeting agenda must indicate 
whether the public body intends to adjourn the open session to a closed session and, if 
applicable, the expected time at which the public body intends to adjourn the open session 
to a closed session. 
 
The public body must maintain meeting minutes on its website for a minimum of five years 
after the date of the meeting. Generally, the public body must maintain on its website a 
complete and unedited archived video recording of each open meeting for which live video 
streaming was made available for a minimum of one year after the date of the meeting; 
however, this requirement is altered for specified public bodies. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 344 (Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) - Environment and 
Transportation.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Transportation; Federal Highway 
Administration; Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 345/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
Enrolled - April 11, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 11, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6