START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 307 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 307 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Labor) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Public Safety - Board of Boiler Rules - Membership, Sunset Extension, and 
Report 
 
   
This departmental bill extends the termination date for the Board of Boiler Rules within 
the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) by five years to July 1, 2029, subject to the 
evaluation and reestablishment provisions of the Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
(MPEA). MDL must submit a report by July 1, 2025, to the Joint Audit and Evaluation 
Committee (JAEC) with information regarding the Board of Boiler Rules to be determined 
by JAEC. The bill also adds a member to the Board of Boiler Rules. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures for the board are maintained through 
FY 2029. Otherwise, adding a member to the board and the bill’s reporting requirement 
can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  MDL has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Background:  The Board of Boiler Rules advises State regulators on the 
construction, operation, installation, maintenance, repair, and inspection of boilers and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 307/ Page 2 
pressure vessels. Safety inspectors employed by the State and the insurance industry verify 
that boilers have been installed and are being maintained in compliance with regulations 
and industry standards. The board consists of 10 members. 
 
Maryland Program Evaluation Act 
 
The board is 1 of approximately 60 regulatory entities and activities subject to termination 
unless reauthorized periodically through statute. Under MPEA, these entities may also be 
subject to an evaluation by the Office of Program Evaluation and Government 
Accountability (OPEGA) within DLS prior to their termination. However, OPEGA may 
conduct an evaluation only if directed by specified entities or by legislation. The board is 
scheduled to terminate July 1, 2024; OPEGA was not asked to conduct an evaluation prior 
to its termination. Accordingly, the board has requested reauthorizing legislation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 17, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 307/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Public Safety – Board of Boiler Rules – Membership, Sunset 
Extension, and Report 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0307 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Devki Virk, Commissioner Labor & Industry 
 
 
PART A.  LOCAL GOVERNMENT IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
 
OR 
 
        WILL HAVE A MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 
 

END OF PAGE 3