START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 301 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 301 
(Chair, Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Committee)(By Request - Departmental - Natural 
Resources) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Aquaculture - Placement of Shellfish, Bags, Nets, and Structures on Submerged 
Aquatic Vegetation - Extension 
 
 
This departmental bill extends – from June 30, 2024, to June 30, 2027 – the termination 
date of 2019 legislation (Chapter 238) that allows an aquaculture leaseholder to place 
shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) with specified 
prior written approval from the Department of Natural Resources (DNR). The bill 
correspondingly extends a reporting requirement established under Chapter 238. The bill 
takes effect June 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR has determined that this bill has a meaningful impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 238 of 2019 allows an aquaculture leaseholder to place shellfish, 
bags, nets, or structures on SAV with prior written approval from DNR. In approving the 
placement of shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on SAV, DNR (1) may not authorize 
harvesting by dredge in areas where SAV is present; (2) must authorize for water column 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 301/ Page 2 
leases the placement of shellfish, bags, nets, or structures in at least 10% of the area where 
SAV is present; and (3) must authorize harvest by diving in areas on any submerged land 
lease where SAV is present. 
 
Chapter 238 also contains a requirement that DNR report – by June 1, 2020, and each 
June 1 of the following four years – on (1) specified impacts of allowing leaseholders to 
place shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on SAV and (2) specified related data. (The bill 
extends this reporting requirement by requiring reports to also be submitted by  
June 1, 2025, and each June 1 of the following two years.) 
 
Chapter 238 terminates June 30, 2024. 
 
Background:  DNR indicates that three leaseholders have been granted permission under 
Chapter 238 to place shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on SAV, and the bill’s extension of 
the termination date of Chapter 238 allows the department to further study the impacts of 
the law. A recent DNR report submitted pursuant to Chapter 238 indicates that DNR 
received the first request from a leaseholder to place shellfish, bags, nets, or structures on 
SAV pursuant to the law in 2022. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 301/ Page 3 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Aquaculture - Placement of Shellfish, Bags, Nets, and Structures 
on Submerged Aquatic Vegetation - Extension 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0301 
 
PREPARED BY:  Sarah Widman 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
__ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
 x       WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
If the process can be expanded over time to include more leases, there could be a greater 
positive economic impact on the industry. For individual leases, this provides a meaningful 
positive economic impact as it allows the department to consider whether aquaculture 
activities should be allowed in these areas or not, and if so, maximize aquaculture working 
areas while still protecting SAV beds. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3