START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 375 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 375 
(Senator King) 
Budget and Taxation 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Contracts - Prohibited Provisions 
 
 
This bill prohibits State contracts from including specified provisions that generally restrict 
the power and rights of the State. If a contract includes a prohibited provision, the provision 
is void and the contract remains enforceable as if it did not contain the provision. A State 
contract that includes a prohibited provision is governed by and must be construed in 
accordance with State law, regardless of any term or condition to the contrary within the 
contract. The bill applies prospectively only and may not be applied to or interpreted to 
have any effect on or application to contracts executed before its effective date (or to 
renewals or extensions of such contracts). However, contingent on the enactment of 
House Bill 1524 of 2024, the bill does not apply to a State contract relating to the purchase, 
redevelopment, or operation of a “racing facility” or “training facility site.”  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and also generally conforms statute to 
current practice.     
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill applies only to State contracts.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A State contract is defined as any agreement entered into by the State. 
Except as required by State or federal law, a State contract may not contain a provision: 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 375/ Page 2 
 
that requires the State to indemnify, defend, or hold harmless another person without 
an appropriation of State funds for that purpose; 
 
by which the State agrees to binding arbitration or any other binding extrajudicial 
dispute resolution process; 
 
that names a jurisdiction or venue for any action or dispute against the State other 
than a court of proper jurisdiction in the State; 
 
that requires the State to agree to limit the liability for any direct loss to the State, 
as specified, or that would otherwise impose an indemnification obligation on the 
State; 
 
that requires the State to be bound by a term or condition that (1) is unknown to the 
State at the time of signing the contract; (2) may be unilaterally changed by the other 
party; or (3) is electronically accepted by a State employee without authority; 
 
that requires a person other than the Attorney General of Maryland to serve as legal 
counsel for the State, except as allowed under current law; 
 
that is inconsistent with the State’s Open Meetings Act or Public Information Act; 
 
that binds the State to pay unappropriated amounts or otherwise causes the State to 
incur unfunded liabilities, as specified under State law; 
 
for automatic renewal that obligates the State to allocate funding in subsequent 
fiscal years; or 
 
that limits the State’s ability to recover the cost of a replacement contractor.   
 
Current Law:  An officer or agent of the State charged with specified responsibilities may 
not: 
 
 
make or participate in making for any purpose a contract that purports to bind the 
State to pay any amount unless money has been appropriated for that purpose and 
remains unspent; 
 
create a deficiency; or 
 
incur a liability or spend money in excess of the applicable appropriation. 
 
A State procurement contract must include several specific contract provisions. After the 
parties enter into a contract, they may include additional clauses in the contract by consent 
and without consideration. Each procurement contract must include clauses covering:  
 
 
termination for default; 
 
termination wholly or partly by the State for its convenience, as specified; 
 
variations that occur between estimated and actual quantities of work; 
 
liquidated damages, as appropriate; 
 
specified excuses for nonperformance; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 375/ Page 3 
 
the unilateral right of the State to order in writing changes to the work and a 
temporary stop or delay in performance (not applicable for real property leases); 
 
the contractor’s obligation to comply with statutory political contribution reporting 
requirements; and 
 
nonvisual access for information technology. 
 
In addition, construction contracts must allow for contract modifications and include 
requirements for the notice, submission, and resolution of contract claims in accordance 
with State law. 
 
Additional Comments:  House Bill 1524 provides for the transfer of ownership and 
operation of thoroughbred racing facilities in the State from the Maryland Jockey Club to 
the Maryland Thoroughbred Racetrack Operating Authority (MTROA). Under  
House Bill 1524, §10-601 of the Economic Development Article generally defines “racing 
facility” to mean the Pimlico site and the “training facility site,” as well as any facilities or 
other improvements on those sites. “Training facility site” means a site for training 
thoroughbred racehorses selected or acquired by MTROA.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 289 (Delegate Kerr, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  State Board of Contract Appeals; Office of the Attorney General; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of General Services; Board of 
Public Works; Maryland Department of Transportation; State Treasurer’s Office; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 13, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3