START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 112

Chapter 112

(Senate Bill 300)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Wildland Areas – Belt Woods Wildland

FOR the purpose of authorizing certain ~~archaeological~~ archeological, salvage, excavation,
stabilization, and restoration activities within the Belt Woods Wildland; and
generally relating to the Belt Woods Wildland.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 5–1203(a) and (k)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

5–1203.

(a) (1) In order to assure that an increasing population, accompanied by
expanding settlement and growing mechanization, does not occupy and modify all areas
within the State, leaving no lands designated for preservation and protection in their
natural condition, it is the policy of the General Assembly to secure for the people of present
and future generations the benefits of an enduring resource of State wildlands.

(2) For this purpose there is established a State wildlands preservation
system composed of areas in the State designated by the General Assembly as “wildland
areas”.

(3) The wildland areas shall be administered for the use and enjoyment of
the people of Maryland in a manner that will leave them unimpaired for the future use and
enjoyment as wildlands, to provide for their protection, preservation of their wildland
character, and for gathering and dissemination of information regarding their use and
enjoyment as wildlands.

(4) A State land may not be designated as [“wildland areas”] A WILDLAND
AREA except as provided for in this section or by a subsequent act.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 112 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(k) (1) Under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, that property in
Prince George’s County, containing approximately 610 acres and described as follows is a
Type 2 State wildland and shall be named the “Belt Woods Wildland”:

Beginning at a point, said point being the end of the 11th line of a tract of land which
by deed dated, November 30 1984, and recorded in the land records of Prince George’s
County in Liber 6041, Folio 249, was conveyed by the Mercantile Safe Deposit and Trust
Company to the State of Maryland, to the use of the Department of Natural Resources, and
running thence with the west side of Church Road in a southeasterly direction 1810 feet
more or less to a point in the north west corner of the intersection of Church Road and
Central Avenue, thence running along the northern right of way of Central Avenue in a
westerly direction 2433 feet more or less to a point in the 7th line of the aforementioned
deed, thence continuing along said right of way in a westerly direction 573 feet more or less
to a point, thence running, north 05 degrees 50 minutes 10 seconds west 2977.54 feet to a
point, north 32 degrees 10 minutes 26 seconds west 2093.66 feet to a point, north 27 degrees
43 minutes 31 seconds east 1899.67 feet to a point, north 02 degrees 46 minutes 07 seconds
west 701.52 feet to a point, north 83 degrees 35 minutes 23 seconds east 2989.80 feet to a
point, south 03 degrees 32 minutes 21 seconds east 1073.29 feet to a point, north 85 degrees
20 minutes 56 seconds east 737.15 feet to a point in the western right of way of Church
Road, thence running with said right of way in a southerly direction 2700 feet more or less
to a point in said right of way, thence running, north 81 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds
west 800 feet more or less to a point, south 13 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds west 780 feet
more or less to a point, south 81 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds east 680 feet more or less
to a point in the western right of way of Church Road, thence running with the western
right of way of said road in a southwesterly direction 1230 feet more or less to the point of
beginning.

(2) (I) Existing agricultural fields WITHIN THE BELT WOODS
WILDLAND will be reforested or allowed to naturally revert to a forested condition
according to a management plan developed for the area.

(II) Agricultural leases may continue within the Belt Woods
Wildland until such time as forestation occurs.

(III) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the
Department may reforest existing fields using mechanical or motorized equipment.
[Existing tenancies within the Belt Woods Wildland may continue until December 31,
1997.]

(3) (I) All existing structures including the barns, houses, sheds, and
electric utility lines within the [above described area] BELT WOODS WILDLAND shall be
allowed to remain in the wildland area.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 112

(II) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the
Department may allow the use of mechanical or motorized equipment to STABILIZE OR
remove [these] existing structures and other existing debris from the wildland.

(4) NOTWITHSTANDING ANY OTHER PROVISION OF THIS TITLE, IN
THE BELT WOODS WILDLAND THE DEPARTMENT, WITH PRIOR APPROVAL OF THE
MARYLAND HISTORICAL TRUST AND AFTER AN INTERNAL DEPARTMENTAL REVIEW,
MAY AUTHORIZE:

(I) ~~ARCHAEOLOGICAL~~ ARCHEOLOGICAL INVENTORIES,
STUDIES, AND RESEARCH THAT INVOLVE SURFACE EXAMINATION OR LIMITED
SUBSURFACE SAMPLING;

(II) SALVAGE AND EXCAVATION OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES; AND

(III) STABILIZATION AND RESTORATION OF HISTORIC
STRUCTURES EXISTING AS OF DECEMBER 1, 1985.

(5) PRIOR TO UNDERTAKING ANY ACTIVITIES ON THE SETON BELT
BARN, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL CONSULT WITH THE MARYLAND–NATIONAL
CAPITAL PARK AND PLANNING COMMISSION.

(6) (I) The Belt Woods Wildland contains unique ecological features
including species sensitive to pressures caused by the burgeoning populations of nonnative
and domesticated species.

(II) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the
Department may, as called for in the management plan developed for the area, remove
nonnative or domesticated species of plant or animals and erect fencing, gates, and signage
associated with the protection and interpretation of unique ecological features.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3