START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

Chapter 603

(Senate Bill 345)

AN ACT concerning

Transportation – Vision Zero ~~Advisory~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~–~~ ~~Establishment~~ –
Implementation

FOR the purpose of establishing certain standards and requirements for implementing the
Vision Zero ~~Advisory~~ ~~Commission~~ program under the Maryland Department of
Transportation; and generally relating to the Vision Zero ~~Advisory~~ ~~Commission~~
program under the Maryland Department of Transportation.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – General Provisions
Section 3–307
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapters 149 and 150 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2022)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 8–1001, 8–1002, ~~and~~ 8–1003, and 8–1006
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Transportation
Section 8–1004, 8–1005, and 8–1007
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Transportation~~
~~Section~~ ~~8–1008~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2020~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – General Provisions

3–307.

(a) This section applies only to the following public bodies:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 603 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) the Board of Directors of the Bainbridge Development Corporation;

(2) the Canal Place Preservation and Development Authority;

(3) the Maryland 9–1–1 Board;

(4) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Agricultural and
Resource–Based Industry Corporation;

(5) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Clean Energy Center;

(6) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Economic Development
Corporation;

(7) the Board of Directors of the Maryland Environmental Service;

(8) the Maryland Food Center Authority;

(9) the Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority;

(10) the Maryland Industrial Development Financing Authority;

(11) the Maryland Stadium Authority;

(12) the Maryland Transportation Authority;

(13) the Northeast Maryland Waste Disposal Authority;

(14) the Public Service Commission;

(15) the State Board of Elections;

(16) the Maryland Technology Development Corporation;

(17) the Historic St. Mary’s City Commission;

(18) the State Ethics Commission; [and]

(19) the Maryland Aviation Commission; AND

(20) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, WITH
RESPECT TO QUARTERLY PUBLIC MEETINGS HELD BY THE VISION ZERO
COORDINATOR ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF VISION ZERO UNDER § 8–1004 OF THE
TRANSPORTATION ARTICLE.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

(b) A public body specified in subsection (a) of this section shall make publicly
available on its website:

(1) each open meeting agenda, together with a summary of any finalized
documents, written testimony from the public, and other materials that the public body will
vote on at the open meeting:

(i) at least 48 hours in advance of each meeting; or

(ii) if the meeting is being held due to an emergency, a natural
disaster, or any other unanticipated situation, as far in advance of the meeting as
practicable;

(2) meeting minutes from the portions of a meeting that were held in open
session, not more than 2 business days after the minutes are approved; and

(3) subject to subsections (f) and (g) of this section, live video streaming of
each portion of a meeting that is held in open session.

(c) To the extent practicable, each open meeting agenda shall indicate:

(1) whether the public body intends to adjourn the open session to a closed
session; and

(2) if applicable, the expected time at which the public body intends to
adjourn the open session to a closed session.

(d) (1) The public body shall approve meeting minutes in a timely manner.

(2) Each open meeting agenda shall include consideration of the meeting
minutes from the most recent meeting.

(3) The requirement under paragraph (2) of this subsection does not apply
to the agenda of an emergency meeting of a public body if consideration of the meeting
minutes from the most recent meeting is not practicable because of the need to hold an
emergency meeting.

(e) The public body shall maintain on its website:

(1) meeting minutes made available under subsection (b) of this section for
a minimum of 5 years after the date of the meeting; and

(2) except as provided in subsections (f) [and (g)], (G), AND (G–1) of this
section, a complete and unedited archived video recording of each open meeting for which
live video streaming was made available under subsection (b) of this section for a minimum
of 1 year after the date of the meeting.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 603 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(f) (1) This subsection applies only to the Maryland Stadium Authority.

(2) If the Maryland Stadium Authority meets by telephone conference, the
Authority shall:

(i) make publicly available on its website live audio streaming of
each portion of the meeting that is held in open session; and

(ii) maintain on its website a complete and unedited archived audio
recording of each meeting for which live audio streaming was made available for a minimum
of 1 year after the date of the meeting.

(g) (1) This subsection applies only to the Maryland Transportation Authority.

(2) The Maryland Transportation Authority is required to provide live video
streaming of a meeting only if the meeting is held at:

(i) the headquarters of the Maryland Transportation Authority; or

(ii) a location where the Maryland Transportation Authority held at
least 10 meetings during the immediately preceding calendar year.

(G–1) THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, WITH RESPECT
TO QUARTERLY PUBLIC MEETINGS HELD BY THE VISION ZERO COORDINATOR ON
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF VISION ZERO UNDER § 8–1004 OF THE TRANSPORTATION
ARTICLE, SHALL MAINTAIN ON ITS WEBSITE A COMPLETE AND UNEDITED ARCHIVED
VIDEO RECORDING OF THE MEETING FOR A MINIMUM OF 5 YEARS AFTER THE DATE
OF THE MEETING.

(h) The Department of Information Technology shall provide the technical staff,
support, and equipment necessary to livestream the open meetings of:

(1) the Maryland Transportation Authority;

(2) the State Board of Elections; and

(3) the State Ethics Commission.

(i) For purposes of this title, a project site visit or educational field tour may not
be considered a meeting of a public body listed under subsection (a) of this section if no
organizational business is conducted.

(j) Nothing in this section may be construed to prevent a public body from altering
the agenda of a meeting after the agenda has been made available to the public.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

(k) The requirements of this section are in addition to the other requirements of
this subtitle.

Article – Transportation

8–1001.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Coordinator” means the individual designated by the Department to oversee
the implementation of Vision Zero throughout the State.

(c) “Vision Zero” means a program for planning and developing a State roadway
system that has zero vehicle–related deaths or serious injuries.

8–1002.

There is a program within the Department known as Vision Zero.

8–1003.

(a) The purpose of Vision Zero is to develop strategies to make roadways safer for
drivers and passengers of motor vehicles, bicyclists, and pedestrians.

(b) The goal of Vision Zero is to have zero vehicle–related deaths or serious
injuries on roadways by the year 2030.

8–1004.

(a) The Department shall designate a coordinator to oversee the implementation of
Vision Zero throughout the State.

(b) (1) In implementing Vision Zero, the coordinator shall collaborate with
other State agencies and local authorities, including local transportation agencies, law
enforcement agencies, educational institutions, and fire and rescue services, TO:

(I) IDENTIFY STRATEGIES FOR ACHIEVING THE VISION ZERO
GOAL ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–1003(B) OF THIS SUBTITLE AS ENUMERATED UNDER
§ 8–1005 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(II) ANALYZE INFRASTRUCTURE REVIEWS COMPLETED UNDER §
8–204.2 OF THIS TITLE;

(III) PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON ANY OTHER ISSUE DIRECTLY
RELATED TO ROADWAY SAFETY; AND

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 603 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(IV) ADVISE THE GOVERNOR AND STATE AND LOCAL AGENCIES
ON:

1. THE IMPLEMENTATION OF VISION ZERO;

2. POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND SERVICES AFFECTING
TRAFFIC SAFETY FOR PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLISTS, AND DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS
OF MOTOR VEHICLES; AND

3. PRIORITIES AND NEEDS FOR ROADWAY SAFETY.

(2) (I) THE COORDINATOR SHALL HOLD A QUARTERLY PUBLIC
MEETING ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF VISION ZERO WITH:

1. THE ADMINISTRATOR OR THE ADMINISTRATOR’S
DESIGNEE;

2. THE MOTOR VEHICLE ADMINISTRATOR OR THE
MOTOR VEHICLE ADMINISTRATOR’S DESIGNEE;

3. THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE MARYLAND
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S DESIGNEE; AND

4. A REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF THE
SECRETARY AS DESIGNATED BY THE SECRETARY.

(II) THE COORDINATOR MAY REQUEST THAT ANY OTHER
APPROPRIATE STATE OR LOCAL OFFICIAL PARTICIPATE IN OR TAKE QUESTIONS AT A
QUARTERLY PUBLIC MEETING.

(III) AT A QUARTERLY PUBLIC MEETING, THE PARTICIPANTS
IDENTIFIED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH SHALL:

1. ADDRESS AND MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ON ANY
VISION ZERO DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES IDENTIFIED BY THE
COORDINATOR UNDER PARAGRAPH (1)(I) OF THIS SUBSECTION;

2. A. DISCUSS EACH INFRASTRUCTURE REVIEW
COMPLETED UNDER § 8–204.2 OF THIS TITLE AND ANALYZED BY THE COORDINATOR;
AND

B. VOTE TO ACCEPT THE INFRASTRUCTURE REVIEW OR
TO RETURN THE INFRASTRUCTURE REVIEW TO THE PERSON THAT CONDUCTED IT

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

FOR A RESPONSE TO QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS OR FOR FURTHER REVIEW AS
APPROPRIATE; AND

3. DISCUSS AND RECOMMEND ANY GUIDANCE OR ADVICE
FOR THE COORDINATOR TO PROVIDE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(IV) 1. A QUARTERLY PUBLIC MEETING SHALL BE LIVE
STREAMED.

2. THE DEPARTMENT SHALL MAINTAIN ON ITS WEBSITE
A COMPLETE AND UNEDITED ARCHIVED VIDEO RECORDING OF EACH QUARTERLY
PUBLIC MEETING FOR A MINIMUM OF 5 YEARS AFTER THE DATE OF THE MEETING.

8–1005.

The implementation of Vision Zero shall include [strategies for achieving the goal
established under § 8–1003(b) of this subtitle, including] strategies for:

(1) Identifying State and local laws, policies, and regulations that hinder
the development and implementation of Vision Zero;

(2) Proposing changes to State and local laws to allow for innovative
engineering and traffic calming;

(3) Creating a Vision Zero website that contains information related to
Vision Zero;

(4) Collecting and publishing motor vehicle collision data;

(5) Connecting with other states and communities that have implemented a
similar Vision Zero program;

(6) Reviewing existing traffic safety programs to determine their
effectiveness;

(7) Working with research organizations to develop best practices;

(8) Prioritizing resources for investment in the communities most affected
by motor vehicle collisions;

(9) Proactively engaging community members to address their traffic safety
concerns;

(10) Developing and publishing a long–term plan for the continued
development of Vision Zero; and

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 603 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(11) Investing more resources into construction needs for high–accident
intersections and roadway sections.

8–1006.

Funds for Vision Zero shall be as provided by the Governor in the State budget.

8–1007.

(a) On or before December 31 each year, the Department shall submit a report
[on the status of Vision Zero] to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, the General Assembly THAT INCLUDES:

(1) THE STATUS OF VISION ZERO; AND

(2) THE ACTIVITIES, AND ANY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS, OF
THE VISION ZERO ADVISORY COMMISSION ESTABLISHED UNDER § 8–1008 OF THIS
SUBTITLE COORDINATOR; AND

(3) A SUMMARY OF EACH QUARTERLY PUBLIC MEETING HELD IN THE
PREVIOUS YEAR.

(b) The Department shall make the report required under subsection (a) of this
section available on its website.

~~8–1008.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “COMMISSION” MEANS THE VISION ZERO ADVISORY
~~COMMISSION.~~

(B) THERE IS A VISION ZERO ADVISORY COMMISSION.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE COMMISSION IS TO ADVISE THE DEPARTMENT ON
~~BEST~~ ~~PRACTICES~~ ~~INTENDED~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ELIMINATE~~ ~~DEATHS~~ ~~AND~~ ~~SERIOUS~~ ~~INJURIES~~ ~~ON~~
ROADWAYS IN ALL MODES OF GROUND TRANSPORTATION USING DATA–DRIVEN
PREVENTION STRATEGIES, WITH AN EMPHASIS ON A SAFE SYSTEM APPROACH.

(D) THE COMMISSION CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS:

(1) ONE MEMBER OF THE SENATE OF MARYLAND, APPOINTED BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE;

(2) ONE MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES, APPOINTED BY THE
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE;

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

(3) THE SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION, OR THE SECRETARY’S
~~DESIGNEE;~~

(4) THE SECRETARY OF STATE POLICE OR THE SECRETARY’S
~~DESIGNEE;~~

(5) THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(6) THE SECRETARY OF PLANNING OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(7) THE SECRETARY OF AGING OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(8) THE SECRETARY OF DISABILITIES OR THE SECRETARY’S
~~DESIGNEE;~~

(9) THE STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS OR THE STATE
~~SUPERINTENDENT’S~~ ~~DESIGNEE;~~

(10) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE SECRETARY OF
~~TRANSPORTATION:~~

~~(I)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COORDINATOR;~~

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND HIGHWAY
~~SAFETY~~ ~~OFFICE;~~

(III) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE STATE HIGHWAY
~~ADMINISTRATION;~~

(IV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND TRANSIT
~~ADMINISTRATION;~~

(V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MOTOR VEHICLE
ADMINISTRATION; AND

(VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY; AND

(11) THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR:

(I) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND INSTITUTE FOR
~~EMERGENCY~~ ~~MEDICAL~~ ~~SERVICES~~ ~~SYSTEMS;~~

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 603 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF
~~MEDICAL~~ ~~EXAMINER;~~

(III) ONE CITIZEN MEMBER OF THE MARYLAND PEDESTRIAN
AND BICYCLIST ADVISORY COMMITTEE;

(IV) ONE MEMBER OF THE STATE COORDINATING COMMITTEE
FOR HUMAN SERVICES TRANSPORTATION;

(V) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND ASSOCIATION
OF COUNTIES;

(VI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND MUNICIPAL
~~LEAGUE;~~

(VII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND SHERIFFS’
~~ASSOCIATION;~~

(VIII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND CHIEFS OF
~~POLICE~~ ~~ASSOCIATION;~~

(IX) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COUNTY ENGINEERS
ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND;

(X) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A MARYLAND INSTITUTION OF
HIGHER EDUCATION WITH EXPERTISE IN TRANSPORTATION SAFETY OR SYSTEMS;

(XI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF A MARYLAND INSTITUTION OF
~~HIGHER~~ ~~EDUCATION~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~EXPERTISE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~EVALUATING~~ ~~HIGHWAY~~ ~~SAFETY~~ ~~PROGRAMS~~
OR CAMPAIGNS;

(XII) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL
~~ASSOCIATION;~~

(XIII) TWO REPRESENTATIVES OF ORGANIZATIONS THAT
ADVOCATE FOR BICYCLISTS OR PEDESTRIANS;

(XIV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION THAT
ADVOCATES FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES;

(XV) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF AN ORGANIZATION THAT
REPRESENTS THE TRUCKING INDUSTRY; AND

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

(XVI) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF EACH OF THE FOLLOWING
METROPOLITAN PLANNING ORGANIZATIONS WHO ARE CITIZENS OF MARYLAND:

~~1.~~ ~~NATIONAL~~ ~~CAPITAL~~ ~~REGION~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~
~~PLANNING~~ ~~BOARD;~~

~~2.~~ ~~BALTIMORE~~ ~~REGIONAL~~ ~~TRANSPORTATION~~ ~~BOARD;~~

~~3.~~ ~~CUMBERLAND~~ ~~AREA~~ ~~METROPOLITAN~~ ~~PLANNING~~
~~ORGANIZATION;~~

~~4.~~ ~~HAGERSTOWN/EASTERN~~ ~~PANHANDLE~~
~~METROPOLITAN~~ ~~PLANNING~~ ~~ORGANIZATION;~~

~~5.~~ ~~WILMINGTON~~ ~~AREA~~ ~~PLANNING~~ ~~COUNCIL;~~

~~6.~~ ~~SALISBURY/WICOMICO~~ ~~METROPOLITAN~~ ~~PLANNING~~
ORGANIZATION; AND

~~7.~~ ~~CALVERT–ST.~~ ~~MARY’S~~ ~~METROPOLITAN~~ ~~PLANNING~~
~~ORGANIZATION.~~

(E) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION
SHALL REFLECT THE RACIAL, ETHNIC, GEOGRAPHIC, GENDER, AND ECONOMIC
DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

(F) THE GOVERNOR SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHAIR OF THE COMMISSION.

(G) (1) A VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER SHALL BE
PROMPTLY FILLED BY THE PERSON WHO APPOINTED THE VACATING MEMBER.

(2) THE GOVERNOR MAY REMOVE AN APPOINTED MEMBER FOR
INCOMPETENCE, MISCONDUCT, OR FAILURE TO PERFORM THE DUTIES OF THE
~~POSITION.~~

(2) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION SERVES AT THE PLEASURE OF
THE PERSON WHO APPOINTED THE MEMBER TO THE COMMISSION.

(3) AT THE FIRST MEETING OF THE COMMISSION THAT OCCURS ON
OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2024, THE COMMISSION SHALL VOTE TO ADOPT A CODE OF
CONDUCT PROVIDING FOR THE ACCEPTABLE CONDUCT OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.

(H) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO COMMISSION MEMBERS
APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(11) OF THIS SECTION.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 603 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) EXCEPT FOR THE INITIAL TERMS OF THE COMMISSION MEMBERS,
THE TERM OF A MEMBER IS 4 YEARS.

(3) THE TERMS OF MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS REQUIRED BY THE
TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION ON OCTOBER 1, 2024.

(4) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(5) A MEMBER WHO IS APPOINTED AFTER A TERM HAS BEGUN SERVES
~~ONLY~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~REST~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TERM~~ ~~AND~~ ~~UNTIL~~ ~~A~~ ~~SUCCESSOR~~ ~~IS~~ ~~APPOINTED~~ ~~AND~~
~~QUALIFIES.~~

(6) A MEMBER MAY BE REAPPOINTED, BUT AFTER SERVING TWO
CONSECUTIVE TERMS, A MEMBER MAY NOT BE REAPPOINTED UNTIL AT LEAST 1
YEAR AFTER THE END OF THE MEMBER’S SECOND TERM.

(I) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE COMMISSION.

(J) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

~~(K)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~COMMISSION~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) ADVISE THE GOVERNOR AND STATE AGENCIES ON:

(I) THE IMPLEMENTATION OF VISION ZERO;

(II) POLICIES, PROGRAMS, AND SERVICES AFFECTING TRAFFIC
SAFETY FOR PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLISTS, AND DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS OF MOTOR
VEHICLES; AND

(III) PRIORITIES AND NEEDS FOR ROADWAY SAFETY;

(2) IDENTIFY STATE AND LOCAL LAWS, POLICIES, AND REGULATIONS
THAT HINDER THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF VISION ZERO;

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 603

(3) REVIEW SAFETY DEFICIENCIES AT CRASH SITES WHERE THERE
HAVE BEEN THREE OR MORE FATALITIES WITHIN 12 MONTHS, INCLUDING
DEFICIENCIES IDENTIFIED BY INFRASTRUCTURE REVIEWS CONDUCTED UNDER §
8–204.2 OF THIS TITLE; AND

(4) PROVIDE GUIDANCE ON ANY OTHER ISSUE DIRECTLY RELATED TO
ROADWAY SAFETY.

~~SECTION~~ ~~2.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That~~ ~~the~~ ~~terms~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~initial~~
~~members~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Vision~~ ~~Zero~~ ~~Advisory~~ ~~Commission~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~
~~8–1008(d)(11)~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Transportation~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~as~~ ~~enacted~~ ~~by~~ ~~Section~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Act,~~ ~~shall~~ ~~expire~~
~~as~~ ~~follows:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~eight~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2026;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~eight~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2027;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~seven~~ ~~members~~ ~~in~~ ~~2028.~~

SECTION ~~3.~~ 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13