START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 394 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 394 
(Senator Hester, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Catalytic Revitalization Project Tax Credit - Alterations 
 
 
This bill makes various alterations to the catalytic revitalization project tax credit. A 
recipient of a tax credit certificate for a phased project that is issued on completion of a 
phase may claim the full amount stated on the final tax credit certificate in the tax year in 
which the certificate is issued. The Secretary of Housing and Community Development 
may award initial tax credit certificates for more than one catalytic revitalization project 
within a two-year period; however, the Secretary may not (1) accept applications and award 
initial tax credit certificates for projects more than once within a two-year period or 
(2) issue tax credit certificates totaling more than $15 million, in aggregate, within a 
two-year period (consistent with the existing per-project limit). The bill also authorizes the 
Secretary to revoke an initial tax credit certificate under specified circumstances and 
requires the Secretary to establish procedures for the approval of project phases. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024, and applies to tax year 2024 and beyond.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by at least $2.7 million in FY 2025 and 
$0.1 million in FY 2028, as discussed below. In FY 2029 and beyond, the bill’s net effect 
on State revenues is less clear. To the extent credits are claimed against the corporate 
income tax, Higher Education Investment Fund (HEIF) revenues and Transportation Trust 
Fund (TTF) revenues and expenditures are also affected (not shown below).  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($2.7) 
($2.6) 
($1.1) 
($0.1) 
(-)/- 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-) 
(-)/-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 394/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues are potentially affected beginning as early as 
FY 2025, as discussed below. Local expenditures are not affected.     
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law/Bill Summary:  Chapter 332 of 2021 established a refundable credit against 
the State income tax equal to 20% of the rehabilitation and new construction costs incurred 
for a qualified catalytic revitalization project in the State. The credit is administered by the 
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). “Catalytic revitalization 
project” means the substantial rehabilitation of a property in the State (1) that was formerly 
owned by the State or federal government; (2) the rehabilitation of which will foster 
economic, housing, and community development within the community in which the 
property is located; and (3) that is out of service and was formerly used as a college or 
university, K-12 school, hospital, mental health facility, or military facility or installation. 
For purposes of calculating the credit, new construction costs must be related to the 
construction of new structures that connect, expand, or integrate the existing structures to 
be rehabilitated and may not exceed 50% of the total costs of the catalytic revitalization 
project.  
  
The Secretary of Housing and Community Development may not award an initial credit 
certificate for more than one catalytic revitalization project within a two-year period and 
may not issue tax credit certificates totaling more than $15.0 million for any project. Under 
the bill, the Secretary may issue initial credit certificates for multiple projects within a 
two-year period, up to $15.0 million in aggregate. The bill also authorizes the Secretary to 
revoke an initial credit certificate on a finding that the recipient is not in compliance with 
the initial credit certificate or an agreement with DHCD regarding the initial credit 
certificate. If the Secretary revokes an initial credit certificate in accordance with the bill, 
the Secretary may award an initial credit certificate to another applicant up to the amount 
of the revoked certificate. The bill further specifies that the Secretary may not revoke a tax 
credit certificate awarded on or before July 1, 2024, unless the recipient ceases 
rehabilitation of the project for which the tax credit certificate was awarded.  
 
A final tax credit certificate is issued (1) on completion of a catalytic revitalization project 
for which an initial tax credit certificate has been issued or (2) for a phased project, on 
completion of a phase, as authorized by Chapter 173 of 2023, provided that the final tax 
credit certificate does not exceed 20% of the project’s eligible expenses to date or the 
aggregated limit of a project’s credit. An individual, nonprofit organization, or business 
entity awarded a tax credit certificate must claim the credit over the course of 
five consecutive tax years beginning with the tax year in which the final tax credit 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 394/ Page 3 
certificate is issued. Under the bill, a final tax credit certificate issued on completion of a 
phase of a catalytic revitalization project may be fully claimed in the tax year in which the 
certificate is issued. The bill further requires the Secretary, in consultation with the 
Department of Commerce, to adopt regulations that establish procedures for the approval 
of project phases for tax credit certificates.  
 
Any unclaimed amount of a final tax credit certificate may be transferred, by written 
instrument, in whole or in part, to any individual, nonprofit organization, or business entity, 
as specified. The Comptroller or the Secretary of Housing and Community Development 
may not recapture a tax credit if (1) the catalytic revitalization project is transferred, in 
whole or in part, by fee simple transfer of real property or by transfer of an ownership 
interest in the entity that owns the project to a new owner and (2) the Secretary has issued 
a final tax credit certificate for the catalytic revitalization project.  
 
The Secretary may not issue additional tax credit certificates on or after January 1, 2031. 
After this termination date, previously issued tax credit certificates may continue to be 
claimed, refunded, carried forward, or transferred in accordance with existing provisions.  
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, under the bill, a recipient of a tax credit 
certificate for a phased project that is issued on completion of a phase need not claim the 
credit over five years and may claim the full amount in the tax year in which the certificate 
issued. In the immediate term, general fund revenues decrease significantly due to the 
acceleration of tax credit claims. Based on an existing award, it is estimated that general 
fund revenues decrease by at least $2.7 million in fiscal 2025 and $80,000 in fiscal 2028. 
In fiscal 2029 and future years, as existing awards begin to phase out on an accelerated 
schedule, the bill’s net effect on State revenues is less clear and depends on the extent to 
which other multi-phase projects receive tax credit awards under the program and the 
timing and amount of resulting tax credit claims. As noted above, the Secretary may not 
issue additional tax credit certificates on or after January 1, 2031. 
 
The bill also authorizes the Secretary to award initial tax credit certificates for more than 
one project within a two-year period, subject to an aggregate limit of $15.0 million 
(consistent with the existing per-project limit). While the bill does not alter the aggregate 
amount of credit that may be awarded, to the extent that the bill results in increased 
utilization of the tax credit program, general fund revenues decrease further.   
 
To the extent credits are claimed against the corporate income tax, HEIF and TTF revenues 
are similarly affected, as are local highway user revenues and associated TTF expenditures. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 394/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Housing and Community 
Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - April 23, 2024 
 
km/jrb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4