START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 598

Chapter 598

(Senate Bill 368)

AN ACT concerning

State Retirement and Pension System – Military Service Credit – Eligibility

FOR the purpose of repealing a limitation for members of the State Retirement and Pension
System to receive certain service credit for active duty with the commissioned corps
of the Public Health Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
or the Coast and Geodetic Survey; and generally relating to credit in the State
Retirement and Pension System for military service.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Personnel and Pensions
Section 38–101
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2015 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Personnel and Pensions

38–101.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Accumulated contributions”:

(1) when used in relation to a State system, has the meaning stated in §
20–101 of this article; and

(2) when used in relation to a local retirement or pension system, has the
meaning most closely analogous to the meaning stated in § 20–101 of this article within the
context of the local retirement or pension system.

(c) “Member”:

(1) when used in relation to a State system, has the meaning stated in §
20–101 of this article; and

(2) when used in relation to a local retirement or pension system, has the
meaning most closely analogous to the meaning stated in § 20–101 of this article within the
context of the local retirement or pension system.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 598 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(d) “Military service” means:

(1) induction into the armed forces of the United States for training and
service under the Selective Training and Service Act of 1940 or a subsequent act of a similar
nature;

(2) membership in a reserve component of the armed forces of the United
States:

(i) on active duty or ordered or assigned to active duty; or

(ii) on active duty for training or inactive duty for training that
interrupts a member’s service;

(3) enlistment into the armed forces of the United States;

(4) membership in the Maryland National Guard; or

(5) [with respect to a person separated from employment on or after July
1, 1991,] active duty with the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or the Coast and Geodetic Survey [from:

(i) December 7, 1941, to December 31, 1946, both inclusive;

(ii) June 25, 1950, to January 31, 1955, both inclusive; or

(iii) December 22, 1961, to May 7, 1975, both inclusive].

(e) “Regular interest”:

(1) when used in relation to a State system, has the meaning stated in §
20–101 of this article; and

(2) when used in relation to a local retirement or pension system, has the
meaning most closely analogous to the meaning stated in § 20–101 of this article within the
context of the local retirement or pension system.

(f) “State or local retirement or pension system” means a retirement or pension
system operated under the laws of the State or a political subdivision of the State.

(g) “State system” means a retirement or pension system that is included in the
State Retirement and Pension System under § 21–102 of this article other than the
Legislative Pension Plan except to the extent provided by the joint resolution submitted to
the General Assembly by the General Assembly Compensation Commission under Article
III, § 15 of the Maryland Constitution.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 598

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3