START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 371 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 371 
(Senator Lam) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Medical Assistance Program - Personal Care Aides - Wage Reports 
 
 
This bill requires each residential service agency (RSA), by September 1, 2025, and 
annually thereafter, to submit a report to the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL) 
documenting the RSA’s average wage rate and highest and lowest wage rates for personal 
care aides (PCAs). The Maryland Department of Health (MDH) must submit a specified 
report on the Ensuring Access to Medicaid final federal rule and the plans or steps the 
department will take to operationalize the rule. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MDL can receive RSA wage reports, and MDH can submit the required 
report using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The reporting requirement applies to personal assistance services provided 
through an RSA under Community First Choice, Community Options, Community 
Personal Assistance Services, and any other home- and community-based services (HCBS) 
administered by MDH. It does not apply to personal care services provided through the 
Developmental Disabilities Administration. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 371/ Page 2 
Residential Service Agency Requirements 
 
By September 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, each RSA must submit to MDL a report 
that includes documentation of the RSA’s average wage rate and highest and lowest wage 
rates for PCAs and any other information that MDL determines appropriate. The report 
must be signed by an authorized representative of the RSA. 
 
Maryland Department of Health Requirements 
 
Uncodified language requires MDH, by the 180th day following release of the final federal 
Ensuring Access to Medicaid Services rule, to report to the Senate Finance Committee and 
the House Health and Government Operations Committee on an overview of the final rule 
and the plans or steps the department will take to operationalize the rule. The report must 
include the process MDH will use to review wage reports of PCAs and how the data will 
be used to review Medicaid reimbursement rates as outlined in the rule. 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 10 and 11 of 2019 (Fight for Fifteen), among other actions, 
required the Governor’s proposed budget to include specified rate increases for several 
types of health care providers over the funding provided in the prior year’s legislative 
appropriation. For fiscal 2021 through 2026, the Governor’s proposed budget had to 
include a 4.0% rate increase over the funding provided in the prior year’s legislative 
appropriation for provider reimbursement in Medicaid and the Maryland Children’s Health 
Program for nursing home services, medical day care services, private-duty nursing 
services, personal care services, HCBS, and services provided through the Community 
First Choice program.  
 
The federal American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) authorized a 10-percentage point increase 
to the federal matching rate on certain qualifying HCBS expenses. Funds had to be 
reinvested to enhance, expand, or strengthen Medicaid HCBS. Chapter 357 of 2021 (the 
fiscal 2022 budget bill) required that at least 75% of the funding be used on a one-time 
provider rate increase. Thus, Medicaid HCBS providers, including those providing 
personal care services, received a 5.2% rate increase effective November 1, 2021. Further, 
Medicaid reimbursement rates for personal assistance service providers increased by 12% 
in fiscal 2023 (4% under Fight for Fifteen, an additional 4% under the fiscal 2023 budget, 
and a temporary 4% tied to ARPA). 
 
Chapter 2 of 2023 (the Fair Wage Act of 2023) repealed the provider rate increases required 
under Fight for Fifteen for fiscal 2025 and 2026. Instead, the fiscal 2024 budget included 
funding for an 8.0% rate increase, annualized to align with the January 1, 2024 acceleration 
of the minimum wage increase, which equated to 4.0% year-over-year. Accordingly, in 
fiscal 2024, reimbursement rates for personal assistance service providers had an aggregate 
8% rate increase per the fiscal 2024 budget and the Fair Wage Act of 2023. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 371/ Page 3 
There are currently 920 RSAs enrolled in Medicaid that provide personal assistance 
services, primarily to individuals receiving community long-term services and supports as 
an alternative to nursing home placement. In fiscal 2023, MDH reimbursed RSAs 
$394.4 million for personal assistance services provided to 14,230 Medicaid participants. 
 
In May 2023, the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services published a proposed 
rule (Ensuring Access to Medicaid Services) intended to increase transparency and 
accountability, standardize data and monitoring, and create opportunities for states to 
promote active beneficiary engagement in their Medicaid programs, with the goal of 
improving access to care. Among other things, the rule proposes that states transparently 
publish a payment rate disclosure that collects and reports the average hourly rate paid to 
individual providers and providers employed by an agency and report annually on the 
percent of payments for personal care services that are spent on compensation for direct 
care workers. The proposed rule also requires that at least 80% of Medicaid payments for 
personal care services be spent on compensation.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business RSAs must submit annual wage reports to MDL, 
and they may be required to include any other information that MDL determines to be 
appropriate.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced in the last 
three years. See HB 318 and SB 604 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 2, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3