START OF PAGE 1
SB 362/ Page 1 
 
  SB 362 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 362 
(The President)(By Request - Administration) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024 
 
 
This Administration bill executes actions to increase revenues, provide mandate relief, 
contain costs, use special funds in place of general funds, and reduce future year general 
fund expenditures, in addition to other actions. Although the bill generally takes effect 
June 1, 2024, several provisions take effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $469.4 million in FY 2024 and 
$284.9 million in FY 2025. General fund expenditures decrease by $24.5 million in 
FY 2024 and $129.0 million in FY 2025. Special fund revenues decrease by $82.3 million 
in FY 2024 and increase by $320.3 million in FY 2025. Special fund expenditures increase 
by $4.5 million in FY 2024 and decrease by $15.8 million in FY 2025. Federal fund and 
nonbudgeted expenditures decrease beginning in FY 2025. Future years reflect the ongoing 
effects of the bill. This bill affects existing mandated appropriations. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
GF Revenue 
$469.4 
$284.9 
($42.2) 
($42.5) 
$33.6 
SF Revenue 
($82.3) 
$320.3 
$497.2 
$551.8 
$475.3 
GF Expenditure 
($24.5) 
($129.0) 
($114.8) 
($458.0) 
($83.7) 
SF Expenditure 
$4.5 
($15.8) 
($83.1) 
$394.5 
$86.0 
FF Expenditure 
$0 
($0.9) 
($0.3) 
($0.2) 
($0.2) 
NonBud Exp. 
$0 
($0.8) 
($0.3) 
($0.2) 
($0.2) 
Net Effect 
$407.2 
$751.7 
$653.4 
$573.2 
$507.0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 
Local Effect:  Local finances are generally affected beginning in FY 2025, as discussed 
below. This bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
  
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 362/ Page 2 
concurs with this assessment, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
 
  
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A brief overview of the bill’s provisions is provided below. In general, 
the bill’s actions increase revenues, provide mandate relief, contain costs, swap or transfer 
funds, and reduce future year general fund expenditures, in addition to various 
administrative and other actions. 
 
Mandate Relief 
 
 
Repeals the requirement that the Governor provide at least $700,000 in general 
funds for specified costs and investigations in the Office of the Attorney General 
Consumer Protection Division in fiscal 2025 and reduces the mandate to at least 
$350,000 beginning in fiscal 2026.  
 
Repeals the School Construction Revolving Loan Fund program and authorizes the 
Governor to transfer $40.0 million from its fund balance to the Blueprint for 
Maryland’s Future Fund. 
 
Alters, beginning in fiscal 2025, the calculation for the Senator John A. Cade 
Funding Formula for the distribution of funds to local community colleges. 
 
Alters, beginning in fiscal 2025, the calculation for apportionment to qualifying 
institutions for funding under the Joeseph A. Sellinger Program for private 
institutions of higher education. 
 
Alters, beginning in fiscal 2025, the mandate for the Business Façade Improvement 
Program to allow the use of general obligation bonds to meet the $5.0 million 
funding requirement. 
 
Suspends, for fiscal 2025 only, the requirement that the Governor provide at least 
$1,794,000 in general funds for the Fisheries Research and Development Fund. 
 
Reduces, beginning in fiscal 2025, the annual funding the Governor must provide 
to the Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund from $1.0 million to 
$500,000. 
 
Repeals the requirement to distribute $10.0 million to the Local Income Tax Reserve 
Account in fiscal 2024 and 2025; specifies that, from fiscal 2026 through 2060, the 
annual $10.0 million distribution to the Local Income Tax Reserve Account is to 
repay $350.0 million transferred from the account to the Education Trust Fund as 
required in Chapter 484 of 2010; and ends that distribution to the Local Income Tax 
Reserve Account after the fiscal 2060 final payment is made. 
 
Reduces the amount of the supplemental contribution to the pension system that the 
Governor is required to make annually from $75.0 million to $50.0 million 
beginning in fiscal 2025 and repeals specified deductions for administrative fees. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 362/ Page 3 
 
Alters the full-day prekindergarten funding formula by (1) delaying the initiation of 
funding of Tier II students from fiscal 2025 to fiscal 2026; (2) limiting fiscal 2026 
Tier II funding to families with incomes more than 300%, but not more than 360%, 
of the federal poverty level; and (3) substantially increasing the annual per pupil 
funding amount for each year beginning with fiscal 2027. 
 
Revenue Actions, Fund Transfers and Swaps, Cost Shifts, and Cost Containment 
 
 
Expands, for fiscal 2025 only, the authorized uses of Blueprint for Maryland’s 
Future funding for the Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community Supports 
within the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission to include 
school-based behavioral health services and related reimbursements. 
 
Uses funds from the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund to 
satisfy the requirement that the Governor provide $2.5 million annually for tree 
plantings on public and private land, which applies for fiscal 2024 through 2031. 
 
Reduces the revenue volatility adjustment, in fiscal 2024 and 2025, by altering the 
maximum amount of projected nonwithholding income tax revenue that must, under 
certain circumstances, be subtracted from the projected general fund revenue 
estimate each year to $0. 
 
Redirects, for fiscal 2024 through 2028 only, interest earned on special funds of the 
State to the general fund, with specified exceptions. 
 
Reduces lottery agent sales commissions from 6% to 5.75% of gross lottery sales 
and reduces the prize ticket cashing commission from 3% to 2%. 
 
Repeals the small business relief tax credit program. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by June 30, 2025, 
$60.0 million from the balance of the reserve account that was established by the 
State to pay for unemployment benefits for State employees. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, by June 30, 2025, a total of $2,556,174 in 
special funds from the fund balances of three health professional licensing boards, 
as specified, to the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Behavioral Health 
Administration. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, by June 30, 2025, $216,845 from the Health 
Information Exchange Fund to the Medical Care Programs Administration to 
support information technology activities. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by June 30, 2025, 
$193,474,476, as specified, from the Dedicated Purpose Account. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by June 30, 2025, 
$14.0 million from the Dedicated Purpose Account from funds held for critical 
maintenance at the Department of Natural Resources (DNR).  

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 362/ Page 4 
 
Expands allowable uses of the Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program Fund 
within MDH, to include the Kidney Disease Program and community mental health 
services to the uninsured beginning in fiscal 2025, and for fiscal 2025 only, also 
include depositing funds into health reimbursement accounts of certain State retirees 
transitioning to Medicare Part D. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by June 30, 2025, a total of 
$7,580,873 in unspent funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account originally 
appropriated in fiscal 2023. Specifically, the authorized transfers are from funds 
originally appropriated for assistance to assisted living facilities ($7,340,250), 
nursing homes ($132,321), and hospitals ($108,302). 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by June 30, 2025, 
$4.5 million in unspent funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account originally 
appropriated in fiscal 2023 for Learning in Extended Academic Programs in the 
Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer up to $6,678,827 of available special funds from 
the Program Open Space State land acquisition fund balance by June 30, 2025, to 
DNR to replace general funds budgeted for personnel expenses in DNR for the 
Maryland Forest Service and the Maryland Park Service. 
 
Withdraws $2.0 million in pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general funds from a 
fiscal 2022 capital appropriation of $7.4 million made to the Board of Public Works 
for the purpose of the demolition of the Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) 
Bard Building. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by June 30, 2024, 
$150,000,000 from the Local Income Tax Reserve Account, representing funds 
identified in the Office of the Comptroller’s fiscal 2023 analysis as an 
overdistribution to the account net of canceled repayments. 
 
Increases the annual vehicle registration surcharge (from $17.00 to $40.00) and the 
maximum fine that may be imposed for specified alcohol- and/or drug-related 
driving offenses and alters the distribution of those revenues. Also makes other 
changes related to trauma care and emergency services. 
 
Establishes, effective July 1, 2024, (1) a transportation network company (TNC) 
impact fee on passenger trips that originate in the State, with at least a portion of 
such revenues pledged to repayment of principal and interest on consolidated 
transportation bonds and (2) a related TNC Impact Fee Account within the 
Transportation Trust Fund (TTF). 
 
Phases in increases in the annual vehicle registration fee for most classes of vehicles 
over two or three years, beginning in fiscal 2025, and establishes a new, lower, 
weight division within certain vehicle classes. Authorizes installment payments for 
registration fees throughout the registration period, as determined by the Motor 
Vehicle Administration. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 362/ Page 5 
 
Establishes a $125 annual surcharge on electric vehicles (EVs) and a $100 annual 
surcharge on plug-in electric vehicles (PHEVs), effective July 1, 2024, and paid 
with other registration fees, with revenues deposited into TTF. 
 
Increases, from $500 to $800, the maximum processing charge car dealers may 
impose on top of the purchase price of a vehicle, effective July 1, 2024. 
 
Increases the tax rates and alters the distributions for the tobacco tax and the sales 
and use tax on electronic smoking devices (ESD), effective July 1, 2024. 
 
Requires the Comptroller to distribute, effective July 1, 2024, to TTF sales and use 
tax collected that is attributable to the sale of electricity (1) at an electric vehicle 
charging station or (2) used to charge an electric vehicle and is not sold under a 
residential or domestic rate schedule on file with the Public Service Commission. 
 
Administrative and Other Actions 
 
 
Prohibits MSDE from increasing family copayments for the Child Care Scholarship 
Program above the levels in place on January 1, 2024. 
 
Delays the requirement that the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) procure 
only zero-emission buses (ZEBs) to support its transit fleet from beginning in 
fiscal 2023 to fiscal 2027. Also authorizes MTA to procure additional 
alternative-fuel buses if sufficient ZEBs to meet the requirement are not 
commercially available. 
 
Authorizes the transfer of $90.0 million from the balance in the Strategic Energy 
Investment Fund to the Dedicated Purpose Account, by June 30, 2025, as specified; 
requires that at least 50% of funds transferred support programs serving low- to 
moderate-income communities, as specified; and authorizes the use of funds 
transferred to help implement the Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022 and 
Maryland’s Climate Pollution Reduction Plan. 
 
Alters, beginning in fiscal 2025, the calculation of State funding per full-time 
equivalent student for BCCC. 
 
Authorizes the Governor to expand, by June 30, 2024, the allowable use of a 
PAYGO miscellaneous capital grant appropriated in the fiscal 2024 operating 
budget for the Living Classrooms Foundation Opportunity Hub facility to include 
noncapital insurance expenses. 
 
Repeals and reestablishes the Maryland Commission on Transportation Revenue 
and Infrastructure Needs (TRAIN Commission), staffed by DLS, and establishes an 
Advisory Committee to the TRAIN Commission, staffed by the Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
 
Expands the allowable uses of the Maryland Police Training and Standards 
Commission Fund, in fiscal 2024 and 2025 only, to support police and correctional 
training activities. 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 362/ Page 6 
 
Delays due dates associated with specified evaluations of the Blueprint for 
Maryland’s Future, along with State and local funding implications triggered by the 
Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB), by approximately two years.  
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Constitution requires the Governor to submit, and the 
General Assembly to pass, a balanced budget. Generally, the General Assembly cannot add 
more spending to the budget introduced by the Governor, nor can general funds be used to 
restore reductions made by the General Assembly after adoption of the budget, except 
through an approved deficiency appropriation in the following year’s budget. 
 
Beginning with the 2023 session (fiscal 2024 budget bill), the General Assembly may 
amend the budget to increase appropriations made by the Governor as well as add items to 
appropriations for Executive Branch agencies if the total appropriation for the 
Executive Branch does not exceed the total proposed appropriation submitted by the 
Governor. Prior to the 2023 session, the legislature could only add or increase funding for 
the General Assembly and the Judiciary. 
 
Background:  In December 2023, the Spending Affordability Committee recommended 
that the fiscal 2025 budget leave a closing general fund balance of at least $100.0 million. 
The committee also recommended maintaining a Rainy Day Fund balance of at least 8.5% 
of estimated general fund revenues. The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced would have left 
a $103 million balance in the general fund and maintained the Rainy Day Fund balance at 
9.4% of general fund revenues ($2.3 billion). Combined cash balances at the end of 
fiscal 2025 of $2.4 billion would have represented approximately 9.8% of general fund 
revenues. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Estimates of the fiscal 2024 and 2025 impact of the bill on the State 
general fund, totaling $907.8 million, are shown in Exhibit 1. Of the decrease in general 
fund expenditures, $150.1 million is accounted for in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly, of which $32.2 million is contingent on provisions in this bill. 
 
A discussion of each provision in the bill is provided in Appendix A (beginning on 
page 10). The fiscal 2024 through 2029 State effects for each provision, including the 
general fund impacts, the effects on other fund types, and other related information, such 
as any effects on local governments, are included with the discussions. Appendix B 
(beginning on page 83) identifies the quantified fiscal impact of separate provisions by 
budgeted fund type. 
 
This analysis assumes that increased TTF revenues from the bill’s provisions, totaling 
$224.9 million in fiscal 2025, are largely directed toward MDOT’s operating spending 
needs and, thus, do not have a material impact on increasing MDOT’s bond capacity. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 362/ Page 7 
 
Exhibit 1 
General Fund Impact Due to the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024 
Fiscal 2024 and 2025 
($ in Millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
Revenues 
Mandate Relief 
$0.0  
$10.0  
Other Actions 
469.4 
274.9 
Revenue Subtotal 
$469.4 
$284.9 
Expenditures 
Mandate Relief 
($20.0) 
($113.6) 
Other Actions 
(4.5) 
(15.4) 
Expenditure Subtotal 
($24.5) 
($129.0) 
General Fund Improvement 
$493.9 
$413.9 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The impacts on local jurisdictions are included in the discussion of 
each provision in Appendix A. For example, direct State aid for community colleges is 
reduced in fiscal 2025 and future years due to altering the formula for annual growth, which 
can be seen on page 16. Local school systems realize altered State funding as a result of 
changes to the full-day prekindergarten enrollment count and per pupil funding, which can 
be seen on page 27, along with county government funding for public schools, which 
decreases statewide by $1.7 million in fiscal 2025. The fiscal 2025 effects of these 
provisions on local government finances are summarized in Appendix C (on page 88). 
 
Other impacts include local revenues potentially decreasing beginning in fiscal 2025 from  
repealing the School Construction Revolving Loan Fund; local education agency revenues 
potentially increasing through consortium support for behavioral health services provided 
in schools in fiscal 2025; a potential reduction in financial assistance provided to forest 
conservancy district boards through the Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship 
Fund; funding for local projects from the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust 
Fund potentially decreasing as a result of diverted funds; local governments benefiting 
from the availability of $1.5 million in more funding from the Senator William H. Amoss 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 362/ Page 8 
Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund; and local revenues increasing to the extent MDOT 
distributes TNC impact fee revenues to local jurisdictions in the form of capital 
transportation grants and/or locally operated transit system grants.  
 
In addition, delaying from fiscal 2026 to fiscal 2028 the potential curtailment of State and 
local education aid, which occurs in the event of an AIB finding that Blueprint 
implementation and results are not as intended, potentially substantially increases county 
government expenditures in fiscal 2026 and 2027. Accordingly, local school system 
funding from the State and county governments may increase substantially in fiscal 2026 
and 2027. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DLS advises that small businesses may be meaningfully affected 
by some provisions in the bill, such as repealing the small business relief tax credit (as 
acknowledged by the Administration in its statement of impact); reducing the 
compensation of lottery retailers (as also acknowledged by the Administration in its 
statement of impact); increasing the annual vehicle registration fee for most classes of 
vehicles; establishing annual surcharges on EVs and PHEVs; altering the full-day 
prekindergarten funding formula; and increasing the tax rates for the tobacco tax and the 
sales and use tax on ESD.  
 
Small businesses with 14 or fewer employees that provide paid sick and safe leave to 
qualified employees may no longer receive up to $500 in tax credits per eligible employee. 
 
Approximately 4,350 licensed lottery agents, approximately 70% of which are small 
businesses, receive less compensation due to reducing lottery agent sales commissions 
from 6.0% to 5.75% of gross lottery sales and reducing the prize ticket cashing commission 
from 3% to 2%. On average, a licensed lottery agent’s sales compensation decreases by 
approximately $400 in fiscal 2024 and by approximately $4,800 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025. 
 
State and local funding for private prekindergarten providers, many of which are small 
businesses, is altered beginning in fiscal 2025. Thus, private prekindergarten providers are 
negatively impacted in fiscal 2025 and 2026 and are positively affected beginning in 
fiscal 2027. 
 
Small cigarette, other tobacco product, and ESD businesses and small businesses that sell 
these products are negatively affected by the increased tobacco tax rates and the sales and 
use tax rate imposed on the sale of ESD. The actual impact depends on the extent to which 
the tax increases affect sales of these products and the extent to which the tax increases are 
passed on to customers. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 362/ Page 9 
Any small businesses that own and operate vehicle fleets may be significantly affected by 
the provisions of the bill, depending on the number of vehicles owned, and even more 
affected if those vehicles are EVs and PHEVs.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Budget Reconciliation and Financing Acts have been 
introduced within the last three years. See SB 183 and HB 202 of 2023 and SB 493 and 
HB 589 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 352 (The Speaker)(By Request - Administration) - 
Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Department of 
Emergency Management; Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Comptroller’s Office; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Maryland State 
Treasurer’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State 
Department of Education; University System of Maryland; St. Mary’s College of 
Maryland; Maryland Independent College and University Association; Interagency 
Commission on School Construction; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department 
of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of the Environment; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Military 
Department; Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Maryland State Archives; 
Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland Health Benefit Exchange; Maryland State 
Lottery and Gaming Control Agency; Public Service Commission; State Retirement 
Agency; Maryland Stadium Authority; Subsequent Injury Fund; Uninsured Employers’ 
Fund; University of Maryland Medical System; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 26, 2024 
Enrolled - May 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 30, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 362/ Page 10 
 
Appendix A – Contents  
 
Mandate Relief 
 
Alter Mandate for the Consumer Protection Division ....................................................... 13 
 
Repeal 
School 
Construction 
Revolving 
Loan 
Fund 
Program 
and 
Transfer  
Fund Balance ..................................................................................................................... 14 
 
Alter Senator John A. Cade Funding Formula for Local Community College Aid .......... 16 
 
Alter Joseph A. Sellinger Program Funding Formula ....................................................... 19 
 
Alter Mandate for the Business Façade Improvement Program to Allow Use of General 
Obligation Bonds ............................................................................................................... 21 
 
Suspend Mandate for Fisheries Research and Development Fund in Fiscal 2025  
Only ................................................................................................................................... 22 
 
Reduce Mandate for Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund ................ 23 
 
Specify Distribution to Local Income Tax Reserve Account Is for Repayment of 
Fiscal 2010 Transfer and Repeal Requirement for Fiscal 2024 and 2025 Distributions .. 24 
 
Reduce Mandated Retirement Reinvestment Contribution and Repeal Requirement to 
Reduce Pension Contribution by Amount of Certain Administrative Fees ...................... 25 
 
Delay Certain Funding and Alter Full-day Prekindergarten Enrollment Count and Per Pupil 
Funding .............................................................................................................................. 27 
 
Revenue Actions, Fund Transfers and Swaps, Cost Shifts, and Cost Control 
 
Expand Allowable Uses of Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Funding Provided for 
Coordinated Community Supports .................................................................................... 30 
 
Use Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund to Satisfy Tree Solutions Now 
Act of 2021 Funding Mandate ........................................................................................... 32 
 
Reduce Amount of Revenue Volatility Adjustment .......................................................... 34 
 
Redirect Interest from Variety of Special Funds ............................................................... 36 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 362/ Page 11 
 
Reduce Lottery Agent Sales and Cashing Commissions .................................................. 37 
 
Repeal Small Business Relief Tax Credit ......................................................................... 38 
 
Authorize Transfer of Fund Balance from State Unemployment Insurance Reserve 
Account to General Fund in Fiscal 2025 ........................................................................... 39 
 
Authorize Transfer of Fund Balances from Certain Health Professional Licensing Boards 
to Behavioral Health Administration in Fiscal 2025 ......................................................... 40 
 
Authorize Transfer of Funds from Health Information Exchange Fund to Medical Care 
Programs Administration for Information Technology in Fiscal 2025 ............................. 42 
 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund, as Specified, from Dedicated Purpose Account .... 43 
 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Critical Maintenance Funds Held in Dedicated 
Purpose Account ................................................................................................................ 46 
 
Expand Allowable Uses of Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program Fund ............. 47 
 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Unspent Funds for Health Care Provider 
Assistance Held in Dedicated Purpose Account ............................................................... 49 
 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Unspent Funds for Learning in Extended 
Academic Programs Held in Dedicated Purpose Account ................................................ 50 
 
Authorize Transfer of Program Open Space State Funds for Department of Natural 
Resources’ Personnel Expenses ........................................................................................ 51 
 
Withdraw Unused Funding for Baltimore City Community College Bard Building 
Demolition ......................................................................................................................... 53 
 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Local Income Tax Reserve Account in  
Fiscal 2024 ......................................................................................................................... 54 
 
Increase Annual Vehicle Registration Surcharge and Maximum Fines for Certain Offenses, 
Change Distribution of Those Revenues, and Make Other Changes Related to Trauma Care 
and Emergency Services .................................................................................................... 55 
 
Establish Transportation Network Company Impact Fee and Account ............................ 59 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 362/ Page 12 
Phase In Increases in Annual Vehicle Registration Fee for Most Classes of Vehicles and 
Authorize Payments in Installments .................................................................................. 61 
 
Establish Annual Surcharges on Electric Vehicles and Plug-in Electric Vehicles ........... 65 
 
Increase Maximum Car Dealer Processing Charge ........................................................... 67 
 
Increase Tax Rates and Alter Distributions for Tobacco Tax and Sales and Use Tax on 
Electronic Smoking Devices ............................................................................................. 68 
 
Divert Sales and Use Tax on Electricity for Charging Vehicles to Transportation Trust 
Fund ................................................................................................................................... 71 
 
Administrative and Other Items 
 
Prohibit Increasing Child Care Scholarship Program Copayments .................................. 73 
 
Delay Requirement for Maryland Transit Administration to Purchase Only Zero-emission 
Buses and Authorize Alternative Purchases ...................................................................... 74 
 
Alter Allowable Uses of Strategic Energy Investment Fund Balance and Transfer Funds to 
Dedicated Purpose Account in Fiscal 2025 ....................................................................... 75 
 
Alter Baltimore City Community College Funding Formula ........................................... 78 
 
Expand Allowable Uses of Fiscal 2024 General Fund Miscellaneous Capital Grant to 
Living Classrooms Foundation .......................................................................................... 79 
 
Repeal and Reestablish Maryland Commission on Transportation Revenue and 
Infrastructure Needs and Establish Related Advisory Committee .................................... 80 
 
Expand Authorized Uses of Police Training and Standards Commission Fund ............... 81 
 
Delay Due Dates Associated with Evaluation of Blueprint for Maryland’s Future .......... 82 
 
Note:  Page numbers for locations of provisions in the bill within each discussion refer to the locations in 
the enrolled bill, not the chapter law. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 362/ Page 13 
Alter Mandate for the Consumer Protection Division 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Repeal the requirement, for fiscal 2025, that the Governor provide 
at least $700,000 in general funds for specified costs and investigations in the Office of the 
Attorney General (OAG) Consumer Protection Division (CPD) and reduce the mandated 
amount to be at least $350,000 annually beginning in fiscal 2026. Authorize the use of 
special funds for this purpose in fiscal 2025 only – although no specific special fund is 
identified as the source for the fiscal 2025 funding. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly includes a $700,000 general fund reduction, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation eliminating the mandate.  
 
Agency:  OAG 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
$0 
($0.7) 
($0.35) 
($0.35) 
($0.35) 
($0.35) 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0.7 
$0.35 
$0.35 
$0.35 
$0.35 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for OAG decrease by $700,000 in fiscal 2025, 
reflecting elimination of the mandate for that year as well as the contingent reduction. 
Special fund expenditures likely increase correspondingly due to the authorization to fund 
these activities with special funds. While a specific source of special funds is not identified, 
the Consumer Protection Division Recoveries Fund has sufficient resources to cover the 
expense. General fund expenditures for OAG decrease by $350,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2026. Accordingly, this analysis assumes that special fund expenditures from the 
Consumer Protection Division Recoveries Fund increase correspondingly to maintain the 
same level of funding for the specified purposes in the out-years. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description/Recent History:  CPD assists residents by providing mediation and 
arbitration service to consumers to help resolve complaints against businesses and health 
insurance carriers, registers homebuilders and health clubs, and enforces consumer laws 
against businesses engaging in unfair or deceptive trade practices. The Consumer 
Protection Division Recoveries Fund receives certain revenues from cases handled by 
CPD. It is established as part of the Maryland Consumer Protection Act. The fund is used 
for operational expenses, including personnel, within CPD. In fiscal 2025, it is expected to 
have a starting balance of $14.8 million; revenues are anticipated to be $17.7 million, with 
expenditures of $12.0 million, resulting in a closing fund balance of $20.5 million. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 7-9)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jacob L. Pollicove 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 362/ Page 14 
Repeal School Construction Revolving Loan Fund Program and Transfer Fund 
Balance 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Repeal the School Construction Revolving Loan Fund program 
(and associated mandated funding provisions). Authorize the Governor to transfer 
$40,000,000 from the fund balance of the School Construction Revolving Loan Fund to 
the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) by June 30, 2024.  
 
Agencies:  Interagency Commission on School Construction; Maryland State Department 
of Education 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$40.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
PAYGO GF Exp 
($20.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Exp 
$0 
$0 
$0 
($40.0) 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$40.0 
$0 
$0 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues to BMFF increase by $40.0 million in fiscal 2024 due 
to transferring the fund balance from the School Construction Revolving Loan Fund. 
Pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general fund expenditures decrease by a combined $40.0 million 
from fiscal 2024 through 2026, due to the repeal of the School Construction Revolving 
Loan Fund program and, consequently, the mandated funding for it. The fiscal 2025 budget 
bill as passed by the General Assembly reduces the previously appropriated fiscal 2024 
general funds for the program by $20.0 million and does not include fiscal 2025 funding 
for the program, reflecting the program’s repeal. Special fund expenditures for BMFF 
increase by $40.0 million in fiscal 2027, and general fund expenditures correspondingly 
decrease due to the higher available balance to support Blueprint programs, which reduces 
the need for general fund expenditures.  
 
Local Effect:  Local governments no longer have access to this funding to cover their local 
share of school construction project costs. Although not yet used for this purpose, to the 
extent local governments had intended to use these funds, then local revenues may decrease 
as a result of the repeal.  
 
Program Description:  The School Construction Revolving Loan Fund provides loans to 
local governments to assist them in funding the local share of school construction projects. 
The fund is administered by the Interagency Commission on School Construction and may 
be used only to provide low- or no-interest loans to local governments. 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 362/ Page 15 
Recent History:  Chapter 14 of 2018, the 21st Century School Facilities Act, established 
the fund. However, funding was not provided until mandated by Chapter 32 of 2022, which 
required the Governor to allocate at least $40.0 million in fiscal 2023, $20.0 million in 
fiscal 2024, and $10.0 million in each of fiscal 2025 and 2026. None of the prior 
appropriated general funds has been utilized. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 4 (p. 88) and Section 21 (p. 98)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Laura H. Hyde 
 
 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
SB 362/ Page 16 
Alter Senator John A. Cade Funding Formula for Local Community College Aid 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Alter the calculation for the Senator John A. Cade Funding 
Formula for the distribution of funds to community colleges, beginning in fiscal 2025, to 
(1) reduce the statutory funding level from 29.0% to 27.2% of the State funding per 
full-time equivalent student (FTES) at the selected public four year institutions; (2) remove 
the hold harmless provision; (3) remove fixed costs as part of the calculation of the formula; 
and (4) alter the community college FTES count to be either the greater of the second 
preceding year or the average of three preceding years, beginning with the second 
preceding year. Alter the calculation of State funding per FTES from budget year State 
appropriations and budget year enrollment estimates to two-year prior actual expenditures 
for the general fund and Higher Education Investment Fund and two-year prior actual 
enrollment at the selected public four-year institutions. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly includes a $12.7 million general fund reduction, contingent on 
the enactment of legislation altering the formula. 
 
Agency:  Maryland Higher Education Commission 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
$0 
($12.7) 
($24.5) 
($18.8) 
($11.6) 
($4.8) 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for Cade formula funding decrease by 
$12.7 million in fiscal 2025 due to altering the formula. Out-year expenditures reflect 
changes in the estimated State funding per FTES and projected enrollment changes and the 
change to the State funding per FTES calculation. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Direct State aid for local community colleges decreases by $12.7 million in 
fiscal 2025, $24.5 million in fiscal 2026, $18.8 million in fiscal 2027, $11.6 million in 
fiscal 2028, and $4.8 million in fiscal 2029. Exhibit 1 shows the fiscal 2025 effect on each 
local community college. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
SB 362/ Page 17 
 
Exhibit 1 
Distribution of Aid for Local Community Colleges 
Under the Senator John A. Cade Funding Formula 
Fiscal 2025 
 
Current Law 
BRFA 
Change 
Distribution Distribution 
In Dollars 
As a % 
Allegany College of Maryland 
$8,620,598 
$8,174,206 
($446,392) 
-5.2%
Anne Arundel Community College 
43,763,073 
42,926,055 
(837,018) 
-1.9%
Community College of Baltimore County 
71,703,077 
68,948,700 
(2,754,377) 
-3.8%
Carroll Community College 
12,751,854 
11,928,011 
(823,843) 
-6.5%
Cecil College 
8,127,775 
7,242,087 
(885,688) -10.9%
College of Southern Maryland 
21,416,280 
20,629,234 
(787,046) 
-3.7%
Chesapeake College 
9,867,824 
9,004,793 
(863,031) 
-8.7%
Frederick Community College 
20,280,008 
20,743,431 
463,423 
2.3%
Garrett College 
4,324,485 
3,506,158 
(818,327) -18.9%
Hagerstown Community College 
15,222,549 
14,414,261 
(808,288) 
-5.3%
Harford Community College 
18,477,775 
18,046,557 
(431,218) 
-2.3%
Howard Community College 
33,622,303 
33,050,277 
(572,026) 
-1.7%
Montgomery College 
71,092,972 
69,889,139 
(1,203,833) 
-1.7%
Prince George’s Community College 
45,922,277 
45,054,348 
(867,929) 
-1.9%
Wor-Wic Community College 
12,278,064 
11,201,923 
(1,076,141) 
-8.8%
Total 
$397,470,914 $384,759,180 ($12,711,734) -3.2%
 
BRFA:  Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act 
 
Note:  The contingent reduction of $12,739,610 in the budget bill reflects both the $12,711,734 change 
reflected above as well as a $27,876 reduction in a reciprocity grant.  
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Program Description:  The Cade funding formula makes up the majority of State funding 
for the 15 locally operated community colleges in the State. The total funds to be distributed 
through the formula are based on a percentage of the State’s funding per FTES for selected 
public four-year institutions of higher education. The State’s annual contribution to the 
Cade funding formula is determined by enrollment at community colleges and a 
percentage, set in statute, of the level of funding received by selected public four-year 

END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
    
SB 362/ Page 18 
institutions. Specifically, the formula bases per student funding on a set statutory 
percentage of current year State appropriations per FTES at the selected four-year 
institutions. This per FTES amount is multiplied by total community college enrollment 
from the second prior year to arrive at the total formula amount for the colleges. Each 
college’s share of the total is then based primarily on its proportion of formula funding 
from the prior year and enrollment. Under current law, the mandated percentage of per 
FTES funding for the Cade funding formula is 29.0%. Exhibit 2 provides a comparison of 
calculation of the formula under current law to that under the bill. The revised funding 
formula included in this provision is more closely tied to enrollment changes. In addition 
to changes shown in Exhibit 2, the calculation of State funding per FTES is changed for all 
higher education funding formulas, including the Cade funding formula to reflect two-year 
prior actual expenditures and two-year prior actual enrollment.   
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Comparison of Current Law and BRFA Formula Changes 
 
Current Cade Formula 
BRFA Formula 
Hold Harmless Provision 
Yes 
No 
Statutory Level of Funding 
29.0% 
27.2% 
FTES for Community 
Colleges 
2 years prior FTES 
Greater of:  2 years prior FTES or 
average of 2 years prior, 3 years 
prior, and 4 years prior FTES 
Fixed Component 
38% 
0% 
Marginal Cost 
60% 
100% 
Size Factor 
2% 
2% 
 
BRFA:  Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act 
FTES:  full-time equivalent student 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Recent History:  In July 2020, the Board of Public Works reduced fiscal 2021 
Cade formula funding by $36.4 million to level fund it at the fiscal 2020 appropriation 
($249.7 million). The formula reached the 29.0% statutory maximum in fiscal 2023. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 19-27) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Kelly K. Norton 

END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
    
SB 362/ Page 19 
Alter Joseph A. Sellinger Program Funding Formula 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Alter the calculation for apportionment of funding to qualifying 
institutions under the Joseph A. Sellinger Program beginning in fiscal 2025 to be based on 
the full-time equivalent enrollment of undergraduate students only at the institutions. 
Increase the percentage of full-time equivalent students (FTES) in the calculation from 
15.5% to 16.1% and the methodology for calculating the State funding per FTES at the 
selected public four-year institutions to be based on two-year prior actual expenditures for 
the general fund and Higher Education Investment Fund and two-year prior enrollment 
data. Clarify how graduate students are to be calculated. 
 
Agency:  Maryland Higher Education Commission  
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
$0 
($61.3) 
($65.4) 
($65.7) 
($66.0) 
($66.5) 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for the Sellinger program decrease by 
$61.3 million in fiscal 2025 due to altering the count of eligible FTES to be based only on 
undergraduate students and adjusting the statutory percentage from 15.5% to 16.1%. 
Out-year expenditures reflect using two-year prior actual expenditures and two-year prior 
enrollment data to calculate State funding per FTES at the selected public four-year 
institutions, which includes anticipated changes in the State funding per FTES at the 
selected public four-year institutions and changes in estimated enrollment at the private 
colleges and universities. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  The Joseph A. Sellinger Program provides State funding to 
13 qualifying nonprofit independent colleges and universities. The formula for the 
Sellinger program uses a percentage of the State’s per FTES funding for selected public 
four-year institutions of higher education to determine a per FTES funding amount for the 
independent institutions. Under current law, the mandated Sellinger percentage of per 
FTES funding at the four-year institutions is 15.5% for fiscal 2022 and annually thereafter. 
This figure is then multiplied by the two-year prior FTES enrollment at each of the 
qualifying institutions to determine the allocation of Sellinger funds. The impact of altering 
the formula by institution is shown in Exhibit 1.       
 
 

END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
    
SB 362/ Page 20 
 
Exhibit 1 
Comparison of Funding Distribution by Enrollment 
Under the Joseph A. Sellinger Program 
Fiscal 2025 
 
Current Law 
BRFA 
Change 
Institution 
Distribution 
Distribution 
In Dollars 
As a % 
The Johns Hopkins University 
$72,880,791 
$19,735,989 ($53,144,802) -72.9% 
Loyola College 
14,104,043 
12,781,606 
(1,322,437) 
-9.4% 
Stevenson University 
9,489,502 
8,847,919 
(641,583) 
-6.8% 
McDaniel College 
7,148,909 
5,989,757 
(1,159,152) -16.2% 
Maryland Institute College of Art 
5,091,657 
4,117,361 
(974,296) -19.1% 
Mount St. Mary’s College 
5,928,938 
5,553,917 
(375,021) 
-6.3% 
Goucher College 
3,512,339 
3,086,371 
(425,968) -12.1% 
Washington College 
2,917,663 
3,008,186 
90,523 
3.1% 
Hood College 
4,514,285 
3,653,375 
(860,910) -19.1% 
Notre Dame of Maryland University 
3,327,440 
1,869,268 
(1,458,172) -43.8% 
Washington Adventist University 
1,519,015 
1,496,790 
(22,225) 
-1.5% 
St. John’s College 
1,961,828 
1,703,607 
(258,221) -13.2% 
Capitol Technology University 
1,508,657 
749,959 
(758,698) -50.3% 
Total 
$133,905,065 
$72,594,106 ($61,310,959) -45.8% 
 
BRFA:  Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Recent History:  The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2020 reduced the level 
of general funds for the Sellinger program in fiscal 2021 to $69,624,905 and specified that 
funds be allocated based on each institution’s proportion of FTES in the fall semester of 
fiscal 2020 at all the qualifying institutions. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 31-34) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Sara J. Baker 
 
 

END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
    
SB 362/ Page 21 
Alter Mandate for the Business Façade Improvement Program to Allow Use of 
General Obligation Bonds 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to meet the requirement to provide 
$5.0 million for the Business Façade Improvement Program in either the operating or 
capital budget, rather than only the operating budget, beginning in fiscal 2025.  
 
Agency:  Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
PAYGO GF Exp 
$0 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
($5.0) 
   
State Effect:  Pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general fund expenditures in the operating budget 
decrease by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025 and in any year in which the Governor chooses to 
fund the program with general obligation (GO) bond funds in the capital budget. GO bond 
funding for the program increases correspondingly. The 2024 Capital Improvement 
Program also reflects $5.0 million in GO bonds annually for fiscal 2026 through 2029. 
Providing funding through GO bonds does not affect overall State expenditures but does 
reallocate funding from other capital projects. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly does not include PAYGO funding for the program; however, the 
fiscal 2025 capital budget includes $5.0 million in GO bond funding for the program. 
Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  Chapter 437 of 2023 established the Business Façade 
Improvement Program in DHCD to assist qualified businesses with improving the outside 
appearance of the businesses’ buildings and facilities. The fiscal 2024 capital budget 
included $1.5 million in GO bond funding for the program. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 35- 36) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Emily R. Haskel 
 
 

END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
    
SB 362/ Page 22 
Suspend Mandate for Fisheries Research and Development Fund in Fiscal 2025 Only 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Repeals, for fiscal 2025 only, the requirement that the Governor 
provide at least $1,794,000 in general funds for the Fisheries Research and Development 
Fund. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a 
$1,794,000 general fund reduction, contingent on the enactment of legislation eliminating 
the mandated appropriation (for the year). 
 
Agency:  Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
($1.8) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Exp 
$0 
($1.8) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures decrease by $1.8 million in fiscal 2025. Special 
fund revenues decrease correspondingly. Although, typically, special fund expenditures 
would be expected to decrease as well, special fund expenditures are unaffected due to the 
use of available fund balance to cover expenses in fiscal 2025.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The primary purpose of the Fisheries Research and Development 
Fund is to support the management of fisheries. Revenues for the fund primarily come from 
the sale of commercial and recreational fishing licenses. Accounting for this provision, the 
fund is estimated to have a fiscal 2025 closing balance of $5.8 million. 
 
The Fishing and Boating Services program is responsible for fisheries resources, including 
the regulation of recreational and commercial fishing activities, among other activities. The 
Fisheries Research and Development Fund comprises the largest portion of the fiscal 2025 
special fund appropriation for the DNR Fishing and Boating Services program, reflecting 
$8.0 million out of a total special fund appropriation of $19.6 million. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 6 of the 2007 special session changed the Motor Fuel Tax 
revenue distribution and replaced a distribution to the Fisheries Research and Development 
Fund with a mandated general fund appropriation of at least $1,794,000 annually, 
beginning in fiscal 2009. Chapter 150 of 2021 (Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act 
of 2021) repealed the mandate for fiscal 2022 only. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 36) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Andrew D. Gray 

END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
    
SB 362/ Page 23 
Reduce Mandate for Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Reduces the level of annual funding that the Governor must provide 
to the Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund from $1.0 million to 
$500,000 beginning in fiscal 2025. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes a $500,000 general fund reduction, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation reducing the mandate. 
 
Agency:  Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
GF Exp 
$0 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
SF Exp 
              $0 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
($0.5) 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures decrease by $0.5 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025. Special fund revenues and expenditures decrease correspondingly. 
 
Local Effect:  There is a potential reduction in financial assistance provided to forest 
conservancy district boards provided through the fund. 
 
Program Description:  The Mel Noland Woodland Incentives and Fellowship Fund 
supports a variety of forest-related programs. Among other things, fund revenues must be 
used to (1) provide cost-share assistance to private forest land owners for tree planting, site 
preparation, and timber stand improvement; (2) provide annual grants to forest 
conservancy district boards; (3) establish a forest health emergency contingency program; 
(4) provide financial assistance for the administration of an urban and community forestry 
program; and (5) provide stipends to Mel Noland Fellowship Program fellows and offset 
the cost of administering the Mel Noland Fellowship Program. 
 
Fund revenue sources include (1) up to $200,000 annually in agricultural land transfer tax 
revenue from woodland areas; (2) DNR charges imposed for assisting with implementation 
of approved practices; (3) money distributed from the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal 
Bays 2010 Trust Fund; (4) revenues derived from forestry practices on certain DNR lands, 
subject to specified approval; and (5) a mandated annual appropriation of $1.0 million. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 39 of 2022 increased the appropriation that the Governor is 
required to include in the annual budget bill for the fund from $50,000 to $1.0 million 
beginning in fiscal 2024, an increase of $950,000. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 36-37) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Andrew D. Gray 

END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
    
SB 362/ Page 24 
Specify Distribution to Local Income Tax Reserve Account Is for Repayment of 
Fiscal 2010 Transfer and Repeal Requirement for Fiscal 2024 and 2025 Distributions 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Repeal the requirement for the annual $10.0 million distribution to 
the Local Income Tax Reserve Account in fiscal 2024 and 2025. Specify that, from 
fiscal 2026 through 2060, the annual $10.0 million distribution to the Local Income Tax 
Reserve Account is to repay $350.0 million transferred from the account to the Education 
Trust Fund as required in Chapter 484 of 2010. Accordingly, terminate that distribution to 
the Local Income Tax Reserve Account after fiscal 2060 when that repayment is complete.  
 
Agency:  None 
 
Type of Action:  Mandate relief; miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$10.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
  
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2025 due to 
repealing the distribution in fiscal 2025, after which there is no effect over the next 
35 years. Beginning in fiscal 2061 when the repayment is complete, general fund revenues 
increase by $10.0 million annually from no longer having the distribution continue in 
perpetuity. In addition, the State’s unfunded liability for the $350.0 million borrowed in 
2010 is eliminated due to statute specifying a payback plan. While the provision also 
eliminates the requirement for the $10.0 million distribution in fiscal 2024, this analysis 
reflects no effect that year as the fiscal 2024 distribution has already been made.  
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description/Recent History:  The Comptroller’s Office uses the Local Income 
Tax Reserve Account to manage the cash flow of personal income tax payments and 
distributions to local governments. The account is also used to meet the State’s liability for 
local income taxes according to generally accepted accounting principles.  
 
Chapter 484 of 2010 required the Comptroller to distribute $350.0 million from the Local 
Income Tax Reserve Account to the Education Trust Fund, which was one of several 
transfers made from the account in that and other years. Although Chapter 484 established 
a repayment plan for fiscal 2014 through 2020, Chapter 425 of 2013 repealed the 
repayment plan. Chapter 489 of 2015 established a repayment of $10.0 million from 
fiscal 2016 through 2025 for another $100.0 million transfer authorized in that Act. 
Chapter 10 of 2018 extended the $10.0 million annual repayment indefinitely and no longer 
tied the repayment to any particular transfer.  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 43)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Tonya D. Zimmerman 

END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
    
SB 362/ Page 25 
Reduce Mandated Retirement Reinvestment Contribution and Repeal Requirement 
to Reduce Pension Contribution by Amount of Certain Administrative Fees 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Reduce the amount of the supplemental contribution to the pension 
system that the Governor is required to make annually from $75.0 million to $50.0 million 
beginning in fiscal 2025. Repeal the requirement that the State reduce its budgeted pension 
contribution by the amount of administrative fees paid by the local boards of education and 
local community colleges. Likewise, repeal authorization for local employers and 
participating governmental units (PGUs) to deduct the amount of their administrative fees 
from their required employer contributions. 
 
Agency:  Statewide 
 
Type of Actions:  Mandate relief; miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0.0 
($25.00) 
($7.84) 
($5.34) 
($5.34) 
($5.25) 
GF Exp 
$0.0 
($21.61) 
($6.77) 
($4.61) 
($4.61) 
($4.52) 
SF Exp 
$0.0 
($1.68) 
($0.53) 
($0.36) 
($0.36) 
($0.36) 
FF Exp 
$0.0 
($0.91) 
($0.29) 
($0.20) 
($0.20) 
($0.20) 
NBF Exp 
$0.0 
($0.79) 
($0.25) 
($0.17) 
($0.17) 
($0.17) 
   
State Effect:  State pension contributions decrease by $25.0 million in total funds until the 
reinvestment is no longer required when the system reaches 85% funded status. The 
fiscal 2025 savings are recognized through a reduction in the fiscal 2025 budget bill. 
Savings decrease beginning in fiscal 2027 due to the impact of changes in unfunded 
liabilities resulting from the lower supplemental payments. The decreases are also largely 
offset, beginning in fiscal 2026, when the effect of repealing the requirement to reduce 
pension funding by the amount of administrative fees paid by local boards of education 
and local community colleges is realized. Administrative fees are estimated at 
$17.1 million in each year.  
 
Local Effect:  No discernible effect on local pension liabilities or contribution rates.   
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Chapter 397 of 2011 required the Governor to 
reinvest a portion of the savings generated by pension benefit reform by making excess 
State contributions into the State Retirement and Pension System trust fund. The purpose 
of the reinvestment was to enhance the financial stability of the trust fund and restore it to 
full funding more quickly. Statute currently requires an annual supplemental contribution 
of $75.0 million.  
 

END OF PAGE 25

START OF PAGE 26
    
SB 362/ Page 26 
Section 21-308(a)(3) of the State Personnel and Pensions Article requires a reduction in 
the State’s share of the employer contribution paid on behalf of members of the Teachers’ 
Combined System by the amount of administrative fees paid by the local boards of 
education and local community colleges. This provision is a remnant of the pension plan’s 
prior structure of including administrative fees in employer contribution rates and was 
instituted to avoid double collecting administrative fees from the State (in the employer 
contribution) and from local boards of education and community colleges (by billing them 
directly). Since fiscal 2016, administrative fees have not been included in employer 
contributions. However, the statute continues to require that the annual required employer 
contribution to the system be reduced by the amount of the administrative fees paid by the 
local boards of education and local community colleges, resulting in underfunding the 
pension fund. 
 
The State Retirement Agency advises that only 3 of approximately 120 PGUs take the 
authorized deduction from their employer contributions and that the deductions total about 
$550,000.   
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 41-43)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jason A. Kramer, Michael Rubenstein, and Tonya D. Zimmerman 
 
 

END OF PAGE 26

START OF PAGE 27
    
SB 362/ Page 27 
Delay Certain Funding and Alter Full-day Prekindergarten Enrollment Count and 
Per Pupil Funding 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Under the full-day prekindergarten funding formula, (1) delay the 
initiation of funding of Tier II students from fiscal 2025 to fiscal 2026 and limit fiscal 2026 
Tier II funding to families with incomes of more than 300%, but not more than 360%, of 
the federal poverty level (FPL) and (2) substantially increase the annual per pupil funding 
amount for each year beginning with fiscal 2027 so that annual per pupil funding is $19,950 
in fiscal 2027 and 2028 and increases with inflation beginning in fiscal 2029. The 
fiscal 2025 budget includes a $7.2 million special fund reduction, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation delaying the phase-in schedule for including Tier II children in 
prekindergarten enrollment.   
 
Agency:  Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 
 
Type of Actions:  Mandate relief; miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Exp 
$0 
($7.7) 
($6.3) 
$14.0 
$0 
$0 
GF Exp 
$0 
$0 
($0.0) 
$77.2 
$80.0 
$66.0 
   
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures decrease by $7.7 million in fiscal 2025 and by 
$6.3 million in fiscal 2026 due to the delay and then truncation of Tier II funding in those 
years, impacting both the full-day prekindergarten program and education effort 
adjustment (EEA) expenditures. Expenditures increase by $91.4 million in fiscal 2027 due 
to the direct effect of the per pupil amount increase on full-day prekindergarten funding, 
$78.0 million, and the impact of this change upon EEA, $13.3 million, in that year. General 
fund guaranteed tax base (GTB) program expenditures decrease by $44,015 in fiscal 2026 
and by $192,733 in fiscal 2027. Because Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) 
revenues will be insufficient to cover BMFF expenditures in fiscal 2027, the net effect is 
BMFF expenditures increase by $14.0 million (reflecting the higher available BMFF 
balance from BMFF savings in fiscal 2025 and 2026 due to these provisions) and general 
fund expenditures increase by $77.2 million in fiscal 2027. BMFF revenues continue to be 
less than the current law required increases to annual expenditures under the Blueprint in 
fiscal 2028 and 2029; thus, expenditures for the full-day prekindergarten program, EEA, 
and GTB, totaling $80.0 million and $66.0 million in fiscal 2028 and 2029, respectively, 
are assumed to be entirely covered by general funds. 
 
Local Effect:  Local school systems realize altered State funding, as described above, and 
as shown in Exhibit 1. Also, county government funding for public schools statewide 
decreases by $1.7 million in fiscal 2025 and by $2.6 million in fiscal 2026; county 

END OF PAGE 27

START OF PAGE 28
    
SB 362/ Page 28 
government funding for local school systems increases by $21.6 million, $16.1 million, 
and $14.4 million in fiscal 2027 through 2029, respectively.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Change in State Aid by County 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Allegany 
($215,545) 
($141,470) 
$1,225,815 
$1,024,962 
$901,534 
Anne Arundel 
(295,512) 
(209,980) 
5,912,208 
5,282,483 
4,616,507 
Baltimore City 
(1,034,436) 
(815,024) 
24,339,411 
19,793,782 
13,418,695 
Baltimore County 
(236,947) 
(157,187) 
1,543,687 
1,338,262 
1,214,922 
Calvert 
(8,055) 
(10,999) 
469,893 
428,306 
379,392 
Caroline 
(309,366) 
(281,381) 
1,900,104 
1,886,031 
1,539,524 
Carroll 
(29,358) 
(30,218) 
1,258,563 
1,132,668 
1,012,299 
Cecil 
(301,222) 
(469,581) 
2,352,483 
2,079,327 
1,877,229 
Charles 
(676,027) 
(645,369) 
3,527,916  
3,133,376 
2,726,776 
Dorchester 
(132,094) 
(143,301) 
1,633,331 
1,456,018 
1,292,556 
Frederick 
(776,816) 
(613,406) 
3,986,001 
3,589,451 
3,153,228 
Garrett 
(127,965) 
(134,838) 
417,364 
332,925 
288,261 
Harford 
(249,170) 
(243,873) 
2,186,575 
1,932,583 
1,673,658 
Howard 
(108,976) 
(67,804) 
1,650,373 
1,534,249 
1,356,413 
Kent 
(30,668) 
(31,124) 
330,609 
309,075 
299,294 
Montgomery 
4,625 
1,893 
4,704,279 
4,213,789 
3,684,635 
Prince George’s 
(1,042,741) 
(447,267) 
20,304,179 
17,950,425 
15,988,142 
Queen Anne’s 
(112,470) 
(25,183) 
385,381 
348,488 
304,260 
St. Mary’s 
(36,249) 
(72,482) 
2,171,062 
1,916,089 
1,639,805  
Somerset 
(62,509) 
(74,226) 
1,405,480 
1,281,281 
1,081,437 
Talbot 
(68,696) 
(66,115) 
370,446 
321,625 
281,081 
Washington 
(1,455,776) 
(1,267,419) 
3,878,326 
3,671,735 
3,121,745 
Wicomico 
(298,649) 
(277,108) 
4,584,404 
4,506,110 
3,661,006 
Worcester 
(105,154) 
(86,736) 
622,951 
527,306 
458,756 
Total 
($7,709,776) ($6,310,198) $91,160,841 $79,990,346 $65,971,155 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Program Description:  The full-day prekindergarten funding formula provides State and 
local funding for voluntary full-day prekindergarten for (1) four- and three-year-olds from 
low-income families and homeless youths (Tier I students) and (2) beginning in the 
2024-2025 school year (fiscal 2025), four-year-olds from families whose income is 

END OF PAGE 28

START OF PAGE 29
    
SB 362/ Page 29 
between 300% and 600% of FPL (Tier II students). There is no family share for Tier I 
students. For Tier II students, a sliding scale developed by MSDE determines the family 
share. For four-year-olds from families with income above 600% (Tier III), the family 
share covers the full cost of full-day prekindergarten. However, a local board may provide 
up to 100% of the family share on behalf of the family.  
 
Local governments are required to fund the local share of several funding formula 
programs, including the full-day prekindergarten program. EEA establishes a maximum 
local share that a county must fund each year and provides equivalent additional State 
funding to hold local school systems harmless from the adjustment. GTB provides 
additional State education aid to counties that have less than 80% of the statewide average 
wealth per pupil and provide local education funding above the minimum local share 
required by the foundation program. 
 
The funding formula for full-day prekindergarten is based in part on the per pupil amount. 
The per pupil amount is $13,003 for fiscal 2025 and gradually escalates to $19,526 by 
fiscal 2030, after which the amount is indexed with inflation. The provisions increase the 
per pupil amount from $15,598 to $19,950 in fiscal 2027 and 2028 and index the amount 
with inflation beginning in fiscal 2029. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 119 of 2023 alters the definition of “Tier I child” to include, 
beginning in fiscal 2023, a child who is three or four years old who is a homeless youth 
and, in the 2023-2024 school year only, to include Tier II children (1) with a disability or 
(2) who are from a home in which English is not the primary spoken language. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 9-13)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
 

END OF PAGE 29

START OF PAGE 30
    
SB 362/ Page 30 
Expand Allowable Uses of Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Funding Provided for 
Coordinated Community Supports 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Expands, for fiscal 2025 only, the authorized uses of the Blueprint 
for Maryland’s Future funding for the Maryland Consortium on Coordinated Community 
Supports within the Maryland Community Health Resources Commission (MCHRC) to 
include not only providing school-based behavioral health services but also reimbursing 
the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) Medical Care Programs Administration 
(MCPA) for school-based behavioral health services provided on a fee-for-service basis 
through a Medicaid waiver.  
 
Agencies:  MCHRC; MDH 
 
Type of Action:  Change use of special fund 
   
State Effect:  No effect on overall special fund revenues or expenditures; however, funds 
are reallocated among eligible activities in fiscal 2025. To the extent that special funds are 
spent in fiscal 2025 to reimburse MCPA for school-based behavioral health services 
covered by Medicaid, general fund savings are realized. MDH advises that Maryland will 
implement a State Plan Amendment to Medicaid that would allow for reimbursement for 
services delivered by school psychologists and social workers beginning in the first quarter 
of calendar 2025. MDH estimates $12.7 million of general fund expenditures would be 
necessary in fiscal 2025 absent this authorization, with growth in the out-years due to 
annualization and inflation. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
specifies that no more than $12.0 million in consortium funding can be used to reimburse 
MCPA for this new allowable use. Supplemental Budget No. 2 to the fiscal 2025 budget 
added $14.7 million in federal funds to account for the federal fund match for Medicaid 
spending on school-based behavioral health services.  
 
Local Effect:  Local education agency revenues potentially increase through consortium 
support for, or Medicaid reimbursement of, behavioral health services provided in schools 
in fiscal 2025. 
 
Program Description:  Chapter 36 of 2021 (the Blueprint for Maryland Future – 
Implementation) established the consortium within MCHRC, in part to develop 
coordinated community supports partnerships to meet student behavioral health needs and 
administer the Coordinated Community Supports Partnerships grant program. Allowable 
uses of consortium funding include (1) providing reimbursement, under a memorandum of 
understanding, to the National Center for School Mental Health and other technical 
assistance providers; (2) providing grants to coordinated community supports partnerships 

END OF PAGE 30

START OF PAGE 31
    
SB 362/ Page 31 
to deliver services and supports to meet students’ holistic behavioral health needs; and 
(3) paying associated administrative costs. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 713 of 2022 increased mandated funding levels for the 
consortium to $85.0 million in fiscal 2024, $110.0 million in fiscal 2025, and 
$130.0 million in fiscal 2026 and annually thereafter. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by 
the General Assembly reduces funding to the consortium to $40.0 million due to the 
delayed timing of the fiscal 2024 grant distribution. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 16-18) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Anne W. Braun 
 
 

END OF PAGE 31

START OF PAGE 32
    
SB 362/ Page 32 
Use Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund to Satisfy Tree Solutions 
Now Act of 2021 Funding Mandate 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Establishes that $2.5 million in special funds from the Chesapeake 
and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund must be used annually from fiscal 2024 through 
2031 for tree plantings on public and private land to satisfy the funding mandate in 
Chapter 645 of 2021 (Tree Solutions Now Act), thereby eliminating a general fund 
appropriation to the trust fund for that purpose. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $2.5 million in general fund reductions for both fiscal 2024 
and 2025 and a $2.5 million special fund appropriation for fiscal 2024, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation allowing the mandate to be satisfied in this manner. 
 
Agency:  Department of Natural Resources 
 
Type of Action:  Fund swap 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
($2.5) 
SF Exp 
$2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
2.5 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures decrease by $2.5 million annually from 
fiscal 2024 through 2031. Special fund expenditures increase correspondingly.  
 
Local Effect:  Funding for local projects from the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 
2010 Trust Fund may decrease in future years as a result of funds being used to meet the 
Chapter 645 funding mandate. The Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust 
Fund’s fiscal 2024 appropriation is $60.6 million, of which $22.9 million, or approximately 
38%, was allocated to the Competitive Grant Program for local projects. 
 
Program Description:  Chapter 6 of the 2007 special session established a Chesapeake 
and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 Trust Fund to be used to implement the State’s tributary 
restoration strategy. The fund is financed with a portion of existing revenues from the 
motor fuel tax and the sales and use tax on short-term vehicle rentals. Subsequently, 
Chapters 120 and 121 of 2008 established a framework for how the trust fund money must 
be spent by specifying that it be used for nonpoint source pollution control projects and by 
expanding it to apply to the Atlantic Coastal Bays. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 645 required the Governor to include an annual appropriation of 
$2.5 million in fiscal 2024 through 2031 to the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 2010 
Trust Fund for tree planting on public and private land, among other required 
appropriations. Chapter 645 specified that funds appropriated to the fund are supplemental 

END OF PAGE 32

START OF PAGE 33
    
SB 362/ Page 33 
to, and may not take the place of, funding that would otherwise be appropriated for tree 
plantings on public and private land. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (p.37) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Andrew D. Gray 
 
 

END OF PAGE 33

START OF PAGE 34
    
SB 362/ Page 34 
Reduce Amount of Revenue Volatility Adjustment 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Alters, in fiscal 2024 and 2025, the maximum amount of projected 
nonwithholding income tax revenue that must, under certain circumstances, be subtracted 
from the projected general fund revenue estimate each year to $0. 
 
Agency:  State Reserve Fund 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$120.0 
$140.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Rev 
($120.0) 
($140.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0 
($60.0) 
($70.0) 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $120.0 million in fiscal 2024 and 
$140.0 million in fiscal 2025 due to reducing the cap to $0 in each of those years. Special 
fund revenues for the Revenue Stabilization Account (Rainy Day Fund) and Fiscal 
Responsibility Fund each decrease by as much as $60.0 million in fiscal 2024 and 
$70.0 million in fiscal 2025, representing the amount that would have gone to each fund if 
the revenues exceeding the cap were realized. Special fund expenditures from the Fiscal 
Responsibility Fund decrease by the amount that would have been appropriated from the 
fund based on the amounts received in the second preceding year in fiscal 2026 and 2027 
if the revenue exceeding the cap were realized. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  Chapters 4 and 550 of 2017 established a cap on income tax 
nonwithholding revenues. The cap applies when the share of estimated general fund 
revenues attributable to income tax nonwithholding sources exceeds the 10-year average. 
If nonwithholding revenues, as a percentage of general fund revenues, are less than the 
10-year average percentage, there is no effect. The cap requires reducing the estimate of 
nonwithholding income tax revenues so that nonwithholding income tax revenues as a 
share of general fund revenues do not exceed the 10-year average. In some years, actual 
income tax nonwithholding revenues will exceed the capped estimate. In those years, the 
Acts specify how the excess revenues are to be allocated. The excess revenues are to be 
distributed (1) to close any revenue gap for the fiscal year; (2) to the Rainy Day Fund (if 
the account is less than 6.0% of general fund revenues), the amount that is required to 
provide a balance in the account of 6.0% of general fund revenues; and (3) the remainder 
split 50.0% to the Rainy Day Fund and 50.0% to the Fiscal Responsibility Fund.  

END OF PAGE 34

START OF PAGE 35
    
SB 362/ Page 35 
The Fiscal Responsibility Fund was established to hold the amount of nonwithholding 
income tax revenues that exceed the capped estimate. The funds are to be used only to 
provide pay-as-you-go capital funds for (1) public school construction and public school 
capital improvement projects; (2) capital projects at public community colleges; and 
(3) capital projects at four-year public institutions of higher education. The funds are 
required to be appropriated in the second following fiscal year.    
 
Recent History:  Chapters 4 and 550 originally set the cap on the revenue volatility 
adjustment at 2.0% of general fund revenues beginning in fiscal 2020, but legislation has 
delayed the 2.0% cap. Most recently, Chapter 538 of 2020 (Budget Reconciliation and 
Financing Act of 2020) delayed the phase in of the 2.0% cap to fiscal 2026 and established 
specific dollar caps for fiscal 2021 ($0), fiscal 2022 ($80.0 million) and then increased 
those caps by $20.0 million per year ($100.0 million in fiscal 2023, $120.0 million in 
fiscal 2024, and $140.0 million in fiscal 2025), until reaching the 2.0% cap in fiscal 2026. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 38-39) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jason A. Kramer and Tonya D. Zimmerman 
 
 

END OF PAGE 35

START OF PAGE 36
    
SB 362/ Page 36 
Redirect Interest from Variety of Special Funds 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Redirect, for fiscal 2024 through 2028 only, interest earned on 
special funds of the State to the general fund, except for special funds and accounts which 
are specifically exempted from the requirement or where doing so would be inconsistent 
with federal law, a grant agreement, other federal requirements, or with the terms of a gift 
or settlement agreement.   
 
Agency:  Multiple 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$2.3 
$27.0 
$13.5 
$13.5 
$13.5 
$0.0 
SF Rev 
($2.3) 
($27.0) 
($13.5) 
($13.5) 
($13.5) 
$0.0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $2.25 million in fiscal 2024 due to the 
June 1, 2024 effective date, allowing for some crediting of interest to the general fund in 
fiscal 2024. General fund revenues increase by $27.0 million in fiscal 2025 to account for 
a full year and by $13.5 million annually from fiscal 2026 through 2028 after which the 
provision terminates. (The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly assumes 
$27.0 million in revenues.) The lower level of general fund revenue attainment in the 
out-years is due to lower expected interest earnings. Special fund revenues decrease 
correspondingly. To the extent that the special fund revenues are reduced, special fund 
expenditures may likewise be reduced; however, the amount and timing cannot be reliably 
estimated.   
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  The State Treasurer’s Office reports that, as of December 2023, 
208 special funds accrue interest retained by the fund. The provision in the bill specifically 
exempts 86 accounts from redirection of interest to the general fund.     
 
Recent History:  A similar provision appeared in the Budget Reconciliation and Financing 
Act (BRFA) of 2010 (Chapter 484), for fiscal 2010 and 2011 only. The BRFA of 2011 
(Chapter 397) made permanent the redirection of interest from special fund accounts, with 
the exception of certain accounts.  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 39) and Section 8 (pp. 91-95) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Tonya D. Zimmerman 

END OF PAGE 36

START OF PAGE 37
    
SB 362/ Page 37 
Reduce Lottery Agent Sales and Cashing Commissions 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Reduce lottery agent sales commissions from 6% to 5.75% of gross 
lottery sales and reduce the prize ticket cashing commission from 3% to 2%.  
 
Agency:  State Lottery and Gaming Control Agency 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$1.7 
$20.7 
$20.8 
$20.9 
$21.1 
$21.3 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $1.7 million in fiscal 2024, reflecting 
one month of revenues, and by $20.7 million in fiscal 2025 due to reduced lottery agent 
sales commissions and prize ticket cashing commissions. (The fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly assumes $22.4 million in revenues.) Fiscal 2025 revenues reflect 
annualization and anticipated growth in lottery sales; out-years reflect continued 
anticipated growth. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  In exchange for selling State lottery products, licensed agents earn 
a 6% commission of gross lottery sales. A licensed agent may receive a cashing fee of up 
to 3% of valid prizes paid for services rendered in cashing winning tickets. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 661 of 2022 increased the lottery agent sales commission from 
5.5% to 6% of gross lottery sales. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 41) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Heather N. MacDonagh and Micah R. Richards 
 
 

END OF PAGE 37

START OF PAGE 38
    
SB 362/ Page 38 
Repeal Small Business Relief Tax Credit 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Repeals the section of law establishing the small business relief tax 
credit.   
 
Agency:  Department of Commerce 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
$0.1 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by up to $0.1 million annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025 due to the small business relief tax credit no longer being claimed against the 
income tax. This estimate assumes continued limited utilization of the tax credit; for 
example, only three small businesses have had claims certified since the inception of the 
program (although more claims have been submitted). (The fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly assumes $1.3 million in revenues.) Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Local highway user revenues are not materially affected.  
 
Program Description:  A small business that employs 14 or fewer employees and provides 
paid sick and safe leave in accordance with the Maryland Healthy Working Families Act 
to a qualified employee may claim a refundable credit against the State income tax. A 
qualified employee is one who earns 250% or less of the annual federal poverty guidelines 
for a single-person household. The credit is the lesser of $500 for each qualified employee 
or the total amount of qualified employer benefits accrued by qualified employees. The 
Department of Commerce may issue tax certificates totaling no more than $5.0 million 
annually.     
 
Recent History:  Chapter 571 of 2018 established the tax credit. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 5 (p. 88) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Heather N. MacDonagh 
 
 

END OF PAGE 38

START OF PAGE 39
    
SB 362/ Page 39 
Authorize Transfer of Fund Balance from State Unemployment Insurance Reserve 
Account to General Fund in Fiscal 2025 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer $60.0 million from the balance 
of the reserve account established by the State to pay for unemployment benefits for State 
employees to the general fund, so long as the transfer occurs by June 30, 2025. 
 
Agency:  Statewide 
 
Type of Action:  Fund balance transfer 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$60.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $60.0 million in fiscal 2025. Expenditures 
are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  The State, as an employer, reimburses the Unemployment 
Insurance (UI) program dollar-for-dollar for benefits paid to eligible claimants in the prior 
quarter. The State maintains a fund for the purpose of making these payments to the 
UI program and budgets 28 cents for every $100 of payroll for this purpose. The projected 
fiscal 2024 closing balance of the fund is $76.5 million before this transfer.  
 
Recent History:  In addition to the transfer from the fund balance authorized in this 
provision, the fiscal 2025 budget accounts for a reduction of $6.0 million in general funds 
due to an anticipated unemployment rate reduction. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 9 (p. 95)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jason A. Kramer and Tonya D. Zimmerman 
 
 

END OF PAGE 39

START OF PAGE 40
    
SB 362/ Page 40 
Authorize Transfer of Fund Balances from Certain Health Professional Licensing 
Boards to Behavioral Health Administration in Fiscal 2025 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the transfer of a total of $2,556,174 from the fund 
balances of three health professional licensing boards to the Behavioral Health 
Administration (BHA) within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), so long as the 
fund balance transfers occur by June 30, 2025. More specifically, the authorized transfer 
comprises (1) $1,648,669 from the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists 
Fund; (2) $426,551 from the State Board of Occupational Therapy Practice Fund; and 
(3) $480,954 from the State Board of Examiners of Psychologists Fund. The fiscal 2025 
budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a $2,556,174 general fund reduction, 
contingent on the enactment of legislation authorizing the transfer. 
 
Agency:  MDH 
 
Type of Action:  Fund swap 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
$0 
($2.6) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$2.6 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for BHA community behavioral health services 
decrease by $2.6 million in fiscal 2025 only due to the available special funds. BHA special 
fund expenditures increase correspondingly in fiscal 2025. To the extent that the 
three boards would have used the available fund balance, special fund expenditures 
decrease correspondingly for the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists, 
the State Board of Occupational Therapy Practice, and the State Board of Examiners of 
Psychologists. However, the timing of any such expenditures cannot be reliably estimated. 
Overall, special fund revenues are not affected, merely reallocated within MDH. 
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Program Description:  BHA has oversight over publicly funded inpatient and outpatient 
behavioral health services and provides services and supports for the treatment and 
rehabilitation of individuals with substance use, mental health, co-occurring, and 
problem-gambling disorders. These transferred funds would support the Community 
Services program; however, the specific uses of the funding are unclear.  
 
The State boards are responsible for the licensing and regulation of individuals practicing 
in each board’s respective field. At the close of fiscal 2023, the special fund balance was 

END OF PAGE 40

START OF PAGE 41
    
SB 362/ Page 41 
$3.7 million in the State Board of Professional Counselors and Therapists Fund, 
$1.2 million in the State Board of Occupational Therapy Practice Fund, and $1.9 million 
in the State Board of Examiners of Psychologists Fund. 
 
Recent History:  The Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2021 authorized a 
transfer of $1.5 million from the balance in the State Board of Professional Counselors and 
Therapists Fund and $2.0 million from the balance in the Natalie M. LaPrade Medical 
Cannabis Commission Fund to BHA. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 10 (p. 95) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Naomi Komuro 
 
 

END OF PAGE 41

START OF PAGE 42
    
SB 362/ Page 42 
Authorize Transfer of Funds from Health Information Exchange Fund to Medical 
Care Programs Administration for Information Technology in Fiscal 2025 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer $216,845 from the Health 
Information Exchange Fund to the Medical Care Programs Administration (MCPA) to 
support information technology activities, so long as the transfer occurs by June 30, 2025. 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a general fund 
reduction of $216,845, contingent on the enactment of legislation authorizing the transfer 
of excess special fund balance from the Health Information Exchange Fund in fiscal 2025.  
 
Agency:  Maryland Department of Health 
 
Type of Action:  Fund swap 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
$0 
($0.2) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0.2 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures in MCPA decrease by $216,845 in fiscal 2025 
due to the use of special funds from the Health Information Exchange Fund. Special fund 
expenditures in MCPA increase correspondingly. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Recent History:  Following the repeal of the Maryland Health Insurance Plan, fund 
balance from the Health Information Exchange Fund within that program was transferred 
to MCPA to be used for integrated care networks. MCPA’s statutory authority to spend 
this fund balance expired in fiscal 2020. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 11 (p. 95) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Anne W. Braun 
 
 

END OF PAGE 42

START OF PAGE 43
    
SB 362/ Page 43 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund, as Specified, from Dedicated Purpose Account 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer to the general fund, on or before 
June 30, 2025, a total of $193,474,476 from the Dedicated Purpose Account. Specifically, 
these monies are authorized to be transferred from funds held in the Dedicated Purpose 
Account for (1) cybersecurity ($149,500,476); (2) capital pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) funds 
for renovations to 2100 Guilford Avenue and the adjacent parking structure ($28,884,000); 
(3) capital PAYGO funds for the Maryland Department of Emergency Management 
(MDEM) Headquarters Renovation and Expansion project ($9,090,000); and (4) capital 
PAYGO funds for Conowingo Dam dredging ($6,000,000). 
 
Agencies:  State Reserve Fund; Department of General Services (DGS); Maryland 
Environmental Service (MES); MDEM; Department of Information Technology (DoIT) 
 
Type of Action:  Fund balance transfer 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$193.5 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $193.5 million in fiscal 2024. Although 
authorized to occur in either fiscal 2024 or 2025, the budget plan assumes the transfer 
occurs in fiscal 2024. Special fund expenditures decrease by as much as $149.5 million 
between fiscal 2025 and 2028, reflecting expenditures that could have been made for 
cybersecurity. As the timing of the expenditures cannot be reliably estimated, any such 
reduction is not reflected above. Other projects are not proceeding and, therefore, there is 
no additional impact on special fund expenditures. 
 
Local Effect:  No direct impact. 
 
Program Description/Recent History:  The Dedicated Purpose Account is established to 
retain appropriations for major, multi-year expenditures in which the magnitude and timing 
of cash needs are uncertain and to meet expenditure requirements that may be affected by 
changes in federal law or fiscal policies or other contingencies. Funds remain available in 
the Dedicated Purpose Account for four years after the close of the fiscal year in which the 
funds were appropriated. 
 
 
Cybersecurity ($149.5 million):  Funding for cybersecurity purposes has been 
included as an appropriation to the Dedicated Purpose Account each year beginning 
in fiscal 2021:  $10.0 million in fiscal 2021; $100.0 million in fiscal 2022; 
$100.0 million in fiscal 2023; and $152.0 million in fiscal 2024. Approximately 
$114.0 million of this amount has been expended. Accounting for this transfer, 
approximately $98.5 million would remain available to be used for cybersecurity 

END OF PAGE 43

START OF PAGE 44
    
SB 362/ Page 44 
purposes. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$68.3 million in DoIT for cybersecurity purposes. 
 
 
2100 Guilford Avenue ($28.9 million):  The former location of the Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services’ Division of Parole and Probation, 
2100 Guilford Avenue, had been selected as a new location for DGS, which is 
one of several State agencies that have left the State Center complex in 
Baltimore City. A construction and renovation plan with funding for fiscal 2023 and 
2024 was included in the 2022 Capital Improvement Program (CIP). However, as 
renovation plans progressed, design modifications were found to be necessary and 
increased costs. At the same time, concerns arose from the surrounding community 
about disruptions from construction and traffic congestion. These issues were 
reflected in the delay of funding to fiscal 2025 and 2026 as reflected in the 2023 CIP, 
along with an increase from the initial estimate of $23.8 million to $76.3 million. In 
a report submitted January 15, 2024, DGS reported that it has decided not to move 
forward with renovation and relocation to 2100 Guilford Avenue. DGS will be 
issuing a request for information to determine alternative uses of the property as it 
continues to manage maintenance and security of the site. 
 
 
MDEM Headquarters at Camp Fretterd ($9.1 million):  The current MDEM 
headquarters building at the Camp Fretterd Military Reservation was constructed in 
calendar 2001. The building was designed for a staff of only 39 personnel; since 
construction, the agency’s programs and responsibilities have greatly expanded. 
The budget for fiscal 2025 includes 107 regular positions in the agency. A plan for 
renovation of the Camp Fretterd headquarters building was estimated to cost a total 
of $21.2 million, and initial funding was provided for design work in fiscal 2023. 
However, the project experienced delays in the permit waiver and procurement 
processes, and MDEM ultimately decided to rent new office space rather than move 
forward with renovations.  
 
 
Conowingo Dam ($6.0 million):  The fiscal 2023 budget included $6.0 million in 
general funds in the Dedicated Purpose Account for the MES Conowingo Dam 
Capacity Recovery and Dredge Material Reuse Project. The project was intended to 
be a large-scale dredging and beneficial reuse project at the Conowingo Dam to 
reduce excess nutrients – from material trapped behind the dam – entering the 
Chesapeake Bay. The budget committees adopted narrative to request additional 
details about various aspects of the project; however, the committees felt that the 
report was not responsive to concerns about project readiness. For instance, the 
project was underdeveloped in that there was no clear program plan, timeline, cost 
estimate, or confirmed buy-in from neighboring states. 

END OF PAGE 44

START OF PAGE 45
    
SB 362/ Page 45 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 12 (pp. 95-96)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jason A. Kramer and Tonya D. Zimmerman 
 
 

END OF PAGE 45

START OF PAGE 46
    
SB 362/ Page 46 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Critical Maintenance Funds Held in 
Dedicated Purpose Account 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer, on or before June 30, 2025, 
$14.0 million from the Dedicated Purpose Account to the general fund. Specifically, the 
transfer is from funds held from the fiscal 2023 appropriation to the Dedicated Purpose 
Account for the Facilities Renewal – State Agencies allocation to the Department of 
Natural Resources (DNR) for critical maintenance. 
 
Agencies:  State Reserve Fund; DNR 
 
Type of Action:  Fund balance transfer 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$14.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $14.0 million in fiscal 2025 due to the 
transfer. Special fund expenditures decrease by as much as $14.0 million between 
fiscal 2025 and 2027, reflecting expenditures that DNR could have made absent the 
transfer. As the timing of the expenditures cannot be reliably estimated, any such reduction 
is not reflected above. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The Dedicated Purpose Account is established to retain 
appropriations for major, multi-year expenditures in which the magnitude and timing of 
cash needs are uncertain and to meet expenditure requirements that may be affected by 
changes in federal law or fiscal policies or other contingencies. Funds remain available in 
the Dedicated Purpose Account for four years after the close of the fiscal year in which the 
funds were appropriated. 
 
Recent History:  The fiscal 2023 budget included $100.0 million in general funds in the 
Dedicated Purpose Account for Facilities Renewal – State Agencies, with $25.0 million of 
that total intended for critical maintenance at DNR facilities.  
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 14 (p. 97) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Andrew D. Gray 
 
 

END OF PAGE 46

START OF PAGE 47
    
SB 362/ Page 47 
Expand Allowable Uses of Senior Prescription Drug Assistance Program Fund 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Expand allowable uses of the Senior Prescription Drug Assistance 
Program (SPDAP) Fund within the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) to include the 
Kidney Disease Program and community mental health services to the uninsured, 
beginning in fiscal 2025 (rather than only in fiscal 2018). Also expand allowable uses of 
the SPDAP Fund, for fiscal 2025 only, to include depositing funds into health 
reimbursement accounts of certain State retirees transitioning to Medicare Part D. The 
fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes an $8.6 million special 
fund appropriation, contingent on the enactment of legislation authorizing the expanded 
uses of the SPDAP Fund. 
 
Agency:  MDH 
 
Type of Action:  Change use of special fund 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
$3.6 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Exp 
$0 
($5.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$8.6 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures decrease by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025, as absent 
the authority to spend SPDAP funding for mental health services for the uninsured, 
additional general funds would be required. Special fund expenditures increase 
correspondingly in fiscal 2025, and, given the use of special funds in fiscal 2025, less 
special funding is available for expenditure in the out-years. The fiscal 2025 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly includes a special fund appropriation of $5.0 million 
within the Behavioral Health Administration, contingent on the enactment of legislation 
authorizing the use of SPDAP Fund balance to support behavioral health services for the 
uninsured. To the extent the Governor chooses to spend SPDAP funding on the Kidney 
Disease Program or mental health services for the uninsured beyond fiscal 2025, general 
fund expenditures decrease further. 
 
Special fund revenues and expenditures for the State Employee and Retiree Health 
Insurance Account increase by $3.6 million in fiscal 2025 only to reflect the new authorized 
use of SPDAP funding for that year only. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes a special fund addition of $3.6 million from the SPDAP Fund 
to the Department of Budget and Management for deposits into health reimbursement 
accounts for certain State retirees transitioning to Medicare Part D, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation authorizing the use of SPDAP funding for certain health 
reimbursement accounts. 

END OF PAGE 47

START OF PAGE 48
    
SB 362/ Page 48 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description/Recent History:  SPDAP provides Medicare Part D premium 
assistance to offset costs for moderate-income Maryland residents (with household 
incomes at or below 300% of federal poverty guidelines) who are eligible for Medicare 
and are enrolled in certain Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plans. The program is 
supported with the SPDAP Fund, which is made up of payments from the CareFirst 
premium tax exemption. According to MDH, the fiscal 2023 SPDAP Fund closing balance 
was $11.1 million. 
 
Chapter 397 of 2011 terminated prescription drug coverage for Medicare-eligible State 
retirees effective in fiscal 2020. Chapter 10 of 2018 made the termination effective 
January 1, 2019, with the expectation that Medicare-eligible State retirees could enroll in 
prescription drug coverage programs under Medicare Part D. Chapter 767 of 2019 
established reimbursement programs that cover out-of-pocket costs for retirees enrolled in 
Part D coverage; however, implementation of the reimbursement programs was delayed 
pending the outcome of a lawsuit in federal court challenging the termination of 
prescription drug coverage for retirees. The lawsuit was resolved in favor of the State in 
July 2023, and the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes savings 
to reflect that the transition will occur in calendar 2025.  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 35) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Anne W. Braun and Naomi Komuro 
 
 

END OF PAGE 48

START OF PAGE 49
    
SB 362/ Page 49 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Unspent Funds for Health Care Provider 
Assistance Held in Dedicated Purpose Account  
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer to the general fund, on or before 
June 30, 2025, a total of $7,580,873 in unspent funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account, 
originally appropriated in fiscal 2023. Specifically, the authorized transfers reflect funds 
originally appropriated for assistance to assisted living facilities ($7,340,250), nursing 
homes ($132,321), and hospitals ($108,302).  
 
Agency:  State Reserve Fund  
 
Type of Action:  Fund balance transfer 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$7.6 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $7.6 million in fiscal 2025. Special fund 
expenditures are unaffected as these funds were unneeded for the original purpose.  
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  The Dedicated Purpose Account is established to retain 
appropriations for major, multi-year expenditures in which the magnitude and timing of 
cash needs are uncertain and to meet expenditure requirements that may be affected by 
changes in federal law or fiscal policies or other contingencies. Funds remain available in 
the Dedicated Purpose Account for four years after the close of the fiscal year in which the 
funds were appropriated. 
 
Recent History:  The fiscal 2023 legislative appropriation included funds in the Dedicated 
Purpose Account for a wide variety of legislative priorities, including $20.0 million for 
assisted living facilities, $20.0 million for nursing homes, and $50.0 million for hospital 
assistance. These funds were transferred by budget amendment to the Maryland 
Department of Health in fiscal 2023, but a portion of the funds ($7.3 million for assisted 
living facilities, $132,321 for nursing homes, and $108,302 for hospitals) were not spent 
and reverted to the Dedicated Purpose Account at closeout. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 15 (p. 97)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jason A. Kramer, Tonya D. Zimmerman, and Anne Braun  
 
 

END OF PAGE 49

START OF PAGE 50
    
SB 362/ Page 50 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Unspent Funds for Learning in Extended 
Academic Programs Held in Dedicated Purpose Account  
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer to the general fund, on or before 
June 30, 2025, $4.5 million in unspent funds from the Dedicated Purpose Account, which 
were originally appropriated in fiscal 2023 for Learning in Extended Academic Programs 
(LEAP) in the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). 
 
Agency:  State Reserve Fund 
 
Type of Action:  Fund balance transfer 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$4.5 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $4.5 million in fiscal 2025. Special fund 
expenditures are unaffected as these funds were unneeded for the original purpose. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The Dedicated Purpose Account is established to retain 
appropriations for major, multi-year expenditures in which the magnitude and timing of 
cash needs are uncertain and to meet expenditure requirements that may be affected by 
changes in federal law or fiscal policies or other contingencies. Funds remain available in 
the Dedicated Purpose Account for four years after the close of the fiscal year in which the 
funds were appropriated. 
 
Chapter 361 of 2018 established LEAP to provide grants to schools with high 
concentrations of students living in poverty for extended-day and extended-year academic 
programming, and the program included $4.5 million in mandated funding. Chapter 36 of 
2021 repealed LEAP and replaced it with the Concentration of Poverty grant program. 
 
Recent History:  The fiscal 2023 legislative appropriation included funds in the Dedicated 
Purpose Account for a wide variety of legislative priorities, including $4.5 million for 
LEAP. As LEAP was repealed in fiscal 2021, no school applied for this grant in fiscal 2023; 
therefore, MSDE reverted the funds. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 16 (p. 97)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Laura H. Hyde 
 
 

END OF PAGE 50

START OF PAGE 51
    
SB 362/ Page 51 
Authorize Transfer of Program Open Space State Funds for Department of Natural 
Resources’ Personnel Expenses 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer up to $6,678,827 of available 
special funds from the Program Open Space (POS) State land acquisition fund balance by 
June 30, 2025, to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) to replace general funds 
budgeted for personnel expenses in DNR for the Maryland Forest Service (MFS) and the 
Maryland Park Service (MPS). The fiscal 2025 budget, as passed by the General Assembly, 
includes general fund reductions of $5,710,734 in MPS and $968,093 in MFS in DNR, 
contingent on the enactment of legislation authorizing the use of POS fund balance for 
these purposes.  
 
Agency:  DNR 
 
Type of Action:  Change use of special funds 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Exp 
$0 
($6.7) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures are reduced by $6,678,827 in fiscal 2025 – 
$968,093 for MFS and $5,710,734 for MPS – due to the use of special funds in lieu of 
general funds for this purpose. Overall, special fund expenditures are not affected but are 
reallocated among purposes and among fiscal years. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. Total funding to local governments is not affected.   
 
Program Description:  The State transfer tax, which is 0.5% of the amount paid for the 
transfer of real property, is used to fund POS, along with several land conservation 
programs and State forest and park operations. DNR administers POS, which acquires and 
improves outdoor recreation and open space areas for public use. POS consists of a State 
and local component. Approximately 50% of the transfer tax funding distributed to POS is 
allocated to State land acquisition and capital development, 30% is allocated to local 
government acquisition and development, and 20% is allocated to State forest and park 
operations. 
 
Anticipated lower amounts of transfer tax revenues in fiscal 2025 coupled with the impact 
of a revenue underattainment in fiscal 2023 significantly reduced the available revenues 
distributed through the POS formula. As a result, the transfer tax funding allocated to MFS 
and MPS decreased by $38.0 million between fiscal 2024 and 2025. As of February 2024, 
the POS State land acquisition account had a fund balance of $172.4 million, of which 
approximately $117.0 million was obligated to projects, leaving approximately 

END OF PAGE 51

START OF PAGE 52
    
SB 362/ Page 52 
$55.4 million in unobligated funding. The use of $6.7 million from the POS State land 
acquisition balance results in an unobligated balance of approximately $48.7 million. 
 
Recent History:  The POS State land acquisition balance has been used a number of times 
to help defray State budget shortfalls or otherwise limit the need for the use of State general 
funds. Most recently, Chapter 39 of 2022 (Great Maryland Outdoors Act) authorized the 
Governor, on or before June 30, 2022, to transfer $43.1 million of the funds for POS State 
land acquisition in the transfer tax special fund to the Park System Capital Improvements 
and Acquisition Fund created by Chapter 39, which obviated the need for $43.1 million in 
State general funds for this purpose. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 17 (p. 97) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Andrew D. Gray 
 
 

END OF PAGE 52

START OF PAGE 53
    
SB 362/ Page 53 
Withdraw Unused Funding for Baltimore City Community College Bard Building 
Demolition 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Withdraws $2.0 million in pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general funds 
from a fiscal 2022 capital appropriation of $7.4 million made to the Board of Public Works 
(BPW) for the purpose of the demolition of the Baltimore City Community College 
(BCCC) Bard Building.  
 
Agencies:  BPW; BCCC 
 
Type of Action:  Cost containment  
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$2.0 
0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $2.0 million in fiscal 2024 as a result of 
withdrawing funds for the demolition of the Bard Building.  
 
Local Effect:  None.  
 
Program Description/Recent History:  The fiscal 2022 budget appropriated $7.4 million 
in PAYGO general funds to BPW for the purpose of providing funding to BCCC to 
demolish the vacant Bard Building located in downtown Baltimore to allow for future 
redevelopment of the property. At its August 2, 2023 meeting, BPW approved a 
construction contract in the amount of $4.2 million procured by the Department of General 
Services (DGS) on behalf of BCCC for this purpose. Including architectural and 
engineering services, approximately $4.5 million has been authorized for the project to 
date. The Department of Legislative Services and DGS estimate that approximately 
$2.0 million of the original $7.4 million general fund authorization for this project could 
be recaptured by the general fund, and the remaining funding would be sufficient to 
complete the project. Demolition began in late calendar 2023 and is projected to be 
complete in July 2024.  
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 18 (p. 97)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Samuel M. Quist 
 
 

END OF PAGE 53

START OF PAGE 54
    
SB 362/ Page 54 
Authorize Transfer to General Fund from Local Income Tax Reserve Account in 
Fiscal 2024 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor to transfer, to the general fund by  
June 30, 2024, $150,000,000 from the Local Income Tax Reserve Account, representing 
funds identified in the Office of the Comptroller’s fiscal 2023 analysis as an 
overdistribution to the account net of canceled repayments. 
 
Agency:  Statewide 
 
Type of Action:  Fund balance transfer 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$150.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase by $150.0 million in fiscal 2024 from the 
transfer. Expenditures are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  The Local Income Tax Reserve Account is established in § 2-606 
of the Tax-General Article and administered by the Comptroller of Maryland. The Local 
Income Tax Reserve Account is used to manage the cash flow of personal income tax 
payments and distributions to local governments. The account is also used to meet the 
State’s liability for local income taxes according to generally accepted accounting 
principles. 
 
Recent History:  The Office of the Comptroller’s fiscal 2023 Generally Accepted 
Accounting Principles audit of the Local Income Tax Reserve Account determined that, 
excluding canceled repayments, the account was overfunded by $315.7 million. The Board 
of Revenue Estimates’ December 2023 forecast assumed the transfer of $150.0 million of 
that overfunding to the general fund. The General Assembly’s action brings the total 
transfer to the general fund to $300.0 million.  
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 20 (p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Tonya D. Zimmerman 
 
 

END OF PAGE 54

START OF PAGE 55
    
SB 362/ Page 55 
Increase Annual Vehicle Registration Surcharge and Maximum Fines for Certain 
Offenses, Change Distribution of Those Revenues, and Make Other Changes Related 
to Trauma Care and Emergency Services  
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Increase the annual vehicle registration surcharge (from $17.00 to 
$40.00) and alter the distribution of revenue so that (1) $6.50 (rather than $2.50) goes to 
the Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund (MTPSF); (2) at least $9.00 is allocated to 
the State primary adult resource center (PARC, known as the R Adams Cowley Shock 
Trauma Center); and (3) the balance (as much as $24.50 rather than $14.50) goes to the 
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund (MEMSOF). Increase the 
maximum fine that may be imposed for specified alcohol- and/or drug-related driving 
offenses and direct at least 20% of such fines collected to MTPSF; accordingly, expand the 
revenue sources for MTPSF to encompass those fines as well as any funds transferred from 
the general fund. Make additional changes related to trauma care and MTPSF so that it 
may be used to cover the documented costs of trauma health care practitioners, the 
maximum amount of reimbursable on-call hours that a Level II trauma center may receive 
is increased, the maximum reimbursement rates for on-call costs are altered, and annual 
grants of $900,000 to certain pediatric trauma centers are mandated. Establish a mandated 
appropriation of at least $16.5 million to the Senator William H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and 
Ambulance Fund. All of these provisions take effect July 1, 2024.  
 
Agencies:  Maryland Department of Emergency Management (MDEM); Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH); Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland Institute 
for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS); University of Maryland Medical 
System; and Judiciary 
 
Type of Actions:  Revenue action; miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
$104.78 
$104.78 
$104.78 
$104.78 
$104.78 
GF Exp 
$0 
$0.02 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Exp 
$0 
$3.41 
$4.91 
$4.91 
$4.91 
$4.91 
 
State Effect:  As shown in Exhibit 1, special fund revenues increase by $104.8 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025 due to the higher annual vehicle registration surcharge 
(as much as $45.6 million to MEMSOF, at least $41.0 million to Shock Trauma, and 
$18.2 million to MTPSF). Special fund expenditures increase by $3.4 million in fiscal 2025 
($1.2 million more to certain pediatric trauma centers – $590,000 is already paid to one of 
them – and $2.2 million for higher credit card processing fees paid by the Motor Vehicle 
Administration (MVA) due to the higher surcharges collected) as well as an additional 
$1.5 million beginning in fiscal 2026 due to the mandated appropriation to the Amoss Fund 

END OF PAGE 55

START OF PAGE 56
    
SB 362/ Page 56 
– representing the additional amount over the $15.0 million already expended for this 
purpose from MEMSOF. Special fund expenditures also likely increase by additional 
indeterminate amounts beginning as early as fiscal 2025 to support projected increases in 
operating expenses supported by MEMSOF, new grants to PARC, and additional 
expenditures from MTSPF.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Revenue Distribution of Increase in Annual Emergency Medical Services Surcharge  
Beginning in Fiscal 2025 
 
Share of 
Surcharge 
Increase 
Annual 
Additional 
Funding 
Total Increase 
$23.00 
$104,781,905 
Maryland Trauma Physician Services Fund 
4.00 
18,222,940  
R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center 
9.00 
41,001,615  
Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund 
10.00 
45,557,350  
 
Note:  The share for the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center reflects the lowest allocation required (at 
least $9.00), whereas the share for the Maryland Emergency Medical System Operations Fund reflects the 
maximum allocation authorized – the balance after the Shock Trauma allocation.  
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
In addition, general fund revenues decrease and MTPSF revenues further increase due to 
redirection of a portion (at least 20%) of the higher maximum fines that may be imposed 
for certain offenses (an additional $200 for a first offense and an additional $400 for a 
second offense). Any such amount cannot be readily quantified and is not reflected above 
as it depends on whether the offense is a first or second offense and sentencing practices, 
as a term of imprisonment may be imposed instead of or in addition to the fine, which may 
be imposed at a lower level. However, for illustrative purposes, general fund revenues 
would decrease by at least $59,000 annually if all recent offenses were first offenses and 
the maximum fine were imposed for all of them (however, a greater amount would be 
foregone if less than the maximum fine were imposed). Under the same illustrative 
scenario, MTPSF revenues would increase by approximately $683,000 annually (which 
reflects fines imposed by the District Court and circuit courts, and by a lesser amount if 
less than the maximum fine were imposed). Finally, general fund expenditures increase by 
$18,543 in fiscal 2025 only for programming by the Judiciary to implement changes to the 
maximum fine amounts.   
 

END OF PAGE 56

START OF PAGE 57
    
SB 362/ Page 57 
Local Effect:  Local governments benefit from the availability of $1.5 million in more 
funding from the Amoss Fund. Distributions are made according to each county’s 
percentage of total property tax accounts. Qualified municipalities in a county receive a 
percentage of the funds received by a county equal to one-half of the proportion that the 
municipality’s expenditures bear to the county’s expenditures. Based on current 
maintenance-of-effort requirements and other related funding provisions, the estimated 
increase for each jurisdiction from the higher level of funding varies from $197,452 to 
$10,860 beginning in fiscal 2025. In addition, a portion of revenues from fines imposed in 
circuit courts is redirected to MTPSF; as discussed above, this amount cannot be readily 
quantified. Nevertheless, under the same illustrative scenario, approximately $54,000 in 
local revenues would be foregone.  
 
Program Description:  MTPSF must transfer to MDH an amount sufficient to fully cover 
the State’s share of expenditures for the costs of undercompensated care incurred by a 
trauma physician who is providing trauma care to a Medicaid enrollee who is a trauma 
patient on the State trauma registry. MTPSF consists of motor vehicle registration 
surcharges paid into the fund in accordance with the Transportation Article. The current 
annual surcharge is $17.00 for each vehicle registered, of which $2.50 must be paid into 
MTPSF. The remainder of the surcharge, $14.50, accrues to MEMSOF.  
 
MEMSOF consists of (1) vehicle registration surcharges; (2) all funds, including charges 
for accident scene transports and interhospital transfers of patients, generated by specified 
units of State government; and (3) revenue distributed from a $7.50 moving violation 
surcharge under § 7-301(f) of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. Money in the 
fund must be used solely for (1) medically oriented functions of Maryland State Police 
Aviation Command; (2) MIEMSS; (3) the R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center; (4) the 
Maryland Fire and Rescue Institute; (5) the provision of grants under the Senator Willam 
H. Amoss Fire, Rescue, and Ambulance Fund; and (6) the Volunteer Company Assistance 
Fund. The Amoss Fund provides grants, administered by MDEM, to local jurisdictions for 
the purchase of fire and rescue equipment and building rehabilitation.  
 
Under the Transportation Article, a person may not drive or attempt to drive any vehicle 
while (1) under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of alcohol per se; 
(2) impaired by alcohol; (3) impaired by a drug, any combination of drugs, or any 
combination of drugs and alcohol; or (4) impaired by a controlled dangerous substance 
(CDS). Additionally, a person may not commit any of these offenses while transporting a 
minor. In addition to or in lieu of imposing a fine, a term of imprisonment may be imposed. 
Penalties collected from these cases heard in the District Court accrue to the general fund, 
while penalties from cases heard in the circuit courts accrue to the county.  
 

END OF PAGE 57

START OF PAGE 58
    
SB 362/ Page 58 
The provisions affect certain alcohol- and/or drug-related driving offenses; all of the 
affected offenses carry a maximum term of imprisonment of one year and/or a maximum 
fine of $1,000 for a first offense and a maximum term of imprisonment of two years and/or 
a maximum fine of $2,000 for a second offense. The terms of imprisonment are unchanged 
under these provisions; however, the maximum fine for a first offense for the following 
violations is increased to $1,200, and the maximum fine for a second offense is increased 
to $2,400: 
   
 
driving or attempting to drive while under the influence of alcohol; 
 
driving or attempting to drive while under the influence of alcohol;  
 
driving or attempting to drive while impaired by alcohol, while transporting a minor;  
 
driving or attempting to drive while so far impaired by any drug, any combination 
of drugs, or a combination of one or more drugs and alcohol that the person cannot 
drive a vehicle safely, while transporting a minor; and  
 
driving or attempting to drive while impaired by any CDS if not entitled to use the 
CDS under the laws of Maryland. 
 
Recent History:  None. 
 
Additional Comments:  Senate Bill 1092 of 2024 and House Bill 1439 of 2024 contain 
provisions identical to those discussed above. However, this bill encompasses additional 
provisions related to fees paid at vehicle registration, including a requirement for MVA to 
allow vehicle owners to pay registration fees, as specified in Title 13, Subtitle 9 of the 
Transportation Article, in installments throughout the registration period (which for most 
vehicle owners is for two years, with both years of annual fees paid biennially), as 
determined by MVA. As the annual surcharges are established in the same subtitle as the 
other fees paid at registration, they may be construed as also being eligible for payment 
through an installment plan. Any such impact has not been accounted for in the analysis 
above; however, some portion of revenues payable in fiscal 2025 may not be realized in 
that year – thereafter, the impact should be less pronounced.  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (pp. 48-58, pp. 80-82, and pp.84-87) and 
Section 24 (p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Amberly E. Holcomb, Ralph W. Kettell, and Eric F. Pierce 
 
 

END OF PAGE 58

START OF PAGE 59
    
SB 362/ Page 59 
Establish Transportation Network Company Impact Fee and Account  
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Establish, effective July 1, 2024, (1) a transportation network 
company (TNC) impact fee on passenger trips that originate in the State, at least a portion 
of such revenues are pledged to repayment of principal and interest on consolidated 
transportation bonds, and (2) a related TNC Impact Fee Account within the Transportation 
Trust Fund (TTF). Set the fee at 75 cents per passenger trip (50 cents per shared passenger 
trip or electric vehicle passenger trip) and index it to the Consumer Price Index for All 
Urban Consumers beginning in fiscal 2029. Require the Comptroller to administer the fee 
and, after administrative cost recovery, deposit the proceeds in the TNC Impact Fee 
Account. Require the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) to allocate monies 
in the TNC Impact Fee Account for specified transit capital needs (related to consolidated 
transportation bonds) and local capital transportation grants, as appropriate, and allocate 
any remaining fund balance to the Locally Operated Transit System Grant Program.  
 
Agencies:  Comptroller; MDOT 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action  
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$1.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
SF Rev 
$0 
$37.4 
$40.1 
$41.9 
$43.6 
$46.5 
GF Exp 
$0 
$1.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
$0.3 
   
State Effect:  General fund revenues and expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office 
increase by an estimated $1.3 million in fiscal 2025, reflecting administrative costs and 
related cost recovery. Future years reflect ongoing administrative costs. TTF revenues 
increase by an estimated $37.4 million in fiscal 2025; future years reflect projected fee 
revenue growth and, in fiscal 2029, the projected inflation adjustment. Although TTF 
expenditures increase, the amount and timing of those expenditures cannot be readily 
determined and is not reflected above.  
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues increase to the extent MDOT distributes fee revenues to 
local jurisdictions in the form of capital transportation grants and/or locally operated transit 
system grants. Local expenditures are not affected.  
 
Program Description:  No such statewide TNC fee exists under current law; however, 
Chapter 204 of 2015 established a regulatory framework for transportation network 
services and authorized local governments to assess transportation network services (i.e., 
trips) that originate in their jurisdictions (generally up to 25 cents per trip) subject to 
specified requirements. A TNC must collect the assessments and remit the funds to the 

END OF PAGE 59

START OF PAGE 60
    
SB 362/ Page 60 
Comptroller within 30 days after each quarter. After an allocation of up to 5% for 
administrative expenses, the Comptroller must then distribute the assessment revenue to 
the appropriate local jurisdictions. 
 
Recent History:  None.  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (pp. 58-61; 63-64; 65-67) and Section 24 
(p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
 

END OF PAGE 60

START OF PAGE 61
    
SB 362/ Page 61 
Phase In Increases in Annual Vehicle Registration Fee for Most Classes of Vehicles 
and Authorize Payments in Installments 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Phase in increases in the annual vehicle registration fee for most 
classes of vehicles over two or three years, beginning in fiscal 2025, and establish a new, 
lower, weight division within certain vehicle classes. Authorize installment payments for 
registration fees throughout the registration period, as determined by the Motor Vehicle 
Administration (MVA). Retain revenue increases attributable to these provisions for 
allocation within the Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT) and disallow 
crediting of them to the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle Revenue Account (GMVRA). 
 
Agency:  MDOT (MVA) 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
$168.9 
$201.0 
$253.3 
$253.3 
$253.3 
SF Exp 
$0 
$3.5 
$4.2 
$5.3 
$5.3 
$5.3 
   
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues from vehicle registration fees 
increase by $168.9 million in fiscal 2025, $201.0 million in fiscal 2026, and $253.3 million 
in fiscal 2027 and subsequent years. This estimate reflects the additional amount payable 
for registration each fiscal year; given the authorization for owners to opt to pay registration 
fees through installment plans, some portion of that revenue will be deferred to another 
year. It is also possible that some portion of existing fee revenue will be deferred as well. 
However, as those installment plans are yet to be determined by MVA, any such impact 
cannot be readily estimated at this time. Nevertheless, the impact of such installment plans 
is likely to be most pronounced in the first few years of implementation, with more level 
collections in the out-years. Essentially, any delays in the payment of the higher annual 
vehicle registration fees due to installment plans are likely mitigated in the out-years as 
installment payments must be completed prior to the next registration renewal. TTF 
expenditures increase for additional credit card processing fees charged, commensurate 
with the increase in registration fee revenues paid by vehicle owners who use credit cards 
for their transactions. This estimate assumes that approximately 70% of transactions are 
subject to a credit card processing fee and the average fee paid is 3%.  
 
Local Effect:  None, as transportation revenues raised as a result of these provisions must 
remain allocated within MDOT and may not be credited to GMVRA.  
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Vehicle registration fees support TTF and 
GMVRA (an account within TTF that provides transportation aid to local governments). 

END OF PAGE 61

START OF PAGE 62
    
SB 362/ Page 62 
Registration fee revenues also support MDOT’s bonding capacity. Fees vary by class and, 
for certain classes, depend on the shipping weight of the vehicle. Most classes of vehicle 
are registered biennially (with two years of annual fees due at registration); however, some 
less common classes are registered on an annual basis. Vehicle registration fees were last 
increased by Chapter 9 of 2004. Exhibit 1 shows the current annual registration fee for 
each affected class and the fee as increased under the bill’s provisions.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Annual Vehicle Registration Fee by Affected Class and Year of Renewal 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
 
Class of Vehicle 
Current FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 
A (passenger) / M (multipurpose) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
≤ 3,500 lbs. 
$50.50 
$70.50 
$80.50 
$80.50 
$80.50 
$80.50 
> 3,500 lbs. to ≤ 3,700 lbs. 
50.50 
80.50 
85.50 
85.50 
85.50 
85.50 
> 3,700 lbs. 
76.50 
121.50 
126.50 
151.50 
151.50 
151.50 
B (for hire) 
150.00 
170.00 
180.00 
180.00 
180.00 
180.00 
C (funeral and ambulance) 
100.00 
120.00 
130.00 
130.00 
130.00 
130.00 
D (motorcycle) 
35.00 
55.00 
65.00 
65.00 
65.00 
65.00 
E (truck) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
≤ 3,500 lbs. 
63.75 
83.75 
93.75 
93.75 
93.75 
93.75 
> 3,500 lbs. to ≤ 5,000 lbs. 
63.75 
93.75 
98.75 
98.75 
98.75 
98.75 
> 5,000 lbs.* 
63.75 
108.75 
113.75 
138.75 
138.75 
138.75 
EPD (dump truck) 
Variable + $20.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 
T (tow truck) 
Variable + $20.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 
F (tractor) 
Variable + $20.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 
G (trailer) 
Variable + $20.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 
H (school) 
Variable + $20.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 
P (passenger bus) 
Variable + $20.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 
J (vanpool) 
76.50 
96.50 
106.50 
106.50 
106.50 
106.50 
L (historic) 
25.50 
45.50 
55.50 
55.50 
55.50 
55.50 
N (street rod) 
25.00 
45.00 
55.00 
55.00 
55.00 
55.00 
Q (limousine) 
185.00 
205.00 
215.00 
215.00 
215.00 
215.00 
 
* Lower-weight vehicles within this range currently pay a fixed registration fee, while higher-weight 
vehicles pay a variable registration fee based on weight increments. This estimate reflects a standard 
increase for all vehicles within the specified range – including those that currently pay registration fees 
based on a flat amount per thousand pounds. 
 
Notes:  Class A (passenger), E (truck), and M (multipurpose) weight classifications are based on shipping 
weight. A vehicle for which the owner certifies on the registration application that the vehicle will be used 
for construction activities pays the same fee as a Class E (truck) that is 3,500 pounds or less. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 62

START OF PAGE 63
    
SB 362/ Page 63 
As under current law, heavier vehicles within certain classes pay a higher annual 
registration fee and weight is added as a factor for certain trucks. The registration fee 
increases are phased in over a two-year period for most vehicles and a three-year period 
for the heaviest vehicles – all beginning in fiscal 2025. The exact amount of the annual 
registration fee depends on the vehicle class and weight and, for some classes of vehicles, 
other factors. Regardless, in fiscal 2025, the annual registration fee increases by between 
$20 and $45 for the affected classes of vehicles. By fiscal 2027, when the phase-in is 
complete, the annual registration fee increases are between $30 and $75 (compared to 
registration fees under current law). 
 
Exhibit 2 shows the additional revenues anticipated by vehicle class from fiscal 2025 
through 2029.  
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Increase in Vehicle Registration Fee Revenues Attributable to Class of Vehicle 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
Class of Vehicle 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
A (passenger) / M (multipurpose)  
 
 
 
 
 
≤ 3,500 lbs. 
$14.9  
$22.3  
$22.3  
$22.3  
$22.3  
> 3,500 lbs. to ≤ 3,700 lbs. 
44.3  
51.6  
51.6  
51.6  
51.6  
> 3,700 lbs. 
68.6  
76.2  
114.3  
114.3  
114.3  
Subtotal 
$127.7  
$150.2  
$188.3  
$188.3  
$188.3  
E (truck) 
 
 
 
 
 
≤ 3,500 lbs.  
$1.1  
$1.7  
$1.7  
$1.7  
$1.7  
> 3,500 lbs. to ≤ 5,000 lbs. 
3.1  
3.6  
3.6  
3.6  
3.6  
> 5,000 lbs.* 
25.6  
28.5  
42.7  
42.7  
42.7  
Subtotal 
$29.8  
$33.7  
$48.0  
$48.0  
$48.0  
All Other Affected Classes 
$11.4  
$17.1  
$17.1  
$17.1  
$17.1  
Total 
$168.9  
$201.0  
$253.3  
$253.3  
$253.3  
 
* Lower-weight vehicles within this range currently pay a fixed registration fee, while higher-weight 
vehicles pay a variable registration fee based on weight increments. This estimate reflects a standard 
increase for all vehicles within the specified range (including those that currently pay registration fees based 
on a flat amount per thousand pounds). 
 
Notes:  Class A (passenger), E (truck), and M (multipurpose) weight classifications are based on shipping 
weight. The estimate reflects static registrations and assumes one-half of vehicles in categories subject to 
biennial renewal do so each year. Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 63

START OF PAGE 64
    
SB 362/ Page 64 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (pp. 69-80) and Sections 22 and 24 (p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
 

END OF PAGE 64

START OF PAGE 65
    
SB 362/ Page 65 
Establish Annual Surcharges on Electric Vehicles and Plug-in Electric Vehicles  
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Establish a $125 annual surcharge on electric vehicles (EVs) and 
a $100 annual surcharge on plug-in electric vehicles (PHEVs), effective July 1, 2024, both 
of which are deposited into the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF). Specify that, as 
determined by the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA), the surcharges (1) may be paid 
in installments throughout the registration period and (2) are adjusted for inflation annually 
beginning in fiscal 2026. Require that, if a motor vehicle owner assessed the surcharge fails 
to pay it, MVA refuse to register, renew, or transfer the vehicle’s registration. Establish 
that surcharge revenues remain allocated within the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT) and may not be credited to the Gasoline and Motor Vehicle 
Revenue Account (GMVRA). 
 
Agency:  MDOT (MVA) 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
$10.7 
$10.7 
$10.7 
$10.7 
$10.7 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0.2 
$0.2 
$0.2 
$0.2 
$0.2 
   
State Effect:  TTF revenues increase by approximately $10.7 million annually beginning 
in fiscal 2025 from surcharges on EVs and PHEVs, based on current registrations for these 
types of vehicles. Although there may be growth in the number of vehicles subject to the 
surcharge in the out-years, this estimate does not reflect that growth, nor does it reflect any 
inflation adjustments. Accordingly, revenues may increase by greater amounts than 
reflected above, with a more pronounced effect in the out-years. This estimate also reflects 
the additional amount payable for EVs and PHEVs each fiscal year; given the authorization 
for owners to opt to pay the surcharge through installment plans, some portion of that 
revenue will be deferred to another year. However, as those installment plans are yet to be 
determined by MVA, any such impact cannot be readily estimated at this time. 
Nevertheless, the impact of such installment plans is likely to be most pronounced in the 
first few years of implementation, with more level collections in the out-years. Essentially, 
any delays in the payment of the surcharge due to installment plans are likely mitigated in 
the out-years as installment payments must be completed prior to the next registration 
renewal. TTF expenditures increase by $0.2 million annually for additional credit card 
processing fees charged, commensurate with the increase in surcharge fee revenues paid 
by vehicle owners who use credit cards for their transactions. This estimate assumes that 
approximately 70% of transactions are subject to a credit card processing fee and the 
average fee paid is 3%.  
 

END OF PAGE 65

START OF PAGE 66
    
SB 362/ Page 66 
Local Effect:  None, as transportation revenues raised as a result of these provisions remain 
allocated within MDOT and may not be credited to GMVRA.  
 
Program Description:  EVs and PHEVs currently pay the registration fee that is 
applicable to the vehicle’s classification and, for certain classes, the vehicle’s shipping 
weight. Vehicle registration fees support TTF and GMVRA (an account within TTF that 
provides transportation aid to local governments). Registration fee revenues also support 
MDOT’s bonding capacity. Most classes of vehicles are registered biennially (with 
two years of annual fees due at registration); however, some less common classes are 
registered on an annual basis.  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (pp. 82-83) and Sections 22 and 24 (p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Eric F. Pierce 
 
 

END OF PAGE 66

START OF PAGE 67
    
SB 362/ Page 67 
Increase Maximum Car Dealer Processing Charge 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Increase, from $500 to $800, the maximum processing charge car 
dealers may impose on top of the purchase price of a vehicle, effective July 1, 2024. 
Revenue increases attributable to this provision must remain allocated within the Maryland 
Department of Transportation (MDOT) and may not be credited to the Gasoline and Motor 
Vehicle Revenue Account (GMVRA). 
 
Agency:  MDOT (Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA)) 
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
$7.0 
$7.0 
$7.0 
$7.0 
$7.0 
   
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues increase by $7.0 million annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025 due to the increased maximum dealer processing charge. The 
dealer processing charge is added to the price of the vehicle for purposes of calculating the 
excise tax; assuming a dealer imposes the maximum authorized charge, the consumer pays 
an additional $318, of which $300 is retained by the dealer and $18 is remitted to TTF. 
 
Local Effect:  None, as transportation revenues raised as a result of this provision must 
remain allocated within MDOT and may not be credited to GMVRA. 
 
Program Description/Recent History:  For collecting and remitting the vehicle excise 
tax on behalf of MVA, a car dealer used to be able to keep the lesser of $12 per vehicle or 
0.6% of the gross excise tax the dealer collects. However, that authorization was repealed 
in 2020 when the fee amount that a car dealer may, when selling a vehicle, impose as a 
dealer processing charge was increased from a maximum of $300 to a maximum of $500. 
The dealer processing charge is imposed at the discretion of the dealer and is intended to 
cover costs of specified administrative services concerning the sale of the vehicle, 
including the preparation of written documentation of the transaction, obtaining the title 
and license plates for the vehicle, obtaining a release of lien, filing title documents with 
MVA, retaining documentation and records of the transaction, complying with federal or 
State privacy laws, or other administrative services concerning the sale of the vehicle. If 
charged, it must be reasonable and reflect the dealer expenses generally incurred, as listed 
above. When requested by the vehicle purchaser, a dealer must provide a written disclosure 
of the services included in the dealer processing charge. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (pp. 83-84) and Sections 22 and 24 (p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Eric F. Pierce 

END OF PAGE 67

START OF PAGE 68
    
SB 362/ Page 68 
Increase Tax Rates and Alter Distributions for Tobacco Tax and Sales and Use Tax 
on Electronic Smoking Devices  
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Make various alterations to the tobacco tax – specifically, 
(1) increase the tobacco tax rate for cigarettes from $3.75 to $5.00 per package of 
20 cigarettes and from 17.5 cents to 25.0 cents for each cigarette in a package of more than 
20 cigarettes; (2) increase the tobacco tax rate for other tobacco products (OTP), other than 
cigars and pipe tobacco, from 53% to 60% of the wholesale price; (3) impose a related 
one-time floor tax on cigarettes and OTP held for sale or use in the State on July 1, 2024, 
to be remitted to the Comptroller by September 30, 2024; and (4) after an allowance for 
refunds and administrative costs, require the Comptroller to distribute to the Blueprint for 
Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) the following amount or percentage of remaining tobacco 
tax revenue:  
 
 
for fiscal 2025, $88.3 million;  
 
for fiscal 2026, 32.6%; 
 
for fiscal 2027, 33.2%; and  
 
for fiscal 2028 and beyond, 16.2%.  
 
Increase the sales and use tax rate imposed on electronic smoking devices (ESD), other 
than vaping liquid sold in a container that contains up to 5 milliliters of vaping liquid, from 
12% to 20% of the taxable price; also require the Comptroller to distribute the revenue 
attributable to the increased tax imposed on ESD to BMFF.  
 
With the exception of the provisions relating to the one-time floor tax on cigarettes and 
OTP – which take effect June 1, 2024, and apply to products held for sale or use in the 
State on July 1, 2024, the provisions take effect July 1, 2024.  
 
Agencies:  Comptroller; Maryland State Department of Education  
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action  
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
$0.5  
($75.9) 
($76.1) 
$0.2  
$0.1  
SF Rev 
$0 
$91.4  
$154.5  
$152.2  
$73.6  
$71.3  
GF Exp 
$0 
$0 
$0 
($398.1) 
($73.6) 
($71.3) 
SF Exp 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$398.1 
$73.6 
$71.3 
   
State Effect:  As detailed in Exhibit 1, net State revenues increase by an estimated 
$91.9 million fiscal 2025, $78.5 million in fiscal 2026, and decreasing amounts annually 

END OF PAGE 68

START OF PAGE 69
    
SB 362/ Page 69 
thereafter, reflecting ongoing tobacco tax and sales and use tax revenues and projected 
declines in cigarette consumption. In fiscal 2026 and 2027, general fund revenues decrease 
by an estimated $75.9 million and $76.1 million, respectively, due to the diversion of 
existing tobacco tax revenues to BMFF. 
 
General fund expenditures decrease by $398.1 million in fiscal 2027 due to the higher 
available BMFF balance to support Blueprint programs, which reduces the need for general 
fund expenditures. After fiscal 2027, general fund expenditures correspondingly decrease 
with the increase in BMFF special fund revenues. Special fund expenditures are assumed 
to increase correspondingly beginning in fiscal 2027 with the availability of additional fund 
balance. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Projected State Revenue Effects 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
($ in Millions) 
 
FY 2025 FY 2026 FY 2027 FY 2028 FY 2029 
By Provision 
 
 
 
 
 
Increase Cigarette Tax Rate1  
$86.0 
$73.2 
$70.7 
$68.3 
$65.9 
Increase OTP Tax Rate1  
2.8 
2.2 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
Increase ESD SUT Rate 
3.1 
3.1 
3.1 
3.2 
3.2 
By Fund2 
 
 
 
 
 
General Fund 
$0.5  
($75.9) 
($76.1) 
$0.2  
$0.1  
BMFF 
91.4 
154.5 
152.2 
73.6 
71.3 
Net State Revenue Effect 
$91.9  
$78.5  
$76.1  
$73.8  
$71.5  
 
BMFF:  Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund  
ESD:  electronic smoking devices 
OTP:  other tobacco products 
SUT:  sales and use tax 
 
1 Includes estimated effect of one-time floor tax in fiscal 2025.  
2 Reflects the effect of specified mandated distributions to BMFF.  
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 69

START OF PAGE 70
    
SB 362/ Page 70 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Chapter 37 of 2021 (1) increased the tobacco tax 
rate for cigarettes from $2.00 to $3.75 per pack (17.5 cents for each cigarette in a package 
of more than 20 cigarettes); (2) increased the tobacco tax rate for OTP other than cigars 
and pipe tobacco from 30% to 53% of the wholesale price; (2) imposed a one-time floor 
tax on cigarettes and OTP in fiscal 2021; and (3) increased the sales and use tax rate 
imposed on the sale of ESD to 12% of the taxable price (60% for vaping liquid sold in a 
container that contains up to 5 milliliters of vaping liquid).  
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (p. 62-65) and Sections 23 and 24 (p. 98)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
 

END OF PAGE 70

START OF PAGE 71
    
SB 362/ Page 71 
Divert Sales and Use Tax on Electricity for Charging Vehicles to Transportation 
Trust Fund 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Requires the Comptroller to distribute to the Transportation Trust 
Fund (TTF) sales and use tax collected that is attributable to the sale of electricity (1) at an 
electric vehicle charging station or (2) used to charge an electric vehicle and is not sold 
under a residential or domestic rate schedule on file with the Public Service Commission. 
The provision takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
Agencies:  Comptroller; Maryland Department of Transportation; Maryland State 
Department of Education  
 
Type of Action:  Revenue action  
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Rev 
$0 
 ($0.8) 
 ($1.0) 
 ($1.3) 
 ($1.6) 
 ($2.0) 
SF Rev 
$0 
 $0.8 
$1.0 
 $1.3 
 $1.6 
 $2.0 
GF Exp 
$0 
$0.3 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  TTF revenues increase by an estimated $0.9 million in fiscal 2025; general 
fund revenues and Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) revenues decrease by 
$0.8 million and $0.1 million, respectively. (Special fund revenues shown above reflect net 
of TTF and BMFF revenue effects.) Future years reflect projected growth in affected sales 
and use tax revenues. General fund expenditures for the Comptroller’s Office increase by 
approximately $250,000 in fiscal 2025 only for one-time programming costs.  
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description/Recent History:  According to the Comptroller’s List of Tangible 
Personal Property and Services Subject to Sales and Use Tax, the sale of electricity at a 
charging station to charge a vehicle is subject to the sales and use tax. The purchase of 
electricity by the provider of the charging equipment for resale is not subject to sales and 
use tax; however, the purchase of electricity is subject to tax by the provider of a free 
charging station. Electricity purchased to charge a vehicle at home is not subject to sales 
and use tax if purchased at a residential rate. 
 
After an allowance for refunds and administrative costs, sales and use tax revenues are 
generally distributed to the general fund. Revenues from the sales tax on short-term rental 
vehicles and peer-to-peer car sharing are distributed to the Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal 
Bays 2010 Trust Fund (55%) and to TTF (45%). Pursuant to Chapter 33 of 2022, after 

END OF PAGE 71

START OF PAGE 72
    
SB 362/ Page 72 
other required distributions, the Comptroller must pay to BMFF the following percentage 
of remaining sales and use tax revenues:   
 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 2 (p. 61-62) and Section 24 (p. 98) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
 

END OF PAGE 72

START OF PAGE 73
    
SB 362/ Page 73 
Prohibit Increasing Child Care Scholarship Program Copayments  
 
Provision in the Bill:  Prohibits the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 
from increasing family copayments for the Child Care Scholarship (CCS) Program above 
the levels in place on January 1, 2024. 
 
Agency:  MSDE 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
   
State Effect:  The bill’s impact in any given fiscal year is indeterminate but potentially 
significant due to limiting MSDE’s ability to respond to changing fiscal circumstances in 
future years. MSDE cannot implement such a CCS Program modification as part of a plan 
to reduce program costs, thereby restricting the State’s flexibility to adapt to fiscal 
circumstances. Nevertheless, MSDE can still use other measures, subject to specified 
notification and approval. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  For each child needing care, participating families receive a 
voucher to purchase child care directly from the provider of their choice. MSDE reimburses 
the provider for the approved scholarship rate, while the parent pays a required copayment. 
The CCS Program provided financial assistance for child care tuition to more than 
33,000 eligible children in fiscal 2023 (up from more than 16,000 eligible children in 
fiscal 2022). Program eligibility is primarily determined by household income. The 
program is funded through a combination of general funds and the federal Child Care and 
Development Block Grant.    
 
Recent History:  Chapters 731 and 732 of 2023 prohibited MSDE from making certain 
alterations to the CCS Program as of January 1, 2023, including increasing copayments, 
reducing reimbursement rates, reducing income eligibility requirements, or implementing 
a freeze in program enrollment without first making certain notifications (subject to a 
waiting period) or obtaining Board of Public Works approval as part of a budget reduction 
action for a particular year. Chapters 525 and 526 of 2022 waived copayments for families 
receiving benefits under certain programs (Temporary Cash Assistance, Supplemental 
Security Income, federal Housing Choice Voucher Program, Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program, or Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and 
Children). As of January 1, 2024, copayments for all other families are set within a range 
of $1 to $3 per week. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 18-19)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Nathaly Andrade 

END OF PAGE 73

START OF PAGE 74
    
SB 362/ Page 74 
Delay Requirement for Maryland Transit Administration to Purchase Only 
Zero-emission Buses and Authorize Alternative Purchases 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Require that the Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) procure 
only zero-emission buses (ZEBs) to support its transit fleet beginning in fiscal 2027 rather 
than beginning in fiscal 2023. Also authorize MTA to procure additional alternative-fuel 
buses, including hybrid buses, if sufficient ZEBs or associated equipment to meet the 
requirement are not commercially available.  
 
Agency:  Maryland Department of Transportation (MTA) 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Exp 
$0 
($28.0) 
($28.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) expenditures decrease by an anticipated 
$28.0 million in fiscal 2025 and 2026 due to deferring procuring ZEBs to fiscal 2027 and 
the lower costs associated with procuring alternative-fuel buses. This analysis assumes 
MTA procures no ZEBs in fiscal 2025 and 2026. However, given MTA’s ongoing pilot 
project for ZEB infrastructure and charging stations, a small portion of bus procurements 
in those years will likely be zero emission, slightly reducing the special fund savings. TTF 
expenditures in subsequent years are not affected as the requirement that all bus 
procurements be zero emission is maintained in fiscal 2027 onward. Revenues are not 
affected.  
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  MTA operates a comprehensive multimodal transit system 
throughout the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area, including more than 50 local bus 
lines in the Baltimore metropolitan area served by a fleet of over 750 buses. Local bus 
ridership in fiscal 2023 exceeded 20 million. To meet service demand while accounting for 
typical asset lifetimes, MTA must purchase approximately 70 buses per year. 
 
Recent History:  Chapter 693 of 2021 prohibited MTA, beginning in fiscal 2023, from 
procuring buses for the transit fleet that are not ZEBs. However, it allows the agency to 
purchase alternative-fuel buses if the agency determines that no ZEBs meet performance 
requirements needed for a particular use. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 44) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Carrie Cook 

END OF PAGE 74

START OF PAGE 75
    
SB 362/ Page 75 
Alter Allowable Uses of Strategic Energy Investment Fund Balance and Transfer 
Funds to Dedicated Purpose Account in Fiscal 2025 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Authorize the transfer of $90.0 million from the balance in the 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) to the Dedicated Purpose Account, so long as 
the transfer occurs by June 30, 2025. Prohibit the transfer from including funds from the 
Energy Assistance Account and specify the distribution of the transfer from various 
accounts under SEIF:  (1) $43.1 million from the Renewable Portfolio Standard alternative 
compliance payment (ACP); (2) $40.0 million from the Administration Account; 
(3) $2.3 million from the Low and Moderate Income Energy Efficiency Account;  
(4) $2.3 million from the Energy Efficiency in All Sectors Account; and (5) $2.3 million 
from the Renewable Energy and Climate Change Account. Authorize funds transferred to 
be used to help implement the Climate Solutions Now Act of 2022 and Maryland’s Climate 
Pollution Reduction Plan but require at least 50% of funds transferred to support programs 
serving low- to moderate-income communities, as specified. The fiscal 2025 budget bill as 
passed by the General Assembly includes a $90.0 million special fund appropriation, 
contingent on the enactment of a provision authorizing this transfer.  
 
Agencies:  State Reserve Fund; Maryland Energy Administration 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Rev 
$0 
$90.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  Special fund revenues increase for the Dedicated Purpose Account in 
fiscal 2025 only to reflect the authorized transfer. Overall, special fund expenditures are 
generally unchanged, but the timing of the expenditures may vary and expenditures are 
potentially reallocated among State agencies (that potential change is not reflected above).  
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic 
Energy Investment Program and the implementing SEIF to decrease energy demand and 
increase energy supply to promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. SEIF is funded 
through the proceeds from the auction of carbon allowances under the Regional 
Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI); the fund also receives revenues from compliance fees 
– often referred to as ACPs – generated under the State’s Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard.  

END OF PAGE 75

START OF PAGE 76
    
SB 362/ Page 76 
RGGI proceeds must be used for the following purposes:  (1) at least 50% for energy 
assistance programs in the Department of Human Services; (2) at least 20% for energy 
efficiency and conservation (at least one-half of which must be used for low- and 
moderate-income programs); (3) at least 20% for renewable and clean energy programs, 
energy-related education and outreach, and climate change and resiliency programs; and 
(4) up to 10% but no more than $7.5 million for administrative expenses.  
 
ACP revenues primarily must be used to support the creation of new renewable energy 
sources in the State that are owned by or directly benefit low- to moderate-income, 
overburdened, or underserved communities. 
 
The estimated closing fund balance across SEIF subaccounts, before the transfer, at the 
close of fiscal 2025 is projected to be $181.3 million. Exhibit 1 presents information on 
the estimated closing fiscal 2025 fund balances by subaccount within SEIF, as well as the 
projected remaining balances after the authorized transfers.  
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Estimated Closing Fiscal 2025 Balances in the Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
By Subaccount, Before and After the Authorized Transfer 
($ in Millions) 
 
Subaccount 
Balance 
Prior to 
Transfer 
Transfer 
Amount in 
BRFA 
Remaining 
Balance 
Energy Assistance 
$13.8  
$0.0  
$13.8  
Low and Moderate Income Energy Efficiency 
14.5 
2.3 
12.2 
Energy Efficiency in All Sectors 
13.3 
2.3 
11.0 
Renewable Energy and Climate Change 
9.4 
2.3 
7.1 
Administration 
43.5 
40.0 
3.5 
Subtotal RGGI-sourced Subaccounts 
$94.5 
$46.9 
$47.6 
Offshore Wind Development 
$0.0 
$0.0 
$0.0 
Exelon Animal-Waste-to-Energy ACP  
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
Renewable Portfolio Standard ACP  
85.2 
43.1 
42.1 
Pepco/Exelon Merger Most Favored Nation Provision  
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
AltaGas/WGL Settlement (Maryland Gas Expansion) 
1.6 
0.0 
1.6 
Subtotal NonRGGI-sourced Subaccounts  
$86.8 
$43.1 
$43.7 
Total All Subaccounts  
$181.3 
$90.0 
$91.3 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
BRFA:  Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act 
RGGI:  Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 76

START OF PAGE 77
    
SB 362/ Page 77 
In a press release in February 2024, Governor Wes Moore indicated the transferred funds 
would be used to support three primary initiatives:  (1) $50.0 million for grants to electrify 
hospitals, schools, multi-family housing, and other community buildings; (2) $23.0 million 
for grants to install electric vehicle charging infrastructure in low- and moderate-income 
communities; and (3) $17.0 million for grants to purchase and lease electric school buses 
to serve Maryland public school students.  
 
Recent History:  Chapter 98 of 2023 increased the dollar cap on the amount of RGGI 
Program revenues that may be credited to the Administration subaccount within SEIF from 
$5.0 million to $7.5 million, along with modifying two transportation sector programs 
funded by SEIF and modifying the authorized uses of certain ACPs deposited in SEIF. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 13 (pp. 96-97)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jason A. Kramer, Tonya D. Zimmerman, Samuel M. Quist 
 
 

END OF PAGE 77

START OF PAGE 78
    
SB 362/ Page 78 
Alter Baltimore City Community College Funding Formula 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Alters the calculation of the State funding per full-time equivalent 
student (FTES) for Baltimore City Community College (BCCC) from a calculation based 
on the budget year State appropriations and budget year enrollment estimates to being 
based on two-year prior actual expenditures for general funds and Higher Education 
Investment Funds and two-year prior enrollment data at the selected public four-year 
institutions.  
 
Agency:  BCCC 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
State Effect:  State aid to BCCC is not impacted due to the hold harmless provision, which 
requires the formula to be funded at a level no lower than the amount of the prior year 
budget. 
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Chapters 568 and 569 of 1998 established a 
funding formula for BCCC, which was enhanced in fiscal 2006 and has been further revised 
several times since then. The BCCC funding formula makes up the majority of State 
funding for the community college. The total funds to be distributed through the formula 
are based on a percentage of the State’s funding per FTES for selected public four-year 
institutions of higher education (68.5%) and the enrollment at BCCC. Specifically, the 
formula bases per student funding on a set statutory percentage of current year State 
appropriations per FTES at the selected four-year institutions. However, the formula also 
includes a hold harmless provision that requires the Governor to fund the formula at a level 
no lower than the level provided in the prior year budget.  
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 27-31)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Kelly K. Norton 
 
 

END OF PAGE 78

START OF PAGE 79
    
SB 362/ Page 79 
Expand Allowable Uses of Fiscal 2024 General Fund Miscellaneous Capital Grant to 
Living Classrooms Foundation 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Authorizes the Governor, by June 30, 2024, to expand the allowable 
use of a pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general fund miscellaneous capital grant appropriated in 
the fiscal 2024 operating budget for the Living Classrooms Foundation Opportunity Hub 
facility – specifically to include noncapital insurance expenses.  
 
Agency:  Department of General Services (DGS) 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
State Effect:  None.  
 
Local Effect:  None.   
 
Program Description:  DGS administers the State grant process for miscellaneous capital 
grants, including those provided through the operating budget as PAYGO grants.  
 
Recent History:  Chapter 101 of 2023, Supplemental Budget No. 2, Item 83(13) 
appropriated a $1.5 million miscellaneous capital grant for infrastructure improvements to 
the Living Classrooms Foundation Opportunity Hub facility. This increased the State’s 
funding support for the project to $2.15 million, including $150,000 and $500,000 general 
obligation bond funded grants in fiscal 2020 and 2022, respectively.   
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 19 (p. 97)  
 
Analysis prepared by:  Matthew D. Klein 
 
 

END OF PAGE 79

START OF PAGE 80
    
SB 362/ Page 80 
Repeal and Reestablish the Maryland Commission on Transportation Revenue and 
Infrastructure Needs and Establish Related Advisory Committee 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Repeal and reestablish the Maryland Commission on 
Transportation Revenue and Infrastructure Needs (TRAIN Commission). Under the 
reestablishment, alter the composition of the commission; alter the items it must review, 
evaluate, and make recommendations regarding; require it to be staffed by the Department 
of Legislative Services (DLS), instead of both DLS and the Maryland Department of 
Transportation (MDOT); and no longer subject the commission to termination. Newly 
establish the Advisory Committee to the Commission, staffed by MDOT, to review, 
evaluate, and make recommendations regarding items requested by the commission. 
Require, by January 1, 2025, the commission to submit a final report of its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly. 
 
Agencies:  DLS; MDOT 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
State Effect:  State operations and finances are not materially affected as the final report 
due date does not change; however, the commission is maintained indefinitely, potentially 
affecting resources that must be dedicated to ongoing staffing.  
 
Local Effect:  Local government operations and finances are not materially affected.  
 
Program Description/Recent History:  Chapter 455 of 2023 established the TRAIN 
Commission and required the commission to review, evaluate, and make recommendations 
concerning specified transportation system funding issues, including, among other things, 
the current State funding sources and structure of the Transportation Trust Fund, the 
methods that other states are employing to fund state transportation operating and capital 
programs, and options for sustainable long-term revenue sources for transportation. 
Chapter 455 required the commission to submit an interim report of its findings and 
recommendations to the Governor and the General Assembly by January 1, 2024, and a 
final report to the Governor and the General Assembly by January 1, 2025, six months 
before its June 30, 2025 termination date. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 6 (p. 88) and Section 7 (pp. 88-91) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Richard L. Duncan 
 
 

END OF PAGE 80

START OF PAGE 81
    
SB 362/ Page 81 
Expand Authorized Uses of Police Training and Standards Commission Fund 
 
Provision in the Bill:  Expands the allowable uses of the Maryland Police Training and 
Standards Commission (MPTSC) Fund, in fiscal 2024 and 2025 only, to support police and 
correctional training activities of MPTSC. The fiscal 2025 budget includes a $2.0 million 
general fund reduction and $2.0 million special fund appropriation for fiscal 2024, 
contingent on the enactment of legislation expanding the authorized uses of the funds. The 
fiscal 2025 budget includes a $300,000 special fund appropriation, contingent on the 
enactment of legislation expanding the authorized uses of the funds.  
 
Agency:  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
 
Fiscal 
($ in millions) 
Impact: 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Exp 
$2.0 
$0.3 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Exp 
($2.0) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
   
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for DPSCS decrease by $2.0 million in 
fiscal 2024 and special fund expenditures increase correspondingly, reflecting a contingent 
reduction and contingent appropriation in the fiscal 2025 budget bill as passed by the 
General Assembly. Special fund expenditures in fiscal 2025 increase by $300,000, 
reflecting a contingent appropriation in the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Program Description:  The MPTSC Fund was established in fiscal 2019 and provides a 
dedicated source of funds to enhance police training activities provided by MPTSC. The 
MPTSC Fund receives $2.0 million each year through special court fees. At the close of 
fiscal 2023, the MPTSC Fund had a balance of $9.6 million.  
 
Recent History:  None. 
 
Additional Comments:  This provision is meant to expand the allowable uses so that funds 
may be used for any police or correctional training activity, including any regular or special 
operations of MPTSC, the Correctional Training Commission (CTC), and the Police and 
Correctional Training Commissions (PCTC). While the provision states funds may only 
support police and correctional training activities of MPTSC, this analysis assumes funds 
can also be used to support police and correctional training activity for CTC and PCTC as 
the applicable contingencies in the fiscal 2025 budget are effectuated by this provision. 
 
Location of Provision in the Bill:  Section 1 (p. 38) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Jacob C. Cash 

END OF PAGE 81

START OF PAGE 82
    
SB 362/ Page 82 
Delay Due Dates Associated with Evaluation of Blueprint for Maryland’s Future 
 
Provisions in the Bill:  Delay the due date for the initial report to the Accountability and 
Implementation Board (AIB) of an independent evaluation of the State’s progress in 
implementing the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future and achieving expected outcomes 
during the implementation period from October 1, 2024, to December 1, 2026. Make a 
corresponding change so that, by January 15, 2027, instead of by December 1, 2024, under 
current law, AIB must, using the first independent evaluation and its own judgment, report 
to the Governor and the General Assembly on whether the Blueprint is being implemented 
as intended and achieving the expected outcomes. Thereby also delay – from fiscal 2026 
to fiscal 2028 – State and local funding implications triggered if AIB does not report that 
the Blueprint is being implemented as intended and is achieving expected outcomes. 
 
Agency:  AIB 
 
Type of Action:  Miscellaneous 
  
State Effect:  Delaying from fiscal 2026 to fiscal 2028 the potential curtailment of State 
education aid, which occurs in the event of an AIB finding that Blueprint implementation 
and results are not as intended, potentially substantially increases State expenditures in 
fiscal 2026 and 2027. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Local Effect:  Potential curtailment of county government required appropriations to 
public schools is delayed from fiscal 2026 to fiscal 2028, resulting in potential substantial 
increases in county government expenditures in fiscal 2026 and 2027. Local school system 
funding from the State and county governments may increase substantially in fiscal 2026 
and 2027. 
 
Program Description:  AIB must contract for an independent evaluation of the State’s 
progress in implementing the Blueprint and achieving expected outcomes during the 
implementation period. The contractor must report its results to AIB by October 1, 2024, 
and October 1, 2030. By December 1, 2024, AIB must, using the first independent 
evaluation and its own judgment, report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
whether the Blueprint is being implemented as intended and achieving the expected 
outcomes. If AIB does not report that it is, then State and local funding for public schools 
is limited, as specified, and it is the intent of the General Assembly to take immediate action 
to adjust Blueprint formula and policies to fulfill its specified Blueprint commitments. 
 
Recent History:  None. 
 
Location of Provisions in the Bill:  Section 1 (pp. 11-12) and Section 3 (pp. 87-88) 
 
Analysis prepared by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
 

END OF PAGE 82

START OF PAGE 83
SB 362/ Page 83 
 
Appendix B 
Quantifiable Revenue and Expenditure Impacts on State Finances, by Provision and Fund Type 
Fiscal 2024-2029 
($ in Dollars) 
 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GENERAL FUND REVENUES 
Mandate Relief 
Repeal Requirement – Distribution to LITRA  
0 
10,000,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Subtotal – Mandate Relief 
0  
10,000,000  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Transfers, Fund Swaps, Cost Shifts/Control, and 
Revenue/Other Actions 
Reduce Revenue Volatility Adjustment 
120,000,000  
140,000,000  
0 
0 
0 
0 
Redirect Interest from Special Funds 
2,250,000 
27,000,000 
13,500,000 
13,500,000 
13,500,000 
0 
Reduce Lottery Sales/Cashing Commissions  
1,690,991 
20,663,841 
20,803,778 
20,946,349 
21,091,332 
21,251,473 
Repeal – Small Business Relief Tax Credit 
0 
85,000 
85,000 
85,000 
85,000 
85,000 
Transfer – from State UI Reserve Account 
0 
60,000,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transfer – from DPA (as specified) 
193,474,476 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transfer – from DPA (DNR related) 
0 
14,000,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transfer – from DPA (MDH related) 
0 
7,580,873 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transfer – from DPA (LEAP) 
0 
4,500,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Withdraw Funding – BCCC Demolition 
2,000,000  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Transfer – from LITRA 
150,000,000  
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Establish TNC Impact Fee and Account  
0 
1,331,771 
298,749 
312,108 
325,788 
340,106 
Increase Tax Rates/Alter Distribution* 
0 
514,000  
(75,942,945) 
(76,100,941) 
215,311  
137,210  
Divert SUT Revenue from Vehicle Charging 
0 
(755,724) 
(991,609) 
(1,277,187) 
(1,618,239) 
(2,019,063) 
Subtotal – Other Actions 
469,415,467  
274,919,761  
(42,247,027) 
(42,534,671) 
33,599,192  
19,794,726  
Total General Fund Revenues 
469,415,467  
284,919,761  
(42,247,027) 
(42,534,671) 
33,599,192  
19,794,726  

END OF PAGE 83

START OF PAGE 84
    
SB 362/ Page 84 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GENERAL FUND EXPENDITURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mandate Relief 
Alter Mandate – CPD 
0  
(700,000) 
(350,000) 
(350,000) 
(350,000) 
(350,000) 
Repeal SCRLF/Transfer Fund Balance  
(20,000,000) 
(10,000,000) 
(10,000,000) 
(40,000,000) 
0  
0  
Alter Cade Funding Formula 
0  
(12,739,610) 
(24,517,353) 
(18,794,852) 
(11,573,651) 
(4,835,949) 
Alter Sellinger Program Funding Formula  
0  
(61,310,959) 
(65,368,218) 
(65,659,192) 
(65,972,377) 
(66,539,979) 
Alter Mandate – Business Façade Improvement 
0  
(5,000,000) 
(5,000,000) 
(5,000,000) 
(5,000,000) 
(5,000,000) 
Suspend Mandate – Fisheries R&D Fund  
0  
(1,794,000) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Reduce Mandate – Noland Woodland Fund 
0  
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
Reduce Mandate for Retirement Reinvestment 
0  
(21,611,737) 
(6,770,000) 
(4,610,000) 
(4,610,000) 
(4,520,000) 
Delay/Alter Full-day PreK Funding 
0  
0  
(44,015) 
77,184,881  
79,990,346  
65,971,155  
Subtotal – Mandate Relief 
(20,000,000) (113,656,306) (112,549,586) 
(57,729,163) 
(8,015,682) 
(15,774,773) 
Transfers, Fund Swaps, Cost Shifts/Control, and 
Revenue/Other Actions 
Satisfy Mandate with CACB 2010 Trust Fund 
(2,500,000) 
(2,500,000) 
(2,500,000) 
(2,500,000) 
(2,500,000) 
(2,500,000) 
Transfer – from Certain Boards to BHA 
0  
(2,556,174) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Transfer – from HIEF to Medicaid 
0  
(216,845) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Expand Allowable Uses of SPADP Fund 
0  
(5,000,000) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Transfer – POS State Funds for DNR Personnel 
0  
(6,678,827) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
18,543  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Establish TNC Impact Fee and Account  
0  
1,331,771  
298,749  
312,108  
325,788  
340,106  
Expand Uses – PTSC Fund 
(2,000,000) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Increase Tax Rates/Alter Distribution* 
0  
0  
0  (398,088,886) 
(73,555,689) 
(71,339,790) 
Divert SUT Revenue from Vehicle Charging 
0  
250,000  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Subtotal – Other Actions 
(4,500,000) 
(15,351,532) 
(2,201,251) (400,276,778) 
(75,729,901) 
(73,499,684) 
Total General Fund Expenditures 
(24,500,000) (129,007,838) (114,750,837) (458,005,941) 
(83,745,583) 
(89,274,457) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 84

START OF PAGE 85
    
SB 362/ Page 85 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SPECIAL FUND REVENUES 
Mandate Relief 
Repeal SCRLF/Transfer Fund Balance  
40,000,000  
0  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Suspend Mandate – Fisheries R&D Fund 
0  
(1,794,000) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Reduce Mandate – Noland Woodland Fund 
0  
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
Reduce Mandate – Retirement Reinvestment 
0  
(25,000,000) 
(7,840,000) 
(5,340,000) 
(5,340,000) 
(5,248,000) 
Subtotal – Mandate Relief 
40,000,000  
(27,294,000) 
(8,340,000) 
(5,840,000) 
(5,840,000) 
(5,748,000) 
Transfers, Fund Swaps, Cost Shifts/Control, and 
Revenue/Other Actions 
Reduce Revenue Volatility Adjustment 
(120,000,000) (140,000,000) 
0  
0  
0  
0  
Redirect Interest from Various Special Funds 
(2,250,000) 
(27,000,000) 
(13,500,000) 
(13,500,000) 
(13,500,000) 
0  
Transfer – from SEIF to DPA 
0  
90,000,000  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Expand Uses of SPADP Fund 
0  
3,600,000  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
41,001,615  
41,001,615  
41,001,615  
41,001,615  
41,001,615  
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
18,222,940  
18,222,940  
18,222,940  
18,222,940  
18,222,940  
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
45,557,350  
45,557,350  
45,557,350  
45,557,350  
45,557,350  
Establish TNC Impact Fee and Account  
0  
37,366,229  
40,108,251  
41,852,892  
43,645,212  
46,471,894  
Increase Annual Vehicle Registration Fee 
0  
168,933,195  
200,984,230  
253,313,205  
253,313,205  
253,313,205  
Establish Annual Surcharge – EVs and PHEVs  
0  
10,722,278  
10,722,278  
10,722,278  
10,722,278  
10,722,278  
Increase Car Dealer Processing Charge 
0  
7,000,362  
7,000,362  
7,000,362  
7,000,362  
7,000,362  
Increase Tax Rates/Alter Distribution* 
0  
91,394,000  
154,470,945  
152,223,941  
73,555,689  
71,339,790  
Divert SUT Revenue from Vehicle Charging 
0  
852,000  
1,123,000  
1,453,000  
1,841,000  
2,297,000  
Divert SUT Revenue from Vehicle Charging 
0  
(96,276) 
(131,391) 
(175,813) 
(222,761) 
(277,937) 
Subtotal – Other Actions 
(122,250,000) 
347,553,693  
505,559,580  
557,671,770  
481,136,890  
495,648,497  
Total Special Fund Revenues 
(82,250,000) 
320,259,693  
497,219,580  
551,831,770  
475,296,890  
489,900,497  

END OF PAGE 85

START OF PAGE 86
    
SB 362/ Page 86 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SPECIAL FUND EXPENDITURES 
Mandate Relief 
Alter Mandate – CPD 
0  
700,000  
350,000  
350,000  
350,000  
350,000  
Repeal SCRLF/Transfer Fund Balance  
0  
0  
0  
40,000,000  
0  
0  
Reduce Mandate – Noland Woodland Fund 
0  
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
(500,000) 
Reduce Mandate – Retirement Reinvestment  
0  
(1,683,650) 
(530,000) 
(360,000) 
(360,000) 
(360,000) 
Delay/Alter Full-day PreK Funding 
0  
(7,709,776) 
(6,266,183) 
13,975,960  
0  
0  
Subtotal – Mandate Relief 
0  
(9,193,426) 
(6,946,183) 
53,465,960  
(510,000) 
(510,000) 
Transfers, Fund Swaps, Cost Shifts/Control, and 
Revenue/Other Actions 
Satisfy Mandate with CACB 2010 Trust Fund 
2,500,000  
2,500,000  
2,500,000  
2,500,000  
2,500,000  
2,500,000  
Lower Spending – Fiscal Responsibility Fund** 
0  
0  
(60,000,000) 
(70,000,000) 
0  
0  
Alter Requirement to Purchase Only ZEBs 
0  
(28,000,000) 
(28,000,000) 
0  
0  
0  
Transfer – from Certain Boards to BHA 
0  
2,556,174  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Transfer – from HIEF to Medicaid 
0  
216,845  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Expand Uses of SPADP Fund 
0 
5,000,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Expand Uses of SPADP Fund 
0 
3,600,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
0  
1,500,000  
1,500,000  
1,500,000  
1,500,000  
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
1,210,000  
1,210,000  
1,210,000  
1,210,000  
1,210,000  
Increase Vehicle Surcharge/Change Distribution 
0  
2,200,420  
2,200,420  
2,200,420  
2,200,420  
2,200,420  
Increase Annual Vehicle Registration Fee 
0  
3,547,597  
4,220,669  
5,319,577  
5,319,577  
5,319,577  
Establish Annual Surcharge – EVs/PHEVs 
0  
225,168  
225,168  
225,168  
225,168  
225,168  
Expand Uses of PTSC Fund 
2,000,000  
300,000  
0  
0  
0  
0  
Increase Tax Rates/Alter Distribution* 
0 
0 
0 
398,088,886  
73,555,689  
71,339,790  
Subtotal – Other Actions 
4,500,000  
(6,643,796) 
(76,143,743) 
341,044,051  
86,510,854  
84,294,955  
Total Special Fund Expenditures 
4,500,000  
(15,837,222) 
(83,089,926) 
394,510,011  
86,000,854  
83,784,955  
 
 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 86

START OF PAGE 87
    
SB 362/ Page 87 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
FEDERAL FUND EXPENDITURES 
Reduce Mandate – Retirement Reinvestment 
(912,824) 
 (290,000) 
 (200,000) 
 (200,000) 
 (200,000) 
Total Federal Fund Expenditures 
0  
(912,824) 
(290,000) 
(200,000) 
(200,000) 
(200,000) 
 
 
BCCC:  Baltimore City Community College  
 
 
 
 
POS:  Program Open Space 
BHA:  Behavioral Health Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
PreK:  Prekindergarten 
CACB:  Chesapeake and Atlantic Coastal Bays 
 
 
 
 
PTSC:  Police Training and Standards Commission 
CPD:  Consumer Protection Division 
 
 
 
 
 
R&D:  Research and Development 
DNR:  Department of Natural Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
SCRLF:  School Construction Revolving Loan Fund 
DPA:  Dedicated Purpose Account  
 
 
 
 
 
SEIF:  Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
EVs:  Electric Vehicles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPADP:  Senior Drug Assistance Development Program 
HIEF:  Health Information Exchange Fund  
 
 
 
 
SUT:  Sales and Use Tax 
LEAP:  Learning in Extended Academic Programs 
 
 
 
 
TNC:  Transportation Network Company 
LITRA:  Local Income Tax Reserve Account 
 
 
 
 
UI:  Unemployment Insurance 
MDH:  Maryland Department of Health  
 
 
 
 
 
ZEBs:  Zero-emission Buses 
PHEVs:  Plug-in Electric Vehicles 
 
* Relates to tobacco tax and sales and use tax on electronic smoking devices, with revenue increase dedicated to the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund. 
 
** Impact is related to reducing the amount of the revenue volatility adjustment. 
 
Note:  Includes only impacts on general, special, and federal funds (impacts on nonbudgeted funds are not included); any impacts that could not be reliably 
quantified are not reflected. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 87

START OF PAGE 88
SB 362/ Page 88 
 
Appendix C 
Impact on Fiscal 2025 Funding for (and by) Local Jurisdictions of  
Selected Provisions of the Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024 
 
County 
Cade Community 
College Funding 
Local School 
Systems from 
State and Local 
Prekindergarten 
Program Funding 
County 
Expenditures for 
Public Schools -- 
Prekindergarten 
Program Funding 
Total Impact 
Allegany 
($446,392) 
($215,545) 
($661,937) 
Anne Arundel 
(837,018) 
(295,512) 
(1,132,530) 
Baltimore City 
(1,034,436) 
(1,034,436) 
Baltimore 
(2,754,377) 
(236,947) 
  
(2,991,324) 
Calvert 
(185,236) 
(8,055) 
(193,291) 
Caroline 
(208,843) 
(404,108) 
($94,742) 
(612,951) 
Carroll 
(823,843) 
(29,358) 
(853,201) 
Cecil 
(885,688) 
(518,178) 
(216,956) 
(1,403,866) 
Charles 
(361,415) 
(676,027) 
(1,037,442) 
Dorchester 
(131,740) 
(132,094) 
(263,834) 
Frederick 
463,423 
(776,816) 
(313,393) 
Garrett 
(818,327) 
(399,279) 
(271,314) 
(1,217,606) 
Harford 
(431,218) 
(249,170) 
(680,388) 
Howard 
(572,026) 
(108,976) 
(681,002) 
Kent 
(71,566) 
(123,622) 
(92,954) 
(195,188) 
Montgomery 
(1,203,833) 
4,625 
  
(1,199,208) 
Prince George’s 
(867,929) 
(1,981,959) 
(939,218) 
(2,849,888) 
Queen Anne’s 
(245,869) 
(112,470) 
(358,339) 
St. Mary’s 
(240,394) 
(36,249) 
(276,643) 
Somerset 
(119,270) 
(62,509) 
  
(181,779) 
Talbot 
(205,011) 
(159,429) 
(90,733) 
(364,440) 
Washington 
(808,288) 
(1,455,776) 
(2,264,064) 
Wicomico 
(697,397) 
(298,649) 
(996,046) 
Worcester 
(259,474) 
(105,154) 
  
(364,628) 
Total 
($12,711,734) 
($9,415,693) 
($1,705,917) 
($22,127,427) 
 
Notes:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding in the amounts apportioned to the appropriate 
jurisdiction for regional community colleges that are funded by and serve multiple jurisdictions. 
Baltimore City Community College, as a State agency, is not affected. The $9.4 million shown for local 
school system support reflects the changes in both the State and county contributions – $7.7 million of which 
is from the State and $1.7 million (as also shown separately) is from counties for which there is a reduction 
in required local support.  
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 

END OF PAGE 88

START OF PAGE 89
    
SB 362/ Page 89 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Budget Reconciliation and Financing Act of 2024 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0362 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Marc Nicole, Deputy Budget Secretary 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X     WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
The Department of Budget and Management has reviewed the provisions of Senate Bill 362 and 
believes that in general small businesses will not be affected by the provisions of the legislation 
with the following exceptions: 
 The reduction in lottery commissions from 6.0% to 5.5% on sales and from 3.0% to 2.0% 
on cashing will reduce revenue for those small businesses that serve as lottery vendors. 
The Lottery and Gaming Commission Agency has provided additional detail in its fiscal 
note response. 
 The repeal of the Small Business Relief Tax Credit. 
 

END OF PAGE 89