START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 376 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 376 
(Senator King, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Higher Education - University of Maryland School of Medicine and MPowering 
Joint Steering Council - Funding 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to include general funds in the annual State budget for the 
MPowering Joint Steering Council to use exclusively on the University of Maryland 
Institute for Health Computing (UM-IHC) in the following amounts:  $1.5 million in 
fiscal 2026; $3.0 million in fiscal 2027; $4.5 million in fiscal 2028; and $6.0 million in 
fiscal 2029 and each fiscal year thereafter. The bill also extends indefinitely the 
requirement for the Governor to include $5.0 million in the annual State budget for the 
University of Maryland School of Medicine (UMSM) to provide clinical care at the 
University of Maryland Capital Region Medical Center by assigning to the center faculty 
who specialize in identified essential areas. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. General fund expenditures increase by at least 
$1.5 million in FY 2026 and escalate to at least $6.0 million beginning in FY 2029, as 
discussed below. Revenues and higher education funding formulas are assumed to not be 
affected, as discussed below. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation, and 
maintains an existing mandated appropriation, beginning in FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
0 
1.5 
3.0 
4.5 
6.0 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($1.5) 
($3.0) 
($4.5) 
($6.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 376/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The money appropriated under the bill is supplemental to and may not 
take the place of funding that otherwise would be appropriated to the council or the 
University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC). 
 
Current Law:   
 
MPowering 
 
In 2011, the General Assembly charged the University System of Maryland (USM) Board 
of Regents and, thus, University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP) and 
University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus (UMB) with developing a plan to have an even 
greater impact on the State, its economy, the job market, and the next generation of 
innovators. The result, MPowering, was launched in 2012. 
 
The University of Maryland Strategic Partnership Act of 2016 (Chapter 25) codified the 
council for MPowering as the University of Maryland Joint Steering Council (later 
renamed the MPowering Joint Steering Council). The council consists of members 
appointed by the presidents of UMCP and UMB. As established in current law, the council 
must:   
 
 
develop guidelines for faculty appointments that are joint faculty appointments; 
 
make recommendations to the presidents on joint faculty appointments; 
 
make recommendations to the presidents identifying competitor state peers for 
UMCP and UMB; 
 
establish a process by which undergraduate and graduate programs are evaluated to 
determine whether the students, the University of Maryland, and the State would 
benefit from alignment and collaboration and make recommendations to the 
presidents; 
 
carry out the programs and policies established under the MPower program as 
directed by the presidents; 
 
explore opportunities to create registered apprenticeship programs in nursing and 
other fields that include integration of high school career and technology education 
programs and University of Maryland graduate and undergraduate programs; and 
 
perform any other duties assigned by the presidents. 
 
University of Maryland Institute for Health Computing 
 
UM-IHC 
is 
co-led 
by 
UMCP 
and 
UMB. 
Funding 
support 
comes 
from 
Montgomery County, Maryland, and MPower. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 376/ Page 3 
University of Maryland Capital Region Medical Center 
 
Chapters 44 and 418 of 2021 require UMSM to provide clinical care at the University of 
Maryland Capital Region Medical Center by assigning to the center faculty who specialize 
in identified essential areas. For fiscal 2023 through 2025, the Governor must include in 
the annual budget bill an appropriation of at least $5.0 million to implement this 
requirement. The funds provided must supplement and may not supplant any other funding 
provided to UMSM. 
 
State Expenditures:  General fund expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2026 to 
reflect the new mandate to fund UM-IHC through the MPowering Joint Steering Council. 
This funding is phased in over four years – increasing by $1.5 million a year from 
fiscal 2026 until it reaches $6.0 million in fiscal 2029 and subsequent years. 
 
Although the bill also maintains an existing mandate for $5.0 million to provide clinical 
care through UMSM, the Department of Legislative Services advises that this analysis 
assumes no impact on general fund expenditures due to that provision. The fiscal and policy 
notes for the implementing legislation (Chapters 44 and 418) already assumed ongoing, 
albeit discretionary, general funds being used for that purpose – since the requirement for 
clinical care was maintained even though the funding mandate was only temporary. The 
fiscal and policy notes recognized that, otherwise, beginning in fiscal 2026, another source 
of funding would need to be identified and used for the same purpose. Nevertheless, to the 
extent general funds would not have continued to be made available, general fund 
expenditures further increase, by another $5.0 million each year, beginning in fiscal 2026. 
 
This estimate assumes that the funds are added to the budget in a manner that does not 
increase any funds not intended for the bill’s purposes. Adding the funds directly to the 
UMCP or UMBC budget would increase the average full-time equivalent student funding 
for selected public four-year institutions, which would result in increases to the higher 
education funding formulas for community colleges and private institutions of higher 
education. Adding the funds directly to the UMB budget or creating a new budget code 
within USM will not impact the higher education funding formulas. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 334 (Delegate Solomon, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 376/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Caroline L. Boice 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4