START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 417 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 417 
(Senator Hayes) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Election Administration - State Administrator, Local Boards, and Election 
Directors 
 
 
This bill requires the State Board of Elections (SBE) to, at least annually, evaluate the 
performance of the State Administrator of Elections. The bill requires the 
State Administrator to, at least annually, provide a performance evaluation of the election 
director of each local board of elections to the local board, including any recommended 
disciplinary actions for failure to comply with State laws, regulations, and policies. The 
bill also makes changes to State election law relating to the statutory powers and 
responsibilities of the local boards of elections and the local election directors. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  
 
Required Annual Performance Evaluations 
 
The bill requires the State board to, at least annually, evaluate the performance of the 
State Administrator of Elections. The bill also requires the State Administrator to, at least 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 417/ Page 2 
annually, provide a performance evaluation of the election director of each local board of 
elections to the local board, including any recommended disciplinary actions for failure to 
comply with State laws, regulations, and policies. When conducting a performance 
evaluation of the election director of a local board, the State Administrator may seek the 
feedback of individuals with whom the election director regularly interacts in the course of 
the election director’s duties. 
 
Requirements Relating to Local Boards of Elections 
 
The bill adds, to the local boards of elections’ statutory powers and responsibilities, a 
requirement that each local board confer with the State Administrator in appointing an 
election director. However, this requirement may not be construed to affect the exclusive 
authority of a local board to appoint an election director.  
 
The bill also requires each local board to maintain a warehouse, and to provide for early 
voting center expenses, subject to State law requiring voting system costs to be shared by 
the State and counties. 
 
Authority and Responsibilities of Local Election Directors 
 
The bill changes existing specified statutory authority of a local election director to instead 
be statutory responsibilities and establishes that those responsibilities are subject to 
regulations adopted by SBE and the policies and guidance of SBE. The bill also adds to a 
local election director’s responsibilities, requiring a local election director to: 
 
 
manage the storage, security, maintenance, and preparation of voting system 
equipment; 
 
within 24 hours, notify the State Administrator and local board in writing of (1) a 
security violation or significant attempted security violation that impedes the proper 
and efficient operation of the local board and (2) damage to the office, warehouse, 
voting system equipment, or other materials used to conduct an election; 
 
ensure the equipment used by the employees of the local board meets cybersecurity 
requirements; and 
 
perform duties as delegated by the local board. 
 
“Security violation” means the incident categories defined by the Department of 
Information Technology in the State information security policy. 
 
“Significant attempted security violation” means an attempt to commit a security violation 
that (1) is known to have been committed by a foreign government or agents of a foreign 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 417/ Page 3 
government or (2) the State Administrator considers to be of particular significance or 
concern. 
 
Current Law: 
 
State Board of Elections Authority and Responsibilities 
 
Under State law, SBE manages and supervises elections in the State and ensures 
compliance with the requirements of the Election Law Article and any applicable federal 
law by all persons involved in the elections process. 
 
In exercising its authority under the Election Law Article, and in order to ensure 
compliance with the Election Law Article and any requirements of federal law, SBE must, 
among other things, (1) direct, support, monitor, and evaluate the activities of each local 
board; (2) have a staff sufficient to perform its functions; (3) adopt regulations to 
implement its powers and duties; and (4) appoint a State Administrator. 
 
State Administrator’s Authority and Responsibilities 
 
The State Administrator is the chief State election official, is appointed by SBE with the 
advice and consent of the Senate of Maryland, and serves at the pleasure of the board. 
Among other things, the State Administrator (1) supervises the operations of the local 
boards of elections and (2) performs all duties and exercises all powers that are assigned 
by law to the State Administrator or delegated by SBE. 
 
Local Boards of Elections Authority and Responsibilities 
 
Among other statutory authority and responsibilities of the local boards of elections, a local 
board of elections must (1) appoint an election director to manage the operations and 
supervise the staff of the local board and (2) maintain an office and be open for business 
as provided under State election law, and provide the supplies and equipment necessary for 
the proper and efficient conduct of voter registration and election, including supplies and 
equipment required by SBE and office and polling place equipment expenses. 
 
Each county must appropriate the funds essential for the operations of its local board to 
enable the local board to pay the reasonable expenses incurred by the local board to 
exercise the powers and perform the duties prescribed for it by law, including (1) personnel 
expenses, such as compensation, workers’ compensation, and unemployment insurance 
and (2) polling place operation expenses and specified supplies and equipment necessary 
for the proper and efficient conduct of voter registration and election (subject to State law 
requiring voting system costs to be shared by the State and counties). 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 417/ Page 4 
Specified Statutory Authority of Local Election Directors 
 
Subject to requirements of the Election Law Article and the policies and guidance of the 
local board of elections, an election director may (1) appoint the employees of the local 
board; (2) train election judges; (3) give notice of elections; (4) upon the request of an 
elderly or disabled voter whose polling place is not structurally barrier free, provide an 
alternate polling place to the voter; (5) issue voter notification cards; (6) receive certificates 
of candidacy; (7) verify petitions; (8) in consultation with the local board, conduct the 
canvass following an election; and (9) subject to specified statutory requirements, process 
and reject absentee ballot applications. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 459 (Delegate D. Jones) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Anne Arundel, Charles, and Garrett counties; Maryland State 
Board of Elections; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
rh/sdk 
 
Analysis by:  Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4