START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 482 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 482 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations and Health and 
Government Operations 
 
Governor's Office for Children - Engaging Neighborhoods, Organizations, 
Unions, Governments, and Households (ENOUGH) Grant Program (ENOUGH 
Act of 2024) 
 
   
This Administration bill codifies the Governor’s Office for Children (GOC) and specifies 
the Special Secretary of GOC is the head of the office. The Special Secretary must establish 
an Engaging Neighborhoods, Organizations, Unions, Governments, and Households 
(ENOUGH) Grant Program to advance place-based strategies targeting child poverty. The 
bill establishes an ENOUGH Grant Fund and requires the Governor to appropriate at least 
$15.0 million to the fund in the fiscal 2026 budget bill. GOC must establish a database of 
resources by July 1, 2025, and submit a report by October 1, 2025. By December 1, 2025, 
the Accountability and Implementation Board (AIB) must submit a recommendation to the 
General Assembly based on the GOC report. The Children’s Cabinet must meet at least 
four times per year, be chaired by the Special Secretary, be staffed by GOC, submit an 
annual report, and submit a three-year plan. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $20.3 million in FY 2025 (the 
FY 2025 budget includes $20.2 million, contingent on the enactment of the bill) and by at 
least $15.6 million in FY 2026 (to reflect the mandated appropriation, staffing, and 
contractual costs). Future years reflect ongoing personnel costs. GOC special fund 
revenues increase by $10.0 million in FY 2025 and by at least $15.0 million in FY 2026; 
special fund expenditures increase by an indeterminate amount beginning in FY 2025 as 
discussed below. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$10.0 
$15.0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
$20.3 
$15.6 
$0.6 
$0.6 
$0.7 
SF Expenditure 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Net Effect 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-) 
($-)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 482/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase by as much as $5.0 million from 
additional funding for local management boards (LMBs), as discussed below. Revenues 
and expenditures increase by an additional indeterminate but potentially significant amount 
to the extent a local governmental entity serves as a lead partner.  
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the 
bill.) 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
ENOUGH Grant Program and Fund 
 
The purpose of ENOUGH grants is to (1) increase community health and safety; 
(2) provide “cradle to career” access to high-quality education and care; (3) connect 
residents to quality jobs and in-demand occupations; (4) enable family-sustaining income 
and access to affordable high-quality housing, child care, and health care; (5) provide 
high-quality support for children with disabilities, child welfare, and justice-involved youth 
and young adults; (6) connect individuals to State programs; and (7) leverage federal, local, 
and private funding for the eligible neighborhood.  
 
ENOUGH Grant Fund:  The bill establishes the ENOUGH Grant Fund as a special, 
nonlapsing fund that must be administered by the Special Secretary. The fund consists of 
money appropriated in the State budget to the fund (at least $15.0 million is required to be 
appropriated to the fund in fiscal 2026), interest earnings, and any other money from any 
other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The fund may be used only for 
ENOUGH grants. Expenditures from the fund may be made only in accordance with the 
State budget.  
 
Eligible Neighborhoods:  “Eligible neighborhood” means a neighborhood that includes 
census tracts with more than 30% of children living in poverty and is served by, as defined 
by GOC, a community school with a concentration of poverty level of (1) in fiscal 2025 
and 2026, at least 80%; (2) in fiscal 2027 through 2029, at least 75%; (3) in fiscal 2030, at 
least 60%; and (4) in fiscal 2031 and thereafter, at least 55%.  
 
GOC must annually identify and communicate to each local government the neighborhoods 
that are eligible for the ENOUGH program. GOC may determine that a regional 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 482/ Page 3 
neighborhood would maximize resources, but a regional neighborhood may not receive 
less funding because of the coordination of multiple eligible neighborhoods.  
 
Lead Partners:  GOC must establish qualifications, standards, and processes for 
determining the lead partner for the neighborhood. When an eligible neighborhood is 
identified, GOC must engage with the neighborhood community, seek input from residents, 
and approve a lead partner for the neighborhood (which may be an LMB, local 
governmental entity, community action agency, local community organization, or 
nonprofit organization). In addition, GOC may assign staff or otherwise provide technical 
assistance to assist the neighborhood. The lead partner must coordinate all aspects of the 
program for the neighborhood and any other responsibilities defined by GOC.  
 
Needs Assessments:  Subject to the availability of funds, each lead partner must receive a 
grant from GOC (in an amount determined by GOC) to complete a needs assessment for 
the eligible neighborhood, which must include specified elements. GOC must establish the 
standards and policies for developing a needs assessment, as specified. The needs 
assessment must supplement and not conflict with the needs assessment completed for the 
community school served by the eligible neighborhood. In completing the needs 
assessment, the lead partner (1) must coordinate with the local community school, a 
community-based organization, and the local government and (2) may coordinate with 
other specified entities. If an eligible neighborhood has recently completed a similar 
assessment, GOC may require submission of an abbreviated needs assessment, as 
specified. GOC may assist the lead partner to complete a needs assessment on request. The 
lead partner must submit the needs assessment to GOC for approval.  
 
Neighborhood Implementation Grants:  If the needs assessment is approved (and subject 
to the availability of funds), GOC must provide a neighborhood implementation grant (in 
an amount determined by GOC) to a lead partner to complete the items in the eligible 
neighborhood’s needs assessment.  
 
Additional Authority:  GOC may consult with entities that it deems relevant to support 
ENOUGH partnerships, and apply for, receive, and spend grants-in-aid made available for 
GOC to carry out the duties of the Special Secretary or GOC.  
 
Annual Report and Evaluation:  Beginning in fiscal 2025, GOC must prepare an annual 
report on the ENOUGH Grant Program that includes specified elements. By June 1, 2027, 
GOC must conduct an evaluation of the program and report to the Governor and specified 
committees of the General Assembly, as specified.  
 
Related Establishment of Centralized Resource Database:  Uncodified language requires 
GOC, by July 1, 2025, to develop a public centralized database of all State, local, and 
private resources for children, youth, and families in the State.  
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 482/ Page 4 
Children’s Cabinet 
 
The Children’s Cabinet must meet at least four times annually in open session to discuss 
matters related to State needs for children, youth, and families. By December 1, 2024, and 
annually thereafter, the Children’s Cabinet must submit a report to the General Assembly 
on its meetings in the prior year and activities planned in the upcoming year. Uncodified 
language requires the Children’s Cabinet to submit the State’s three-year plan for children, 
youth, and families to the General Assembly by December 1, 2025. 
 
Neighborhood Indicators of Poverty Report and Recommendations  
 
By October 1, 2025, GOC must submit a report on neighborhood indicators of poverty to 
the General Assembly, AIB, and the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE). 
Any State agency must share any data needed by GOC to complete the report. The report 
must include an analysis of different methods used to calculate indicators of poverty to 
determine eligibility for the Compensatory Education Program and the Concentration of 
Poverty School Grant Program, as specified. In completing the report, GOC must:   
 
 
evaluate American Community Survey data, as specified;  
 
evaluate the Area Deprivation Index to rank neighborhoods by socioeconomic status 
disadvantage;  
 
analyze how other states approach measuring poverty;  
 
analyze how other states calculate eligibility for state programs for school districts 
that participate in the federal Community Eligibility Provision; and  
 
consult with each local school system for input.  
 
By December 1, 2025, AIB, in consultation with DLS and the Department of Budget and 
Management, must submit a methodological recommendation to the General Assembly 
based on GOC’s neighborhood indicators of poverty report. The recommendation must 
include whether there should be an updated methodology for calculating eligibility for 
compensatory grants to local boards, and if so, an updated methodology for calculating the 
compensatory education formula.  
 
Current Law:  GOC was established by an executive order in 2005 to provide a 
coordinated, comprehensive interagency approach to the development of a continuum of 
care that is family- and child-oriented and emphasizes prevention, early intervention, and 
community-based services for all children and families, with special attention to at-risk 
populations. GOC activities include staffing the Children’s Cabinet, administering the 
Children’s Cabinet Interagency Fund (CCIF), providing technical assistance to LMBs, 
promoting child and family policy, and measuring results for child well-being.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 482/ Page 5 
In December 2018, GOC was moved under the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and 
Policy (GOCPP, which was temporarily renamed the Governor’s Office of Crime 
Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services), with funding for personnel and operational 
expenses 
absorbed 
into 
that 
office 
in 
fiscal 
2020. 
In 
January 
2024,  
Executive Order 01.01.2024.05 separated GOC from GOCPP; the bill codifies GOC as a 
separate office.  
 
Community Schools and Concentration of Poverty Grants 
 
A community school is a whole school model designed to promote positive, equitable 
outcomes by providing students and families with the physical and mental health, 
academic, and extracurricular supports needed to thrive. In Maryland, a community school 
is any school that receives Concentration of Poverty Grants (CPGs). CPGs are 
formula-based and awarded to schools on an annual basis. Eligibility is based on the 
four-year average of the percentage of the school’s students living in poverty (excluding 
the 2020-2021 school year), as determined by the compensatory education enrollment 
(essentially the number of students receiving free and reduced-price meals). 
 
CPGs have two components. First, each qualifying school receives a personnel grant to 
employ a community school coordinator and provide full-time coverage by at least 
one health care practitioner. The coordinator is responsible for identifying student needs 
along with input from the community, establishing partnerships with service providers, and 
coordinating wraparound services. The health care practitioner is tasked with arranging and 
providing health services. Second, per pupil grants are provided for each qualifying school 
following the completion of a community school needs assessment. The personnel grant is 
a State-funded categorical amount that increases with inflation. Per pupil grants are only 
wealth equalized for districts that receive the minimum State funding (40%) under the 
compensatory education formula; for all other districts, the State pays the full amount. The 
local funding percentage is based on the compensatory education wealth equalization 
formula. In fiscal 2023, 358 community schools received CPGs. The fiscal 2025 budget as 
passed by the General Assembly includes a total of $363.3 million for CPGs.  
 
Background:  The Administration advises that the bill reflects a first-in-the-nation 
state-level effort to end concentrated child poverty and build safe and thriving 
communities. ENOUGH grants are intended to provide a direct investment from the State 
to support communities that have experienced multi-generational poverty and its 
consequences. The program will prioritize evidence-based investments in communities. 
 
According to the National Governor’s Association, place-based strategies address the 
physical, social, structural, and economic conditions of a community that affect the 
well-being of the children, families, and individuals who live there. An important purpose 
of place-based strategies is to develop local solutions to poverty and inequality by 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 482/ Page 6 
addressing community-level problems such as limited employment opportunities, poor 
housing, under-resourced schools, social isolation, and poor or fragmented service 
provisions that lead to gaps or duplication of effort. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $20.3 million in fiscal 2025, 
at least $15.6 million in fiscal 2026, and at least $0.6 million annually thereafter for 
ongoing personnel costs. Special fund revenues and expenditures are also affected, as 
discussed below. 
 
Impact of the Fiscal 2025 Budget on the ENOUGH Grant Program 
 
The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes a total of $20.2 million 
in general funds for GOC, contingent on the enactment of Senate Bill 482 or House Bill 694 
of 2024, for the ENOUGH Grant Program, LMBs, and development of the database 
required under this bill. More specifically, the budget includes: 
 
 
$10.0 million in general funds to support the ENOUGH Grant Program (these funds 
are assumed to accrue as special funds to the ENOUGH Grant Fund); 
 
$5.0 million in general funds to develop a public centralized database of resources 
for children, youth, and families in the State, with excess funds used for 
ENOUGH grants (any unspent funds for these two purposes revert to the 
ENOUGH Grant Fund); 
 
$5.0 million in general funds for CCIF to provide funding to LMBs (any unspent 
funds must revert to the ENOUGH Grant Fund); and 
 
$239,625 in general funds for GOC to fund three partnership liaison positions to 
support implementation of the bill. 
 
As the bill effectuates these contingent appropriations, general fund expenditures increase 
by a total $20.2 million in fiscal 2025 for, or related to, the ENOUGH Grant Program.  
 
GOC special fund revenues increase by $10.0 million to reflect the budgeted funds for the 
ENOUGH Grant Program that are assumed to be used for grants. Accordingly, special fund 
expenditures may increase beginning in fiscal 2025. However, this analysis assumes all 
such funding is not expended that year; instead, a large portion of the $10.0 million is likely 
carried forward as fund balance for use in future years. As the bill specifies that the 
ENOUGH Grant Fund may only be used for grants, the other $10.2 million in budgeted 
general funds do not accrue to the special fund – at least not for expenditure in fiscal 2025. 
Indeed, as provided for in the budget, administrative and other expenditures associated with 
the bill must come from other sources (in this case, general funds).  
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 482/ Page 7 
Out-year Funding for the ENOUGH Grant Fund 
 
In fiscal 2026, general fund expenditures increase by at least $15.0 million to reflect the 
mandated appropriation for that year only to the ENOUGH Grant Fund. GOC special fund 
revenues increase accordingly. While special fund expenditures may increase by that 
amount as well, it is likely that a large portion of that funding is again carried forward as 
fund balance for expenditure as ENOUGH grants in future years. Also, to the extent GOC 
identifies additional federal or private-sector funding sources for the program, special fund 
revenues (and possibly expenditures) increase by an additional indeterminate amount. 
Further, to the extent that any of the $10.0 million in funds appropriated to GOC in 
fiscal 2025 for the database and LMBs is unspent that year, the residual funds revert to the 
ENOUGH Grant Fund and are available beginning in fiscal 2026 for additional 
ENOUGH grants.  
 
Expenditures for the Governor’s Office for Children  
 
ENOUGH Grant Program:  Under the bill, as part of the ENOUGH Grant Program, GOC 
must (1) annually identify and communicate to each local government eligible 
neighborhoods for the program; (2) engage with the neighborhood community and approve 
lead partners for eligible neighborhoods; (3) establish qualifications, standards, and 
processes for determining lead partners; (4) subject to the availability of funds, provide 
grants to eligible neighborhoods to complete a needs assessment; (5) subject to the 
availability of funds, provide neighborhood implementation grants to qualified lead 
partners; (6) beginning in fiscal 2025, prepare an annual report on the program; and (7) by  
June 1, 2027, conduct an evaluation of the program and report to the Governor and 
specified committees of the General Assembly.  
 
As noted above, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly includes 
$10.0 million in general funds, specifically for GOC to implement the program, as well as 
$239,625 in general funds for three partnership liaison positions to support program 
implementation – all contingent on the enactment of the bill. Thus, GOC special fund 
revenues increase by $10.0 million in fiscal 2025 and special fund expenditures increase 
by an indeterminate amount (up to $10.0 million in fiscal 2025) to provide  
ENOUGH grants. The amount of grants awarded in any given year cannot be reliably 
estimated at this time. Any such expenditures must be made only in accordance with the 
State budget. Any unspent funds are available in future years for authorized grant awards. 
As noted above, at least $15.0 million must be appropriated to the ENOUGH Grant Fund 
in fiscal 2026. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by at least $15.0 million to 
meet the mandate, while special fund revenues increase correspondingly. Additional 
annual funding for grant awards is discretionary beginning in fiscal 2027 and has not been 
accounted for in this analysis. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 482/ Page 8 
GOC general fund expenditures increase by at least $239,625 in fiscal 2025, the amount 
budgeted for positions, which accounts for a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s 
July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring three partnership 
liaisons to implement the program; identify and engage with eligible neighborhoods; 
establish specified qualifications, standards, and processes; issue and monitor grants; 
pursue additional federal and private-sector funding; and prepare an annual report. It 
includes salaries, fringe benefits, and ongoing operating expenses.  
 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
New Positions 
3.0 
3.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$236,185 
$565,440 
Operating Expenses 
3,440 
25,883 
General Fund Personnel Expenditures 
$239,625 
$591,323 
 
This analysis further assumes that at least three more positions – to oversee grants and help 
manage the program – are needed in fiscal 2026 when the program is more fully 
operational, increasing total personnel costs in fiscal 2026 to at least $591,323. As the 
ENOUGH Grant Fund may only be used for grants, the costs associated with these 
positions must continue to be funded with general funds in fiscal 2026 and the out-years.  
 
Future year expenditures reflect full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that more 
personnel are needed, additional positions can be requested through the budget process.  
 
Related CCIF Awards to LMBs:  Also, as discussed above, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed 
by the General Assembly includes $5.0 million in general funds to provide funding for 
LMBs, contingent on the enactment of the bill, specifically to be allocated in the 
jurisdictions in the same proportion as other awards to all LMBs. This funding is assumed 
to be fully expended in fiscal 2025; however, should any of the funding remain unspent, it 
reverts to the ENOUGH Grant Fund for expenditure as grants in future years.  
 
Related Database of Resources:  Uncodified language requires GOC, by July 1, 2025, to 
develop a public centralized database of all State, local, and private resources for children, 
youth, and families in the State. The fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the General Assembly 
includes $5.0 million in general funds for this purpose, contingent on the enactment of the 
bill. Thus, GOC general fund expenditures increase by up to $5.0 million in fiscal 2025 to 
develop the database. Funds not needed for this purpose may be expended as 
ENOUGH grants, and any funds not expended for these two purposes revert to the 
ENOUGH Grant Fund to be used for ENOUGH grants in future years. Thus, to the extent 
the cost to develop the database is less than $5.0 million, unspent funds may be used to 
provide additional grants under the program.  
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 482/ Page 9 
Children’s Cabinet:  Outside of the ENOUGH Grant Program, GOC must staff the 
Children’s Cabinet, which must submit an annual report by December 1, 2024, and 
annually thereafter and submit the State’s three-year plan for children, youth, and families 
to the General Assembly by December 1, 2025. This analysis does not reflect any 
additional costs that may be incurred to support the Children’s Cabinet.  
 
Neighborhood Indicators of Poverty:  GOC must also, by October 1, 2025, submit a report 
on neighborhood indicators of poverty to the General Assembly, AIB, and MSDE, as 
specified. GOC advises that an additional full-time position with requisite expertise, as 
well as at least $50,000 to support external data analysis, are necessary to complete the 
report. DLS notes that, as the report is only required to be completed on a one-times basis, 
contractual services are more appropriately used for this purpose. Thus, GOC general fund 
expenditures increase by at least $100,000 (assumed to be incurred as $75,000 in 
fiscal 2025 and $25,000 in fiscal 2026) for contractual services to complete the 
neighborhood indicators of poverty report by the October 1, 2025 deadline.  
 
Impact on Expenditures for the Accountability and Implementation Board 
 
By December 1, 2025, AIB must submit a methodological recommendation to the 
General Assembly based on GOC’s neighborhood indicators of poverty report. The 
recommendation must include whether there should be an updated methodology for 
calculating eligibility for compensatory grants to local boards, and if so, an updated 
methodology for calculating the compensatory education formula. AIB can make this 
recommendation using existing budgeted resources. This analysis does not reflect any 
potential impact on the methodology used to calculate the compensatory education formula 
nor any potential future impact on State education aid that may result.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As noted above, the fiscal 2025 budget as passed by the 
General Assembly includes $5.0 million in general funds to provide funding to LMBs, 
contingent on the enactment of the bill. As the bill satisfies this contingency, funds to local 
jurisdictions for LMBs increase by $5.0 million in fiscal 2025. Funds must be allocated to 
jurisdictions in the same proportion as other awards made in fiscal 2025. Any unspent funds 
revert to the ENOUGH Grant Fund. While most LMBs are local government entities, a few 
are nonprofit organizations – nevertheless, for purposes of this analysis, the local 
jurisdiction is assumed to benefit from the funding. The additional funding by jurisdiction 
is shown in Exhibit 1. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 482/ Page 10 
 
Exhibit 1 
Additional Funding to Local Management Boards from Contingent Appropriation 
Fiscal 2025 
 
Jurisdiction 
Additional Funding 
Allegany 
$127,942 
Anne Arundel 
343,148 
Baltimore City 
807,547 
Baltimore 
386,181 
Calvert 
98,712 
Caroline 
155,760 
Carroll 
141,849 
Cecil 
145,809 
Charles 
106,110 
Dorchester 
119,819 
Frederick 
108,813 
Garrett 
146,593 
Harford 
157,853 
Howard 
123,865 
Kent 
104,045 
Montgomery 
422,191 
Prince George’s 
476,715 
Queen Anne’s 
92,691 
St. Mary’s 
111,056 
Somerset 
79,827 
Talbot 
130,065 
Washington 
186,453 
Wicomico 
211,345 
Worcester 
215,611 
Total 
$5,000,000 
 
Note:  The fiscal 2025 budget includes $5.0 million in general funds to provide funding to local management 
boards, contingent on the enactment of Senate Bill 482 or House Bill 694 of 2024. Funds must be allocated 
to jurisdictions in the same proportion as other awards made in fiscal 2025. Any unspent funds revert to the 
ENOUGH Grant Fund. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services  
 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 482/ Page 11 
Additional Comments:  The fiscal 2025 budget recognizes $20.0 million in special funds 
associated with the ENOUGH Grant Program; however, this amount encompasses almost 
all monies made available to GOC contingent on the enactment of the bill (except for 
monies associated with the positions), including $5.0 million earmarked for development 
of the specified database and $5.0 million for LMBs, which, if unexpended by year end, 
are directed to the ENOUGH Grant Fund. Thus, this analysis assumes that those 
two appropriations are not immediately deposited into the special fund, but are expended 
as general funds, with any unspent portion reverting to the ENOUGH Grant Fund. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 694 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Appropriations and Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  National Governor’s Association; Baltimore, Frederick, and 
Montgomery counties; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Association of 
County Health Officers; Governor’s Office; Accountability and Implementation Board; 
Maryland State Department of Education; University System of Maryland; Morgan State 
University; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Housing 
and Community Development; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 16, 2024 
Enrolled - May 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 13, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 13, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 482/ Page 12 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: 
Governor’s Office for Children - Engaging Neighborhoods, Organizations, 
Unions, Governments, and Households (ENOUGH) Grant Program 
(ENOUGH Act of 2024) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB 482 
 
 
 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X__ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
     
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 12