START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 478 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 478 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Families Serve Act of 2024 
 
 
This Administration bill authorizes employers to grant a hiring and promotion preference 
to the spouse of an eligible service member. The bill specifies that granting this preference 
does not violate any State or local equal employment opportunity law. An “eligible service 
member” is a full-time active-duty member of any branch of the uniformed services, and 
the bill makes a conforming change to the definition of an “eligible veteran” for hiring or 
promotion preferences authorized under current law. Additionally, the bill requires all 
appointing authorities in the State Personnel Management System (SPMS) to apply a credit 
of 10 points on a selection test for an applicant who is an “eligible spouse,” defined as an 
individual who is married to a full-time active-duty member of any branch of the uniformed 
services. The definition of “eligible veteran” for selection test credits is also expanded to 
include a veteran of any branch of the uniformed services, not just the armed forces. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. No 
effect on revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill does not apply to local governments as employers. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has minimal or 
no impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs 
with this assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 478/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An employer may grant a hiring and promotion preference to an eligible 
veteran, the spouse of an eligible veteran who has a service-connected disability, or the 
surviving spouse of a deceased eligible veteran. An “eligible veteran” is a veteran of any 
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces who has received an honorable discharge or a certificate 
of satisfactory completion of military service, including the National Guard, the military 
reserves, the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service, and the Commissioned 
Corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Granting this preference 
does not violate any State or local equal employment opportunity law. The State and local 
governments are not considered employers. 
 
State Employees within the State Personnel Management System 
 
SPMS has four major employment categories designated in statute:   
 
 
executive service, which consists of chief administrators of principal units or 
comparable positions, including deputy secretaries or assistant secretaries; 
 
management service, which consists of positions that involve direct responsibility 
for the oversight and management of personnel and financial resources and that 
require the exercise of discretion and independent judgment; 
 
professional service, which consists of positions that require advanced knowledge 
in a field of science or learning and that normally require a professional license, 
advanced degree, or both; and 
 
skilled service, which consists of all other positions. 
 
Selection Process:  When a skilled service or professional service position within SPMS is 
to be filled, a unit must prepare a position selection plan that includes, among other 
requirements, a plan of development of any selection test to be administered to qualified 
applicants. Job announcements for these positions must also describe the type of selection 
test to be administered to applicants who meet the position’s minimum requirements. 
 
Appointing authorities may use any appropriate selection process to rate qualified 
applicants, including job relatedness, reliability, and scores on selection tests. Selection 
tests must be free of charge to applicants and open to all qualified applicants, except to 
those who falsify information on an application. 
 
Application of Credits and Placement in Categories:  Credits may be applied to the results 
of selection tests for applicants who are otherwise qualified and have at least the minimum 
passing score on a selection test for:  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 478/ Page 3 
 
current State employees (one-quarter point for each year of State service, up to 
5 points); 
 
veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces, spouses of veterans with service-connected 
disabilities, and surviving spouses of a deceased eligible veteran (10 points, plus 
2 points for a former prisoner of war); 
 
residents of high unemployment counties for specified positions in correctional 
facilities (5 points); 
 
State residents (5 points); and 
 
individuals with a disability (5 points). 
 
Based on all appropriate standards used, the appointing authority must place all candidates 
in the following categories:  (1) best qualified; (2) better qualified; (3) qualified; 
(4) unsatisfactory; and (5) additional categories related to special circumstances. 
Generally, candidates are to be listed by random order within each category. 
 
Background:  The federal government offers the Military Spouse Noncompetitive 
Appointing Authority, which allows a federal agency to appoint spouses of current 
active-duty service members without competition. However, the authority does not entitle 
spouses to an appointment over any other applicant; it is used at the discretion of an agency. 
This authority sunsets December 31, 2028. 
 
Unlawful Employment Discrimination 
 
State law generally prohibits an employer with at least 15 employees from discharging, 
failing or refusing to hire, or otherwise discriminating against any individual with respect 
to the individual’s compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because 
of race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, marital status, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, genetic information, or disability. The State and local governments are considered 
employers. 
 
Regardless of employer size, under the State’s Equal Pay for Equal Work law, an employer 
may not discriminate between employees in any occupation by providing less favorable 
employment opportunities based on sex or gender identity or paying a wage to employees 
of one sex or gender identity at a rate less than the rate paid to employees of another sex or 
gender identity if both employees work in the same establishment and perform work of 
comparable character or work on the same operation, in the same business, or of the same 
type. The State and local governments are considered employers. 
 
The federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for 
enforcing federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or an 
employee because of the person’s race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy, gender 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 478/ Page 4 
identity, and sexual orientation), national origin, age (40 or older), disability, or genetic 
information. It is also illegal to discriminate against a person because the person 
complained about discrimination, filed a charge of discrimination, or participated in an 
employment discrimination investigation or lawsuit. Most employers with at least 
15 employees are covered by EEOC laws (20 employees in age discrimination cases). Most 
labor unions and employment agencies are also covered. Antidiscrimination laws apply to 
all types of work situations, including hiring, firing, promotions, harassment, training, 
wages, and benefits.  
 
Uniformed Services 
 
The “armed forces,” as defined by 10 U.S.C. § 101, means the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, 
Air Force, Space Force, and the Coast Guard. The “uniformed services” means the armed 
forces, the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, and the commissioned corps 
of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 604 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Labor; Maryland Department of Transportation; 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management; U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 18, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 478/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Families Serve Act of 2024  
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB 478 
 
PREPARED BY: Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs (Andrew Libraty) 
 
 
PART A. ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
_X_ WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B. ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
The legislation will affect the ability of small businesses to pursue preferential hiring and 
promotions for a class of employees. It will positively affect employers ability to hire and retain 
talent. Military spouses are often overeducated and underemployed relative to the general 
population. Should this legislation pass, small businesses will have the ability to pursue a capable 
workforce with more ease. 
 

END OF PAGE 5