START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

Chapter 408

(Senate Bill 482)

AN ACT concerning

Governor’s Office for Children – Engaging Neighborhoods, Organizations,
Unions, Governments, and Households (ENOUGH) Grant Program
(ENOUGH Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Children’s Cabinet to meet a certain number of times each
year; requiring the Special Secretary of the Governor’s Office for Children to chair the
Children’s Cabinet; requiring the Governor’s Office for Children to staff the Children’s
Cabinet; requiring the Accountability and Implementation Board to submit a certain
recommendation to the General Assembly on or before a certain date; establishing the
Governor’s Office for Children and the Special Secretary of the Governor’s Office for
Children as the head of the Office; requiring the Special Secretary to establish the
ENOUGH grant program, subject to certain requirements; requiring the Office to
assign certain staff for a certain purpose; establishing certain reporting and
evaluation requirements; establishing the ENOUGH Grant Fund as a special,
nonlapsing fund; requiring interest earnings of the Fund to be credited to the Fund;
requiring the Children’s Cabinet to submit a certain plan on or before a certain date;
requiring the Office to develop a certain database on or before a certain date; and
generally relating to the Governor’s Office for Children.

BY repealing
Article – Education
Section 5–223(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY renumbering
Article – Education
Section 5–223(h)
to be Section 5–223(g)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 8–103 and 8–104
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 408 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)189. and 190.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)191.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 9–2801 through 9–2805 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 28. Governor’s
Office for Children”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 5–223(g) of Article – Education of the Annotated Code of Maryland be
repealed.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section(s) 5–223(h) of Article
– Education of the Annotated Code of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 5–223(g).

SECTION ~~1.~~ 3. ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~ENACTED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GENERAL~~ ~~ASSEMBLY~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MARYLAND~~
AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

8–103.

(A) THE CHILDREN’S CABINET SHALL MEET NOT LESS THAN FOUR TIMES A
YEAR IN OPEN SESSION TO DISCUSS MATTERS RELATED TO STATE NEEDS FOR
CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIES.

(B) THE SPECIAL SECRETARY SHALL CHAIR THE CHILDREN’S CABINET.

(C) THE OFFICE SHALL STAFF THE CHILDREN’S CABINET.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

(D) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE CHILDREN’S CABINET SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ON THE CHILDREN’S CABINET MEETINGS IN THE PRIOR YEAR AND ACTIVITIES
PLANNED IN THE UPCOMING YEAR.

8–104.

(A) (1) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2025, THE OFFICE SHALL SUBMIT A
REPORT ON NEIGHBORHOOD INDICATORS OF POVERTY TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
ACCOUNTABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION BOARD, AND THE DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION.

(2) THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
INCLUDE AN ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT METHODS USED TO CALCULATE INDICATORS
OF POVERTY IN ORDER TO DETERMINE:

(I) ELIGIBILITY FOR THE COMPENSATORY EDUCATION
PROGRAM UNDER § 5–222 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE, INCLUDING THE DATA
NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT EACH METHODOLOGY; AND

(II) ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE CONCENTRATION OF POVERTY
SCHOOL GRANT PROGRAM UNDER § 5–223 OF THE EDUCATION ARTICLE,
INCLUDING THE DATA NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT EACH METHODOLOGY.

(3) IN COMPLETING THE REPORT REQUIRED UNDER THIS
SUBSECTION, THE OFFICE SHALL:

(I) EVALUATE THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY SURVEY DATA
AVAILABLE ACROSS GEOGRAPHIC AREAS IN THE SMALL INCOME AND POVERTY
ESTIMATES PROGRAM TO PROVIDE SCHOOL DISTRICT POVERTY ESTIMATES;

(II) EVALUATE THE AREA DEPRIVATION INDEX DEVELOPED BY
THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN–MADISON TO RANK NEIGHBORHOODS BY
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS DISADVANTAGE;

(III) ANALYZE HOW OTHER STATES APPROACH MEASURING
POVERTY;

(IV) ANALYZE HOW OTHER STATES CALCULATE ELIGIBILITY FOR
STATE PROGRAMS FOR SCHOOL DISTRICTS THAT PARTICIPATE IN THE FEDERAL
COMMUNITY ELIGIBILITY PROVISION; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 408 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(V) CONSULT WITH EACH LOCAL SCHOOL SYSTEM FOR INPUT.

(4) ANY STATE AGENCY, INCLUDING THE DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION AND THE MARYLAND LONGITUDINAL DATA SYSTEM CENTER, SHALL
SHARE ANY DATA NEEDED BY THE OFFICE TO COMPLETE THE REPORT REQUIRED
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025, THE ACCOUNTABILITY AND
IMPLEMENTATION BOARD, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF
LEGISLATIVE SERVICES AND THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT,
SHALL SUBMIT A METHODOLOGICAL RECOMMENDATION, BASED ON THE OFFICE’S
REPORT REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A) OF THIS SECTION, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

(2) THE RECOMMENDATION SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL INCLUDE WHETHER THERE SHOULD BE AN UPDATED METHODOLOGY FOR
CALCULATING ELIGIBILITY FOR COMPENSATORY GRANTS UNDER § 5–222 OF THE
EDUCATION ARTICLE, AND IF SO, AN UPDATED METHODOLOGY FOR CALCULATING
THE COMPENSATORY EDUCATION FORMULA UNDER § 5–222 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

189. the Teacher Retention and Development Fund; [and]

190. the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund; AND

191. THE ENOUGH GRANT FUND.

Article – State Government

SUBTITLE 28. GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR CHILDREN.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

9–2801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD” MEANS A NEIGHBORHOOD THAT INCLUDES
CENSUS TRACTS WITH MORE THAN 30% OF CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY AND IS
SERVED BY, AS DEFINED BY THE OFFICE, A COMMUNITY SCHOOL WITH A
CONCENTRATION OF POVERTY LEVEL, AS DEFINED IN § 5–223 OF THE EDUCATION
ARTICLE, OF:

(1) IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND 2026, AT LEAST 80%;

(2) IN FISCAL YEAR 2027 THROUGH FISCAL YEAR 2029, AT LEAST 75%;

(3) IN FISCAL YEAR 2030, AT LEAST 60%; AND

(4) IN FISCAL YEAR 2031, AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, AT
LEAST 55%.

(B) (1) “FISCAL AGENT” MEANS AN ENTITY THAT MANAGES FISCAL
MATTERS FOR THE GRANT APPLICANT OR GRANT RECIPIENT.

(2) “FISCAL AGENT” INCLUDES A NONPROFIT ENTITY, LOCAL
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY, OR LOCAL MANAGEMENT BOARD.

(C) “FUND” MEANS THE ENOUGH GRANT FUND.

(D) “LEAD PARTNER” MEANS A NONPROFIT OR GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY
~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~RESPONSIBLE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~COORDINATING~~ ~~ACROSS~~ ~~PARTNER~~ ~~ORGANIZATIONS~~ ~~AND~~
~~DRIVING~~ ~~PLAN~~ ~~IMPLEMENTATION~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~GRANT~~ ~~APPLICANT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~GRANT~~
~~RECIPIENT.~~

(E) (D) “OFFICE” MEANS THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR CHILDREN.

(F) (1) “PARTNER ORGANIZATION” MEANS AN ENTITY PARTICIPATING IN
AN ENOUGH GRANT PARTNERSHIP.

~~(2)~~ ~~“PARTNER~~ ~~ORGANIZATION”~~ ~~INCLUDES:~~

(I) A LOCAL COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION;

(II) A UNION OR WORKER ORGANIZATION;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 408 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(III) AN ANCHOR INSTITUTION, INCLUDING LOCAL HEALTH CARE
ORGANIZATIONS, INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, LOCAL SCHOOL
DISTRICTS, WORKFORCE INVESTMENT BOARDS, OR LOCAL CARE MANAGEMENT
~~TEAMS;~~

(IV) A SMALL BUSINESS OWNER OR ORGANIZATION;

(V) A LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; AND

(VI) A FAITH–BASED ORGANIZATION.

(E) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE ENGAGING NEIGHBORHOODS,
ORGANIZATIONS, UNIONS, GOVERNMENTS, AND HOUSEHOLDS (ENOUGH) GRANT
PROGRAM.

(G) (F) “SPECIAL SECRETARY” MEANS THE SPECIAL SECRETARY OF THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR CHILDREN.

9–2802.

(A) THERE IS A GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR CHILDREN.

(B) THE HEAD OF THE OFFICE IS THE SPECIAL SECRETARY OF THE
GOVERNOR’S OFFICE FOR CHILDREN.

9–2803.

(A) (1) SUBJECT TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION, THE SPECIAL
SECRETARY SHALL ESTABLISH AN ENOUGH GRANT PROGRAM DESIGNED TO
ADVANCE PLACE–BASED STRATEGIES TARGETING CHILD POVERTY.

(2) THE PROGRAM ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION MAY INCLUDE:

(I) A PHASED APPROACH TO GRANT AWARDS; AND

(II) TIERS OF GRANT AWARDS.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF ENOUGH GRANTS MADE BY THE OFFICE UNDER
THIS SECTION IS TO:

(1) INCREASE COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

(2) PROVIDE “CRADLE TO CAREER” ACCESS TO HIGH–QUALITY
EDUCATION AND CARE;

(3) CONNECT RESIDENTS TO QUALITY JOBS AND IN–DEMAND
OCCUPATIONS;

(4) ENABLE FAMILY–SUSTAINING INCOME AND ACCESS TO
AFFORDABLE HIGH–QUALITY HOUSING, CHILD CARE, AND HEALTH CARE,
INCLUDING REPRODUCTIVE, MATERNAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND MENTAL HEALTH CARE;
~~AND~~

(5) PROVIDE HIGH–QUALITY SUPPORT FOR CHILDREN WITH
DISABILITIES, CHILD WELFARE, AND JUSTICE–INVOLVED YOUTH AND YOUNG
ADULTS;

(6) CONNECT INDIVIDUALS TO STATE PROGRAMS; AND

(7) LEVERAGE FEDERAL, LOCAL, AND PRIVATE FUNDING FOR THE
ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD.

(C) THE OFFICE MAY AWARD ENOUGH GRANTS FOR:

(1) TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT OF GRANT
~~APPLICATIONS;~~

(2) NEIGHBORHOOD IMPLEMENTATION GRANTS TO SUPPORT
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMMUNITY–DRIVEN AND PLACE–BASED STRATEGIES;

(3) REGIONAL IMPLEMENTATION GRANTS OF UP TO $500,000 EACH
YEAR FOR UP TO 3 YEARS FOR REGIONAL NONPROFIT ENTITIES AND LOCAL
GOVERNING BODIES, INCLUDING LOCAL MANAGEMENT BOARDS, TO SUPPORT
ENOUGH APPLICANTS WITHIN THEIR JURISDICTION TO IMPLEMENT COMPONENTS
OF COMMUNITY–DRIVEN, PLACE–BASED STRATEGIES; AND

(4) PLANNING GRANTS OF UP TO $300,000 FOR COMMUNITIES THAT
~~REQUIRE~~ ~~ADDITIONAL~~ ~~TIME~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BUILD~~ ~~LOCAL~~ ~~ORGANIZATIONAL~~ ~~CAPACITY~~ ~~TO~~
SUCCESSFULLY EXECUTE A COORDINATED STRATEGY.

(D) AN APPLICANT IS ELIGIBLE FOR A NEIGHBORHOOD IMPLEMENTATION
GRANT UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS SECTION IF THE APPLICANT:

(1) SERVES A COMMUNITY THAT INCLUDES CENSUS TRACTS WITH
MORE THAN 20% OF CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY; AND

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 408 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) REPRESENTS A PARTNERSHIP THAT INCLUDES AT LEAST ONE
COMMUNITY–BASED ORGANIZATION, ONE PUBLIC SCHOOL, AND ONE LOCAL
GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY AND HAS IDENTIFIED:

(I) A LEAD PARTNER; AND

(II) A FISCAL AGENT.

(E) A NEIGHBORHOOD IMPLEMENTATION GRANT RECIPIENT MAY:

(1) DESIGNATE THE LEAD PARTNER TO SERVE AS THE FISCAL AGENT;
~~AND~~

(2) IF THE LEAD PARTNER DOES NOT HAVE EXPERTISE IN DATA USE,
PARTNER WITH AN ADDITIONAL ORGANIZATION WITH THAT EXPERTISE.

(F) THE OFFICE SHALL ATTEMPT TO AWARD NEIGHBORHOOD
IMPLEMENTATION GRANTS UNDER SUBSECTION (C)(2) OF THIS SECTION IN A
MANNER THAT REFLECTS THE GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY OF THE STATE.

(G) (1) THE OFFICE SHALL ASSIGN AT LEAST ONE STAFF PERSON TO
EACH PARTNERSHIP THAT RECEIVES A NEIGHBORHOOD IMPLEMENTATION GRANT.

(2) A STAFF PERSON ASSIGNED TO A PARTNERSHIP UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL:

(I) ASSIST THE PARTNERSHIP WITH NAVIGATING FEDERAL,
STATE, AND PRIVATE FUNDING STREAMS; AND

(II) SERVE AS A LIAISON FOR THE PARTNERSHIP AND STATE
~~GOVERNMENT.~~

(C) (1) THE OFFICE SHALL ANNUALLY IDENTIFY AND COMMUNICATE TO
EACH LOCAL GOVERNMENT ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOODS FOR THE PROGRAM.

(2) (I) THE OFFICE MAY DETERMINE THAT BECAUSE OF THE CLOSE
PROXIMITY OF ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOODS AND THEIR SIMILARITIES IN RESIDENTS
AND NEEDS THAT A REGIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD WOULD MAXIMIZE RESOURCES FOR
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.

(II) A REGIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD MAY NOT RECEIVE LESS
FUNDING UNDER THE PROGRAM BECAUSE OF THE COORDINATION OF MULTIPLE
ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOODS.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

(D) (1) ONCE THE OFFICE IDENTIFIES AN ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD FOR
THE PROGRAM, THE OFFICE SHALL ENGAGE WITH THE NEIGHBORHOOD
COMMUNITY, SEEK INPUT FROM RESIDENTS, AND APPROVE A LEAD PARTNER FOR
THE NEIGHBORHOOD.

(2) A LEAD PARTNER MAY BE A:

(I) LOCAL MANAGEMENT BOARD;

(II) LOCAL GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY;

(III) COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY;

(IV) LOCAL COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION; OR

(V) NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION.

(3) THE OFFICE SHALL ESTABLISH QUALIFICATIONS, STANDARDS,
AND PROCESSES FOR DETERMINING THE LEAD PARTNER FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD.

(4) THE OFFICE MAY ASSIGN STAFF OR PROVIDE TECHNICAL
ASSISTANCE TO ASSIST THE NEIGHBORHOOD.

(5) THE LEAD PARTNER SHALL COORDINATE ALL ASPECTS OF THE
PROGRAM FOR THE NEIGHBORHOOD AND ANY OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES DEFINED
BY THE OFFICE.

(E) (1) (I) SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS, EACH LEAD
PARTNER SHALL RECEIVE A GRANT FROM THE OFFICE, IN AN AMOUNT DETERMINED
BY THE OFFICE, TO COMPLETE A NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR THE ELIGIBLE
NEIGHBORHOOD.

(II) EACH NEEDS ASSESSMENT SHALL INCLUDE:

1. AN ASSESSMENT OF THE PHYSICAL, BEHAVIORAL,
MENTAL HEALTH, EDUCATION, HOUSING, ECONOMIC, AND SAFETY NEEDS OF THE
COMMUNITY;

2. AN IMMEDIATE PLAN TO ACHIEVE THE PURPOSE OF
THE PROGRAM, IF APPLICABLE TO THE ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD;

3. A LONG–TERM PLAN, INCLUDING GOALS, FOR THE
ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD;

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 408 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. A DESCRIPTION OF WHERE STATE FUNDING IS BEING
REQUESTED TO BE SPENT IN THE ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD; AND

5. ANY ADDITIONAL STANDARDS REQUIRED BY THE
OFFICE.

(III) THE OFFICE SHALL ESTABLISH THE STANDARDS AND
POLICIES FOR DEVELOPING A NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR EACH ELIGIBLE
NEIGHBORHOOD, INCLUDING:

1. OPPORTUNITY FOR ENGAGEMENT AND INPUT BY
MEMBERS OF THE ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD’S COMMUNITY;

2. LOCAL MANAGEMENT BOARD INPUT AND ASSISTANCE;
AND

3. DEADLINES AND REVIEW PROCESSES.

(IV) THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT SHALL SUPPLEMENT AND NOT
CONFLICT WITH THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT COMPLETED FOR THE COMMUNITY
SCHOOL SERVED BY THE ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD.

(V) IN COMPLETING THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT, THE LEAD
PARTNER SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE LOCAL COMMUNITY SCHOOL, A COMMUNITY
BASED ORGANIZATION, AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT.

(VI) IN COMPLETING THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT, THE LEAD
PARTNER MAY COORDINATE WITH:

1. LOCAL COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS;

2. UNION OR WORKER ORGANIZATIONS;

3. ANCHOR INSTITUTIONS, INCLUDING LOCAL HEALTH
CARE ORGANIZATIONS, INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION, WORKFORCE
INVESTMENT BOARDS, OR LOCAL CARE MANAGEMENT TEAMS;

4. LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES; OR

5. FAITH–BASED ORGANIZATIONS.

(VII) IF AN ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD HAS COMPLETED A RECENT
ASSESSMENT SIMILAR TO THE NEEDS ASSESSMENT REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION,
THE OFFICE MAY REQUIRE THE ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD TO ONLY SUBMIT AN

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

ABBREVIATED NEEDS ASSESSMENT THAT ADDRESSES THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS
SECTION.

(2) AT THE REQUEST OF THE LEAD PARTNER, THE OFFICE MAY ASSIST
THE LEAD PARTNER TO COMPLETE A NEEDS ASSESSMENT.

(3) (I) THE LEAD PARTNER SHALL SUBMIT THE NEEDS
ASSESSMENT TO THE OFFICE FOR APPROVAL.

(II) IF APPROVED, AND SUBJECT TO THE AVAILABILITY OF
FUNDS, THE OFFICE SHALL PROVIDE A NEIGHBORHOOD IMPLEMENTATION GRANT,
IN AN AMOUNT DETERMINED BY THE OFFICE, TO THE LEAD PARTNER WHO HAS MET
STANDARDS ESTABLISHED BY THE OFFICE, TO COMPLETE THE ITEMS IN THE
ELIGIBLE NEIGHBORHOOD’S NEEDS ASSESSMENT.

(H) (F) THE OFFICE MAY CONSULT WITH ENTITIES THAT IT DEEMS
RELEVANT TO SUPPORT ENOUGH PARTNERSHIPS.

9–2804.

(A) THE OFFICE MAY APPLY FOR, RECEIVE, AND SPEND GRANTS–IN–AID BY
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OR ANY OF ITS AGENCIES, THE PRIVATE SECTOR, OR
ANY OTHER FUNDS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE OFFICE FOR USE IN CARRYING OUT
THE POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE SPECIAL SECRETARY OR THE OFFICE.

(B) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2025 AND IN EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER, THE OFFICE SHALL PREPARE AN ANNUAL REPORT OF THE ENOUGH
GRANT PROGRAM THAT INCLUDES:

(1) ACCOUNTING OF FINANCIAL RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES; AND

(2) PROGRESS AND OUTCOME METRICS AS DEFINED BY THE OFFICE.

(C) (1) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 1, 2027, THE OFFICE SHALL CONDUCT AN
EVALUATION OF THE ENOUGH GRANT PROGRAM AND REPORT ITS FINDINGS TO
THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THIS ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY SENATE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE
ENVIRONMENT, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, AND HEALTH AND
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, AND THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON
CHILDREN, YOUTH, AND FAMILIES.

(2) THE REPORT MADE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION
SHALL INCLUDE AN ANALYSIS OF:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 408 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(I) THE PROGRESS MADE IN JURISDICTIONS RECEIVING
ENOUGH GRANTS BASED ON THE OUTCOME METRICS PRODUCED BY THE GRANT
RECIPIENTS;

(II) THE IMPACT OF PROGRAM ACTIVITIES WITH RESPECT TO
REDUCING THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN LIVING IN POVERTY; AND

(III) POLICY CHANGES ENACTED AT THE STATE AND LOCAL
LEVEL DESIGNED TO ENABLE BETTER COORDINATION AND EFFICACY.

9–2805.

(A) THERE IS AN ENOUGH GRANT FUND.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO SUPPORT ENOUGH GRANTS MADE
BY THE OFFICE UNDER § 9–2803 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) THE SPECIAL SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(D) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(E) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) INTEREST EARNINGS; AND

(3) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR ENOUGH GRANTS MADE UNDER §
9–2803 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(G) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 408

(H) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(I) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE GOVERNOR SHALL INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF AT LEAST $15,000,000 TO THE FUND.

(J) AN APPROPRIATION MADE UNDER SUBSECTION (I) OF THIS SECTION IS
SUPPLEMENTAL TO AND NOT INTENDED TO TAKE THE PLACE OF ANY FEDERAL
FUNDING RECEIVED FOR PLACE–BASED SUPPORT.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2025, the Children’s Cabinet shall submit the State’s 3–year plan for children, youth, and
families, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, to the General
Assembly.

SECTION 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before July 1, 2025, the
Governor’s Office for Children shall develop a public centralized database of all State, local,
and private resources available for children, youth, and families in the State.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13