START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 434 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 434 
(Senator King, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Education - State Library Resource Center - Funding 
 
 
This bill increases the per capita funding amount that must be provided to the State Library 
Resource Center (SLRC) beginning in fiscal 2025. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $616,500 in FY 2025 increasing to 
$632,800 in FY 2029; future year increases reflect population growth. The State budget 
includes funding for the enhancement in FY 2025. Revenues are not affected. This bill 
increases a mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
616,500 
620,700 
624,900 
629,200 
632,800 
Net Effect 
($616,500) 
($620,700) 
($624,900) 
($629,200) 
($632,800)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Although local library systems benefit from SLRC funding, local finances 
are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill increases per capita State aid for SLRC by $0.10 beginning in 
fiscal 2025. Exhibit 1 compares per capita State aid under current law and under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 434/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Per Capita State Library Resource Center Aid Increases under the Bill 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
 
Fiscal Year 
Current Law 
Proposed 
Difference 
% Difference 
2025 
$1.97 
$2.07 
$0.10 
5.1% 
2026 
1.97 
2.07 
0.10 
5.1% 
2027 
1.97 
2.07 
0.10 
5.1% 
2028 
1.97 
2.07 
0.10 
5.1% 
2029 
1.97 
2.07 
0.10 
5.1% 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Library Network 
 
Since 1888, the State has provided funds to support public libraries throughout the State 
under what is now known as the State library network. The network consists of the 
Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library System in Baltimore City, three regional 
resource centers, and metropolitan cooperative service programs. All these systems receive 
State funding for operating expenses. 
 
The Central Library of the Enoch Pratt Free Library operates as the designated SLRC. The 
funding level for SLRC is set at $1.97 per resident. The fiscal 2025 State budget includes 
$12.9 million in funding for SLRC, which includes $775,800 in enhanced funding over the 
current law amount. 
 
Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled 
 
The Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled (LBPD) provides 
comprehensive library services to eligible blind and physically disabled residents of 
Maryland, which includes individuals who are legally blind, visually or physically limited, 
or reading disabled. The library is part of the national network of the National Library 
Services for the Blind and Print Disabled through the Library of Congress. The National 
Library Services selects and produces recordings of full-length books and magazines for a 
network of libraries providing alternative format materials. LBPD supplements the 
National Library Service collection with large print books, descriptive videos, children’s 
braille books, and tactile materials such as maps, atlases, and art books. Books are lent on 
a wide range of subjects in braille, audio, and large type. The service is free, statewide, and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 434/ Page 3 
can be provided to individuals via the U.S. mail. Approximately 8,400 Maryland residents 
receive the services provided by the library annually. 
 
LBPD must receive an amount equivalent to at least 25% of the general fund appropriation 
received by SLRC under the required per capita funding amount. Based on the 
current budgeted amount for SLRC, the minimum State funding level for LBPD totals 
approximately $3.2 million. However, the fiscal 2025 State budget includes $3.5 million 
in funding for LBPD, which exceeds the minimum statutory required amount. 
 
State Expenditures:  As shown in Exhibit 2, State formula aid for SLRC increases by 
$616,466 in fiscal 2025 and, based upon current projections for population growth, by 
$632,837 in fiscal 2029. Since the current State funding level for LBPD exceeds the 
minimum statutory required amount, the enhanced funding for SLRC is not projected to 
impact the level of State funding provided to LBPD. The fiscal 2025 State budget includes 
funding for the enhancement in the first year. 
 
 
Exhibit 2 
Increase in Funding for SLRC and LBPD under the Bill 
Fiscal 2025-2029 
 
 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SLRC 
$616,466 
$620,675 
$624,920 
$629,202 
$632,837 
LBPD 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
$616,466 
$620,675 
$624,920 
$629,202 
$632,837 
 
LBPD:  The Maryland State Library for the Blind and Print Disabled 
SLRC:  State Library Resource Center 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 348 and HB 369 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 489 (Delegate D. Jones, et al.) - Ways and Means.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Library Agency; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 434/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - May 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 1, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4