START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 452 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 452 
(Senator Carter) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Courts - Prohibited Liability Agreements - Recreational Facilities 
 
 
This bill establishes that, except for a health club services agreement for services to be 
rendered for an adult, any provision in a contract or agreement relating to the use of a 
“recreational facility” that purports to limit the recreational facility’s liability or release the 
recreational facility from, or indemnify or hold harmless the recreational facility against, 
liability for injury caused by or resulting from the negligence or other wrongful act of the 
recreational facility (or its agents or on-duty employees) is against public policy and is void 
and unenforceable.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Depending on judicial interpretation of the bill and overall use by State 
entities of the applicable provisions in contracts or agreements, the bill may increase 
special fund expenditures and general fund expenditures, as discussed below. Revenues are 
not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  Depending on judicial interpretation of the bill, local expenditures may 
increase due to increased liability exposure, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “recreational facility” is a commercial recreational facility, a 
commercial athletic facility, or an amusement attraction. Gymnasiums and swimming 
pools are specifically included as recreational facilities under the bill. However, the 
following are specifically excluded from the definition of a “recreational facility”:  (1) a 
“lodging establishment” that does not own, maintain, or operate a recreational facility that 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 452/ Page 2 
is available for use by the general public and (2) a unit of State or local government that 
leases land or facilities to a recreational facility. The bill’s provisions may not be 
interpreted to affect, extend, or limit the liability of a governmental entity for a tort or other 
claim subject to the Maryland Tort Claims Act (MTCA – Title 12, Subtitle 1 of the State 
Government Article) or the Local Government Tort Claims Act (LGTCA – Title 5, 
Subtitle 3 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article).  
 
Current Law:  At common law, a contract can be unenforceable if it has an illegal purpose, 
is contrary to public policy, or is unconscionable, among other reasons. Statute contains 
multiple provisions that specifically establish certain types of provisions or agreements to 
be void and against public policy. For example, under § 8-105 of the Real Property Article, 
if the effect of any provision of a lease is to indemnify the landlord, hold the landlord 
harmless, or preclude or exonerate the landlord from any liability to the tenant, or to any 
other person, for any injury, loss, damage, or liability arising from any omission, fault, 
negligence, or other misconduct of the landlord on or about the leased premises or any 
appurtenances used in connection with them that are not within the exclusive control of the 
tenant, the provision is considered to be against public policy and void. Similar provisions 
exist regarding rental agreements between mobile park owners and mobile home residents.  
 
Health Club Services Agreements and Lodging Establishments 
 
Pursuant to § 14-12B-01 of the Commercial Law Article, a “health club services 
agreement” means an agreement under which (1) the buyer of a health club service 
purchases, or becomes obligated to purchase, health club services to be rendered over a 
period longer than three months; (2) the seller of a health club services agreement collects 
more than three months’ payment in advance; and (3) the service to be rendered under the 
agreement is for personal, family, or household use. “Health club services” includes health 
spa, figure salon, weight reduction center, self-defense school, or other physical culture 
service enterprises offering facilities for the preservation, maintenance, encouragement, or 
development of physical fitness or physical well-being. “Health club services” does not 
include agreements for services rendered by (1) any nonprofit public or private school, 
college, or university; (2) the State, or any of its political subdivisions; or (3) any nonprofit 
religious, ethnic, community, or service organization. 
 
Section 15-201 of the Business Regulation Article defines a “lodging establishment” as an 
inn, hotel, motel, or other establishment that has at least four rooms available for a fee to 
transient guests for lodging or sleeping purposes. 
 
Maryland Tort Claims Act 
 
In general, the State is immune from tort liability for the acts of its employees and cannot 
be sued in tort without its consent. Under MTCA, the State statutorily waives its own 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 452/ Page 3 
common law (sovereign) immunity on a limited basis. MTCA applies to tortious acts or 
omissions, including State constitutional torts, by State personnel performed in the course 
of their official duties, so long as the acts or omissions are made without malice or gross 
negligence. Under MTCA, the State essentially “waives sovereign or governmental 
immunity and substitutes the liability of the State for the liability of the state employee 
committing the tort.” Lee v. Cline, 384 Md. 245, 262 (2004).  
 
MTCA covers a multitude of personnel, including some local officials and nonprofit 
organizations. In actions involving malice or gross negligence or actions outside of the 
scope of the public duties of the State employee, the State employee is not shielded by the 
State’s color of authority or sovereign immunity and may be held personally liable.  
 
In general, MTCA limits State liability to $400,000 to a single claimant for injuries arising 
from a single incident. Higher liability limits apply to claims involving law enforcement 
officers that arise on or after July 1, 2022, and claims involving sexual abuse. 
 
Local Government Tort Claims Act  
 
In general, LGTCA limits the liability of a local government to $400,000 per individual 
claim and $800,000 per total claims that arise from the same occurrence for damages from 
tortious acts or omissions (including intentional and constitutional torts). Higher liability 
limits apply to claims involving law enforcement officers that arise on or after July 1, 2022, 
and claims involving child sexual abuse.  
 
LGTCA further establishes that the local government is liable for tortious acts or omissions 
of its employees acting within the scope of employment, so long as the employee did not 
act with actual malice. Thus, LGTCA prevents local governments from asserting a 
common law claim of governmental immunity from liability for such acts or omissions of 
its employees.  
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  Depending on judicial interpretation of the bill and the use 
by State and local entities of the provisions deemed void and unenforceable under the bill, 
State expenditures and local expenditures may increase due to increased liability exposure.  
 
Application of the Bill – In General  
 
While the bill includes a “commercial recreational facility” and a “commercial athletic 
facility” in the definition of a “recreational facility,” it does not define “commercial.” Nor 
is that term specifically defined elsewhere in the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. 
While the bill establishes an exemption for a “unit of State or local government that leases 
land or facilities to a recreational facility,” it does not explicitly and completely exempt 
State and local governments and their land and facilities. The bill further states that its 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 452/ Page 4 
provisions “may not be interpreted to affect, extend, or limit the liability of a governmental 
entity for a tort or other claim subject to [MTCA or LGTCA].” However, it is unclear 
whether this provision functions to completely exempt State or local governments (because 
they are covered under MTCA or LGTCA) or establishes that claims against State and local 
governments that proceed under the bill are subject to MTCA and LGTCA (because State 
and local governments are not completely exempted under the bill, and the use of 
indemnification and hold harmless provisions is independent of MTCA and LGTCA, 
which address the liability of and procedures for an action in tort against the State or a local 
government or its employees). Thus, it is unclear whether the bill applies to indemnification 
and hold harmless provisions in contracts and agreements in nonleasing situations 
involving State or local government recreational facilities or land when a monetary 
transaction is involved (e.g., admissions, entry, or use charges). 
 
With respect to previous legislation, the State Treasurer’s Office (STO) previously advised 
that while the bill’s application to State and local governments is not entirely clear, it 
surmises that based on the provisions referring to MTCA and LGTCA, the bill does not 
apply to State and local governments. STO further advises that the bill’s reference to an 
“amusement attraction” could include a State-owned facility. However, STO does not have 
information on the number of State-owned properties that are amusement attractions.  
 
The Agricultural Fair Board within the Department of Agriculture (MDA) advises that the 
bill has no fiscal or operational impact on the board. MDA further advises that the bill has 
minimal impact on the Maryland Horse Industry Board.  
 
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) previously advised that, as written, it is 
unclear whether this bill’s definition of “recreational facility” covers any of DNR’s 
property or facilities. However, DNR further noted that based on the total language of the 
bill, the department could continue to use indemnification and liability waiver language in 
its lease and use agreements for its properties and facilities because the exemption clauses 
in the bill appear intended to ensure that they would not be rendered void by the other 
provisions of this bill.  
 
Potential Expenditures – State Agencies 
 
Information is not readily available on the full extent of the inclusion of the types of 
provisions rendered void and unenforceable by the bill in contract or agreements pertaining 
to State-owned recreational facilities. To the extent that State entities use such provisions 
and are exposed to increased liability under the bill, special fund expenditures increase for 
the State Insurance Trust Fund (SITF). General fund expenditures may increase if State 
agencies experience higher SITF assessments under the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 452/ Page 5 
STO previously advised that it is not aware of the use of such provisions by State agencies. 
As noted above, DNR agreements to lease and/or authorize the use of some of its properties 
and facilities for recreational purposes contain indemnification and liability waiver 
provisions. To the extent that DNR uses provisions in agreements that would be rendered 
void and unenforceable under the bill, the bill may lead to increased liability exposure for 
the department.  
 
Potential Expenditures – Local Governments 
 
Based on previously obtained information, local governments use indemnification and hold 
harmless provisions in contracts and agreements pertaining to their recreational facilities, 
including nonleasing situations. For the reasons stated above, depending on judicial 
interpretation, local expenditures may increase if the bill increases liability exposure for 
local governments. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill has a meaningful impact on small business recreational 
facilities whose contracts contain these provisions and who face increased liability, 
insurance costs, and/or litigation under the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 207 and SB 291 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 162 (Delegates Cardin and Moon) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Office of the Attorney 
General (Consumer Protection Division); Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Agriculture; State Treasurer’s Office; Department of Natural Resources; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:  Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5