START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 428 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 428 
(Senator McKay) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Garrett County Alcoholic Beverages Act of 2024 
 
 
This bill establishes a Class B-Resort beer license, a Class B-Resort beer and wine (BW) 
license, and a beer, wine, and liquor (BWL) festival license in Garrett County. In 
conjunction with the establishment of the BWL festival license, the bill requires 
Garrett County to select a nonprofit organization to conduct the Garrett County Beer, Wine, 
and Liquor Festival each year. With respect to a Class B-Resort beer or BW license, the 
bill authorizes the Garrett County Board of License Commissioners to issue a license to a 
license holder for a complex that has at least two facilities that are (1) located on the same 
contiguous property; (2) separated by at least 150 feet from the main area of the licensed 
premises; and (3) determined by the board to be a hotel, motel, recreational, or restaurant 
facility. The bill also imposes a State residency requirement on applicants for alcoholic 
beverages licenses; increases the maximum fine, from $3,000 to $5,000, for a violation of 
the county’s alcoholic beverages laws; and extends the Sunday hours of sale for specified 
alcoholic beverages licenses in the county. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Garrett County can implement the bill’s requirements with existing 
resources. Garrett County revenues may increase minimally, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Class B-Resort Beer and Class B-Resort Beer and Wine Licenses 
 
A Class B-Resort beer license authorizes the license holder to sell beer for  
on- or off-premises consumption at a hotel, motel, recreational, or restaurant facility. For a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 428/ Page 2 
Class B-Resort BW license, the license holder may sell beer and wine at those same 
facilities, but wine may only be sold for on-premises consumption. A holder of either 
license is authorized to make sales during the hours and days set forth for a 
Class B licensee. 
 
The annual license fees for a Class B-Resort beer license are $300 for a 6-day license for 
two facilities and $350 for a 7-day license for two facilities. For each additional facility 
under a 6-day license, the annual license fees increase by $150; for each additional facility 
under a 7-day license, the annual license fees increase by $175. The board must impose a 
one-time issuing fee for a new license that is equal to the annual license fee charged to an 
applicant. 
 
For a Class B-Resort BW license, the annual license fees are $700 for a 6-day license for 
two facilities and $820 for a 7-day license for two facilities. For each additional facility 
under a 6-day license, the annual license fees increase by $350; for each additional facility 
under a 7-day license, the annual license fees increase by $410. The board must impose a 
one-time issuing fee for a new license that is equal to the annual license fee charged to an 
applicant. 
 
Class B-Resort Beer, Wine, and Liquor Licenses 
 
The bill authorizes the holder of a Class B-Resort BWL license (a license that already exists 
in the county under current law) to sell beer, wine, and liquor at a recreational facility in 
addition to a hotel, motel, or restaurant. 
 
Garrett County Beer, Wine, and Liquor Festival 
 
The bill establishes the Garrett County Beer, Wine, and Liquor Festival. Under the 
supervision of the board, a nonprofit organization chosen by Garrett County is authorized 
to conduct the festival annually, over a maximum period of three consecutive days. The 
county must ensure that the nonprofit organization it selects to conduct the festival has 
extensive experience in organizing and managing large-scale public events. 
 
The board must choose a location for the festival that is not already licensed. If the location 
chosen allows for Sunday sales, Sunday sales may begin at 10 a.m. The board must adopt 
regulations, as necessary. 
 
Beer, Wine, and Liquor Festival Licenses 
 
The board is authorized to issue four BWL festival licenses each year for the festival. It 
may issue a license to a holder of a retail license or a person that is eligible to hold a Class C 
multiple day or multiple event license. Prior to approving a license, the board must (1) hold 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 428/ Page 3 
a hearing on the license application and (2) publish notice of the hearing in a newspaper of 
general circulation in Garrett County at least seven days before the hearing. 
 
A license authorizes a license holder to display and sell beer, wine, and liquor that is 
manufactured and processed in or outside the State and distributed in the State when the 
license application is filed. A license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor for  
on- or off-premises consumption during the hours and days designated for the festival. 
Beer, wine, and liquor displayed and sold must be invoiced to the license holder by a 
retailer or wholesaler and delivered to the festival from the licensed premises of the retailer 
or wholesaler. A licensed retailer or State wholesaler may enter into an agreement with a 
BWL festival license holder to deliver beer, wine, and liquor, subject to specified time 
restrictions for delivery and returns. 
 
The board must establish the license fee for the BWL festival license and adopt other 
necessary regulations. 
 
Residency Requirement 
 
The bill specifies that at the time an application for an alcoholic beverages license is filed 
in Garrett County, at least one of the applicants must be a State resident and a license that 
has been issued only stays valid as long as at least one of the applicants remains a State 
resident. 
 
Places of Adult Entertainment 
 
Alcoholic beverages may not be brought into an establishment and be consumed or 
transferred therein if the establishment is a place of adult entertainment, as specified. A 
person who operates a place of adult entertainment and knowingly allows alcoholic 
beverages to be brought into the establishment or be consumed or transferred therein is 
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $5,000 per violation. Each day in 
which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation. 
 
Sunday Sales 
 
The bill authorizes Sunday sales for the following alcoholic beverage licenses in 
Garrett County to begin at 6 a.m. (rather than 10 a.m.) in election districts 11 and 15 and 
any other election districts or precincts within election districts in which the voters by 
referendum have approved Sunday sales:   
 
 
Class A, Class B, and Class D beer licenses; 
 
Class A, Class B, and Class D BW licenses; 
 
Class B, Class C, and Class D BWL licenses; and 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 428/ Page 4 
 
Class BDR (deluxe restaurant) BWL licenses. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Class B-Resort Beer, Wine, and Liquor Licenses 
 
The Garrett County Board of License Commissioners may issue a Class B-Resort 
BWL licenses to a license holder for a complex that has at least two facilities that are 
(1) located on the same contiguous property; (2) separated by at least 150 feet from the 
main area of the licensed premises; and (3) determined by the board to be hotel, motel, or 
restaurant. The license authorizes the license holder to sell beer, wine, and liquor for 
on-premises consumption at a hotel, motel, or restaurant and beer for off-premises 
consumption. 
 
The annual license fees for a Class B-Resort BWL licenses are $3,000 for a 6-day license 
for two facilities and $3,500 for a 7-day license for two facilities. For each additional 
facility under a 6-day license, the annual license fees increase by $1,500; for each 
additional facility under a 7-day license, the annual license fees increase by $1,750. The 
board must charge a one-time issuing fee for a new license that is equal to the annual license 
fee charged to an applicant. 
 
Garrett County Beer and Wine Festival 
 
Chapter 169 of 2018 established the Garrett County Beer and Wine Festival and required 
Garrett County to select a nonprofit organization that has extensive experience in 
organizing and managing large scale public events to conduct the festival. The entity 
selected to run the festival, under the supervision of the board, may conduct the festival 
annually for a period of up to three consecutive days. The board must choose a location for 
the festival that is not already licensed. 
 
Festival Licenses 
 
Currently, in Garrett County, the board may issue up to (1) four beer festival licenses 
each year, for a beer festival lasting up to three consecutive days (excluding Sunday); 
(2) four BW festival licenses annually for the Garrett County Beer and Wine Festival; and 
(3) four wine festival licenses annually, for a wine festival lasting up to  
three consecutive days (excluding Sunday). The board has established the fee for a wine 
festival license at $50; the fee for a beer festival license is $100. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 428/ Page 5 
Sunday Sales 
 
Holders of the following alcoholic beverages licenses in Garrett County are authorized to 
make Sunday sales from 10 a.m. to midnight in election districts 11 and 15 and any other 
election districts or precincts within election districts in which the voters by referendum 
have approved Sunday sales: 
 
 
Class A, Class B, and Class D beer licenses; 
 
Class A, Class B, and Class D BW licenses; 
 
Class B, Class C, and Class D BWL licenses; and 
 
Class BDR (deluxe restaurant) BWL licenses. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Garrett County revenues increase minimally, beginning in 
fiscal 2025, to the extent the board issues up to four BWL festival licenses annually. In 
addition, county revenues may increase to the extent that Garrett County imposes higher 
fines, as authorized under the bill, on individuals or entities that violate the county’s 
alcoholic beverages laws. 
 
Alternatively, county revenues may decrease to the extent that any existing holders of 
Class B-Resort BWL licenses decline to renew their licenses and opt instead to apply for a 
Class B-Resort beer license or Class B-Resort BW license (both of which have 
lower annual license fees). However, the Department of Legislative Services assumes that 
most, if not all, existing Class B-Resort license holders will choose to renew their 
BWL licenses to retain authorization to sell liquor in addition to beer and/or wine. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may realize increased sales at festivals due to 
the bill authorizing festival licenses that permit liquor sales. Additionally, the bill’s 
extension of operating hours on Sundays for specified license holders could result in them 
realizing additional sales. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Garrett County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 428/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 12, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6