START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 900

Chapter 900

(Senate Bill 402)

AN ACT concerning

Correctional Training Commission – Membership – Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the membership of the Correctional Training Commission;
requiring certain members of the Commission appointed by the Governor to
represent certain geographic regions; and generally relating to the Correctional
Training Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Correctional Services
Section 8–204
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

8–204.

(a) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “CAPITAL REGION” MEANS FREDERICK COUNTY, MONTGOMERY
COUNTY, AND PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY.

(3) “CENTRAL REGION” MEANS ANNE ARUNDEL COUNTY,
BALTIMORE CITY, BALTIMORE COUNTY, CARROLL COUNTY, HARFORD COUNTY,
AND HOWARD COUNTY.

(4) “EASTERN SHORE REGION” MEANS CAROLINE COUNTY, CECIL
COUNTY, DORCHESTER COUNTY, KENT COUNTY, QUEEN ANNE’S COUNTY,
SOMERSET COUNTY, TALBOT COUNTY, WICOMICO COUNTY, AND WORCESTER
COUNTY.

(5) “SOUTHERN REGION” MEANS CALVERT COUNTY, CHARLES
COUNTY, AND ST. MARY’S COUNTY.

(6) “WESTERN REGION” MEANS ALLEGANY COUNTY, GARRETT

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 900 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

COUNTY, AND WASHINGTON COUNTY.

(B) The Commission consists of the following members:

(1) the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services;

(2) the Secretary of Juvenile Services;

(3) a representative of the Department of Public Safety and Correctional
Services, designated by the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services;

(4) a representative of the Department of Juvenile Services, designated by
the Secretary of Juvenile Services;

(5) a Deputy Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services;

(6) the president of the Maryland Correctional Administrators Association;

(7) the president of the Maryland Sheriffs Association;

(8) the president of the Maryland Criminal Justice Association;

(9) [a representative of the Federal Bureau of Prisons, designated by its
Director;

(10)] the Attorney General of the State;

[(11)] (10) the president of a university or college in the State with a
correctional education curriculum, appointed by the Maryland Higher Education
Commission;

[(12)] (11) one correctional officer of the State recommended by the
exclusive representative for the officers covered under Title 10, Subtitle 9 of this article and
appointed by the Governor; and

[(13)] (12) [four] FIVE correctional officers or officials [of the State]
appointed under subsection [(b)] (C) of this section.

[(b)] (C) (1) The Governor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the
Senate, [four] FIVE correctional officers or officials FROM LOCAL CORRECTIONAL
FACILITIES to be members of the Commission[, at least one of whom shall be a Department
of Juvenile Services employee or official].

(2) The [four] FIVE members appointed under paragraph (1) of this
subsection shall represent [different] EACH OF THE FOLLOWING geographic areas of the

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 900

State:

(I) THE CAPITAL REGION;

(II) THE CENTRAL REGION;

(III) THE EASTERN SHORE REGION;

(IV) THE SOUTHERN REGION; AND

(V) THE WESTERN REGION.

(3) The term of a member who is appointed under paragraph (1) of this
subsection is 3 years.

(4) The terms of the members who are appointed under paragraph (1) of
this subsection are staggered as required by the terms provided for members of the
Commission on [October 1, 1999] JUNE 1, 2024.

(5) (i) At the end of a term, a member who was appointed under
paragraph (1) of this subsection continues to serve until a successor is appointed and
qualifies.

(ii) A member who is appointed after a term has begun serves only
for the remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.

[(c)] (D) Except for the [four] FIVE members appointed by the Governor under
subsection [(b)] (C) of this section, a member of the Commission may serve personally at a
Commission meeting or designate a representative from the member’s unit or association
who may act at any meeting to the same effect as if the member were personally present.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The terms of the following correctional officers or officials appointed by the
Governor shall expire as follows:

(1) the member whose term is scheduled to expire on June 30, 2024, shall
be succeeded by a member appointed from one of the available regions under § 8–204(c)(2)
of the Correctional Services Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act;

(2) the members whose terms are scheduled to expire on June 30, 2025,
shall be succeeded by members appointed from the available regions under § 8–204(c)(2) of
the Correctional Services Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act; and

(3) the member whose term is scheduled to expire on June 30, 2026, shall

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 900 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

be succeeded by a member appointed from one of the available regions under § 8–204(c)(2)
of the Correctional Services Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

(b) The Governor shall appoint a fifth member to the Commission under §
8–204(c) of the Correctional Services Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, to begin
that member’s term on July 1, 2024, from one of the available regions under § 8–204(c)(2)
of the Correctional Services Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4