START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 423 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 423 
(Senator James) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Real Property - Recordation - Procedures 
 
 
This bill requires (1) the treasurer, tax collector, or director of finance for a county to 
provide upon request a certificate clearly enumerating taxes, assessments, and charges due 
to the county or municipality against a property, as specified, and (2) counties to adopt 
procedures to facilitate the issuance of the certificate (including procedures for obtaining a 
statement on a certificate of all taxes, assessments, and charges due to a municipality on 
the transfer of ownership of a property). The certificate bars any charge or assessment 
against the property levied on a bona fide purchaser for value with no notice of the charge 
or assessment prior to the purchase of the property. Furthermore, the bill authorizes a 
county or municipality to collect a fee of up to $55 for the issuance of a certificate. The bill 
requires (rather than authorizes) local clerks of circuit courts and the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) to coordinate, as specified, on procedures to facilitate 
the electronic satisfaction of prior approvals and conditions precedent to recording 
documents or the electronic payment of fees or taxes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  This bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues may increase from fees charged for certificates. 
It is assumed that these fees are sufficient to cover any minimal administrative costs that 
may be incurred. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 423/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If a collecting agent is presented with a certificate within 45 days after 
issuance, the agent must endorse the deed (as required under specified statutory provisions) 
upon payment of all charges set forth in the certificate and any applicable transfer or 
recordation taxes. 
 
The payment of a fee and the issuance of a certificate may not preclude a claim by a county 
or municipality to payment of a charge or assessment against (1) the owner of the property 
at the time of the issuance of the certificate or (2) a person who acquires the property with 
knowledge of the charge or assessment.  
 
Current Law:  
 
Recording Requirements – Generally 
 
Clerks of the circuit courts are responsible for the recording of land records. Generally, 
property may not be transferred on the assessment books or records until (1) all public 
taxes, assessments, and charges currently due and owed on the property have been paid to 
the treasurer, tax collector, or director of finance of the county in which the property is 
assessed and (2) all taxes on personal property in the county due by the transferor have 
been paid when all land owned by the transferor in the county is being transferred. The 
collecting agent must endorse on the deed a certificate showing that all taxes, assessments, 
and charges have been paid. The endorsement is sufficient authority for transfer on the 
assessment books.  
 
In Allegany, Cecil, Charles, Dorchester, Harford, Howard, Kent, Queen Anne’s, Somerset, 
and St. Mary’s counties, no property may be transferred on the assessment books or records 
until (1) all public taxes, assessments, any charges due to a municipal corporation, and 
charges due on the property have been paid and (2) all taxes on personal property in the 
county due by the transferor have been paid when all land owned by the transferor in the 
county and municipal corporation is being transferred. The certificate of the collecting 
agent and municipal corporation designated by law showing that all taxes, assessments, 
and charges have been paid must be endorsed on the deed. The endorsement is sufficient 
authority for transfer on the assessment books.  
 
Statutory provisions include exceptions to the requirements for prepayment of personal 
property taxes in specified situations, including those relating to grants of land made in 
bankruptcy proceedings. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 423/ Page 3 
Maryland Uniform Real Property Electronic Recording Act 
 
Generally, the Maryland Uniform Real Property Electronic Recording Act – Title 3, 
Subtitle 7 of the Real Property Article – establishes that requirements for documents to be 
signed as a condition for recording are met by an electronic document or electronic 
signature under specific circumstances. The Act also authorizes the clerks of the 
circuit courts and SDAT to coordinate with appropriate entities on procedures and 
processes to facilitate the electronic satisfaction of prior approvals and conditions 
precedent to recording documents or the electronic payment of fees or taxes. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues increase to the extent local jurisdictions collect 
additional fees from certificates issued by local government authorities under the bill. In 
some jurisdictions, issuing such certificates and collecting associated fees is current practice 
and there is likely no additional impact. For example, although Montgomery County  
and Baltimore City did not respond to a request for information regarding the fiscal and 
operational impact of the bill, for similar legislation in a prior year, both advised that they 
already issue tax clearance certificates and charge a fee for doing so. Although local 
jurisdictions that do not already issue such certificates may incur minimal administrative 
costs to do so, it is assumed that the fees authorized to be charged under the bill allow any 
potential costs associated with the preparation and issuance of such certificates to be 
recovered. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 971 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford, Kent, Montgomery, and Worcester 
counties; Maryland Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3