START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

Chapter 221

(Senate Bill 430)

AN ACT concerning

Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program and Fund – Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program
in the Department of Housing and Community Development; establishing the
Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program Fund as a special, nonlapsing
fund to provide financial assistance in the form of grants under the provisions of the
Program for certain eligible projects; requiring interest earnings of the Fund to be
credited to the Fund; and generally relating to the Community Health and Safety
Works Grant Program and Fund.

BY adding to
Article – Housing and Community Development
Section 6–1201 through 6–1207 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 12.
Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(i)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)189. and 190.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section 6–226(a)(2)(ii)191.
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Housing and Community Development

SUBTITLE 12. COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY WORKS GRANT PROGRAM.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 221 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

6–1201.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “ELIGIBLE PROJECT” MEANS:

(1) A FACILITY AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT AS
DEFINED IN § 6–1204 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) A BUSINESS DISTRICT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SECURITY PROJECT
AS DEFINED IN § 6–1205 OF THIS SUBTITLE; OR

(3) A COMMUNITY–CENTERED CRIME AND VIOLENCE INTERVENTION
AND PREVENTION PROJECT AS DEFINED IN § 6–1206 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(C) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY WORKS
GRANT PROGRAM.

6–1202.

(A) THERE IS A COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY WORKS GRANT
PROGRAM IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(B) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL
ASSISTANCE IN THE FORM OF GRANTS FOR ELIGIBLE PROJECTS THAT IMPROVE THE
QUALITY OF LIFE WITHIN AND ECONOMIC POTENTIAL OF MARYLAND COMMUNITIES
BY MAKING TARGETED INVESTMENTS IN CRIME PREVENTION STRATEGIES TO
ADDRESS ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH, OR SAFETY CONCERNS IN COMMERCIAL,
PUBLIC, OR RESIDENTIAL AREAS.

6–1203.

THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM; AND

(2) ADOPT REGULATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE PROGRAM.

6–1204.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

(2) “ELIGIBLE APPLICANT” MEANS A TAX–EXEMPT NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION.

(3) (I) “FACILITY AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT”
MEANS A PHYSICAL PROJECT OR A COMMUNITY SERVICE THAT:

1. MAKES A FACILITY OR A COMMUNITY–MANAGED OPEN
SPACE SAFER FOR RESIDENTS AND VISITORS;

2. ENCOURAGES THE AUTHORIZED USES OF A FACILITY
OR A COMMUNITY–MANAGED OPEN SPACE BY INDIVIDUALS; OR

3. SUPPORTS COMMUNITY–LED EFFORTS TO IMPROVE
THE APPEARANCE OF A FACILITY OR A COMMUNITY–MANAGED OPEN SPACE.

(II) “FACILITY AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT”
INCLUDES:

1. THE PURCHASE OR INSTALLATION OF:

A. EQUIPMENT THAT INCREASES THE VISIBILITY OF
VULNERABLE SPACES, INCLUDING SURVEILLANCE TOOLS OR ADEQUATE LIGHTING
FOR EXTERIOR DOORS, COMMON AREAS, OR HALLWAYS; OR

B. LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN FEATURES,
INCLUDING SIGNS, GARDENS, PAVING TREATMENTS, PLANTINGS, OR OTHER
UPGRADES TO PUBLIC SPACES;

2. EFFORTS TO:

A. IMPROVE SIGHT LINES WITHIN, INCREASE VISITATION
TO, OR CLEAN PUBLIC SPACES; OR

B. INTEGRATE LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
FEATURES INTO A FACILITY OR A COMMUNITY–MANAGED OPEN SPACE IN A MANNER
THAT CONNECTS ADJACENT NEIGHBORHOODS FOR VARIOUS USERS WHILE
DISTANCING THE USERS FROM PRIVATE AREAS;

3. TIMELY REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI AND USE OF GRAFFITI
RESISTANCE PRACTICES IN COLLABORATION WITH A PERSON WHO SPECIALIZES IN
THE AREA OF GRAFFITI REMOVAL SERVICES TO PRESENT A VIBRANT, MAINTAINED
SPACE; AND

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 221 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

4. CONTRACTED LAND ENHANCEMENT OR
GROUNDSKEEPING SERVICES TO MAINTAIN OR CLEAN OPEN SPACES AND
FUNCTIONAL SURFACES.

(B) AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT MAY APPLY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE
PROGRAM FOR A FACILITY AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT.

(C) IF AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT SUBMITS AN APPLICATION FOR A GRANT
UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR A FACILITY AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
TO PURCHASE OR INSTALL A NETWORK OF CAMERAS OR LICENSE READERS, THE
ELIGIBLE APPLICANT SHALL INCLUDE WITH THE APPLICATION:

(1) A MONITORING PLAN;

(2) EVIDENCE OF A PARTNERSHIP WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT, THE
GOVERNMENTAL UNIT RESPONSIBLE FOR TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT FOR THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION, AND ANY OTHER RELEVANT PUBLIC AGENCIES; AND

(3) A LIST OF POSSIBLE LOCATIONS OF CAMERAS AND LICENSE
READERS AND A PLAN FOR PROVIDING NOTICE OF LOCATIONS TO PROPERTY
OWNERS.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT MAY AWARD AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT WHO SUBMITS
A COMPLETE APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR
A FACILITY AND COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT A GRANT THAT:

(1) IS AT LEAST $25,000; AND

(2) DOES NOT EXCEED $50,000.

6–1205.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) (I) “BUSINESS DISTRICT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SECURITY
PROJECT” MEANS A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR ENHANCING THE VISUAL
PERCEPTION OF SAFETY ALONG COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS AND ADJACENT AREAS.

(II) “BUSINESS DISTRICT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SECURITY
PROJECT” INCLUDES:

1. THE PURCHASE OR INSTALLATION OF:

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

A. EQUIPMENT THAT INCREASES THE VISIBILITY OF
VULNERABLE SPACES, INCLUDING SURVEILLANCE TOOLS, ADEQUATE LIGHTING
FOR EXTERIOR DOORS, COMMON AREAS, OR HALLWAYS, OR PEDESTRIAN–SCALE
STREET LIGHTING IN HIGH–PEDESTRIAN–TRAFFIC AREAS;

B. VEHICLE OR PEDESTRIAN CONTROL DEVICES;

C. EQUIPMENT TO LOCK OR CONCEAL DUMPSTERS FROM
PUBLIC ACCESS; OR

D. SIGNS, GARDENS, LITTER REMOVAL EQUIPMENT,
PLANTINGS, OR OTHER UPGRADES TO PUBLIC SPACES;

2. EFFORTS TO:

A. TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THE NEEDS OF
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE SURROUNDING AREA TO IMPROVE ACCESSIBILITY FOR ALL
USERS, IN COMPLIANCE WITH AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT STANDARDS; OR

B. INCREASE CITIZEN AND MERCHANT STEWARDSHIP
THROUGH ORGANIZING, EDUCATION, AND OUTREACH ACTIVITIES THAT SEEK TO
ENGAGE RESIDENTS AND OTHER COMMUNITY STAKEHOLDERS TO ACTIVELY
PARTICIPATE IN THE UPKEEP AND IMPROVEMENT OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS AND
PUBLIC SPACES;

3. CONTRACTED CLEANING OR LANDSCAPING SERVICES
TO MAINTAIN OR CLEAN IMPROVED OPEN SPACES;

4. CONTRACTED LOCAL PRIVATE SECURITY SERVICES
OR SIMILAR COMMUNITY–BASED PROGRAMS WITH A SPECIFIC EMPHASIS ON
DE–ESCALATION AND RELATIONSHIP BUILDING; AND

5. OTHER EFFORTS CONSISTENT WITH SUBPARAGRAPH
(I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH.

(3) “ELIGIBLE APPLICANT” MEANS:

(I) A TAX–EXEMPT NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION;

(II) A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT FOR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION; OR

(III) AN INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN
COLLABORATION WITH A LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 221 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(B) AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT MAY APPLY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE
PROGRAM FOR A BUSINESS DISTRICT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SECURITY PROJECT.

(C) IF AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT SUBMITS AN APPLICATION FOR A GRANT
UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR A BUSINESS DISTRICT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SECURITY
PROJECT TO PURCHASE OR INSTALL A NETWORK OF CAMERAS OR LICENSE
READERS, THE ELIGIBLE APPLICANT SHALL INCLUDE WITH THE APPLICATION:

(1) A MONITORING PLAN; AND

(2) EVIDENCE OF A PARTNERSHIP WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT, THE
GOVERNMENTAL UNIT RESPONSIBLE FOR TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT FOR THE
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION, AND ANY OTHER RELEVANT PUBLIC AGENCIES.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT MAY AWARD AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT WHO SUBMITS
A COMPLETE APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR
A BUSINESS DISTRICT AND NEIGHBORHOOD SECURITY PROJECT A GRANT THAT:

(1) IS AT LEAST $75,000; AND

(2) DOES NOT EXCEED $150,000.

6–1206.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COMMUNITY–CENTERED CRIME AND VIOLENCE INTERVENTION
AND PREVENTION PROJECT” MEANS A COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGY THAT
INTEGRATES PARTNERSHIPS AND COORDINATED ACTIVITIES THAT:

(I) DIRECTLY ENGAGE INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE AT RISK OF
BECOMING INVOLVED WITH OR AFFECTED BY VIOLENCE AND CRIME USING
EVIDENCE–BASED INTERVENTIONS; AND

(II) REDUCE CRIME AND DISORDER BY CAREFULLY EXAMINING
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF PROBLEMS IN NEIGHBORHOODS AND APPLYING
APPROPRIATE PROBLEM–SOLVING REMEDIES.

(3) “ELIGIBLE APPLICANT” MEANS A TAX–EXEMPT NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 221

(B) AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT MAY APPLY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE
PROGRAM FOR A COMMUNITY–CENTERED CRIME AND VIOLENCE INTERVENTION
AND PREVENTION PROJECT.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT MAY AWARD AN ELIGIBLE APPLICANT WHO SUBMITS
A COMPLETE APPLICATION FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM FOR
A COMMUNITY–CENTERED CRIME AND VIOLENCE INTERVENTION AND PREVENTION
PROJECT A GRANT THAT DOES NOT EXCEED $250,000.

6–1207.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “FUND” MEANS THE COMMUNITY HEALTH AND
SAFETY WORKS GRANT PROGRAM FUND.

(B) THERE IS A COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY WORKS GRANT
PROGRAM FUND.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO PROVIDE FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE IN
THE FORM OF GRANTS UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF THE PROGRAM FOR ELIGIBLE
PROJECTS.

(D) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

(E) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(F) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND;

(2) EARNINGS FROM THE INVESTMENT OF MONEY IN THE FUND;

(3) INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND; AND

(4) ANY OTHER MONEY FROM ANY OTHER SOURCE ACCEPTED FOR
THE BENEFIT OF THE FUND.

(G) THE FUND MAY BE USED ONLY FOR PROVIDING FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
IN THE FORM OF GRANTS UNDER THE PROGRAM.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 221 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(H) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE FUND.

(I) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(J) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2025 THROUGH 2028, THE GOVERNOR
SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $10,000,000
TO THE FUND.

Article – State Finance and Procurement

6–226.

(a) (2) (i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and unless
inconsistent with a federal law, grant agreement, or other federal requirement or with the
terms of a gift or settlement agreement, net interest on all State money allocated by the
State Treasurer under this section to special funds or accounts, and otherwise entitled to
receive interest earnings, as accounted for by the Comptroller, shall accrue to the General
Fund of the State.

(ii) The provisions of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph do not apply
to the following funds:

189. the Teacher Retention and Development Fund; [and]

190. the Protecting Against Hate Crimes Grant Fund; AND

191. THE COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY WORKS
GRANT PROGRAM FUND.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8