START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  SB 474 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 474 
(The President, et al.) (By Request - Administration) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity and Related Approvals - 
Definition of Generating Station (Critical Infrastructure Streamlining Act of 
2024) 
 
 
This Administration bill allows generating units or facilities that meet specified 
requirements to be constructed without obtaining either (1) a Certificate of Public 
Convenience and Necessity (CPCN) or (2) approval to construct from the Public Service 
Commission (PSC) under the CPCN exemption process. The bill specifies related reporting 
requirements for owners or operators of those generating units or facilities and the 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA). In addition, the Comptroller must distribute 
specified corporate income tax revenues attributable to qualified data centers that are 
operational on or after January 1, 2026, to the Strategic Energy Investment Fund (SEIF). 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease – and SEIF revenues increase – by an 
estimated $2.3 million in FY 2026. Future years reflect annualization and projected growth 
in affected corporate income tax revenues. Special fund revenues for the Maryland 
Department of the Environment (MDE) may increase beginning as early as FY 2025 (not 
quantified below). While the bill’s changes can be implemented with existing resources, 
the bill may have operational effects, as discussed below. This bill establishes a mandated 
distribution beginning as early as FY 2026. 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
$0 
($2.3) 
($7.9) 
($9.0) 
($9.9) 
SF Revenue 
- 
$2.3 
$7.9 
$9.0 
$9.9 
Expenditure 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
Net Effect 
- 
- 
- 
- 
-  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 474/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Potential significant impact on local government expenditures, as discussed 
below. Local revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The Administration has determined that this bill has a meaningful 
impact on small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) 
concurs with this assessment, as discussed below. (The attached assessment does not reflect 
amendments to the bill.) 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Certain Generating Units and Facilities Not Considered Generating Stations 
 
For purposes of the requirement to obtain a CPCN or approval to construct under the CPCN 
exemption process, a “generating station” does not include a generating unit or facility that:   
 
 
is used for the production of electricity for the purpose of (1) onsite emergency 
backup at a facility when service from the electric company is interrupted due to 
electric distribution or transmission system failure or when there is equipment 
failure at a site where critical infrastructure is located and (2) test and maintenance 
operations necessary to ensure functionality of the generating unit or facility in the 
event of a service interruption from the electric company due to electric distribution 
or transmission system failure or when there is equipment failure at a site where 
critical infrastructure is located;  
 
is installed with equipment that prevents the flow of electricity to the electric grid; 
 
is subject to a permit to construct issued by MDE (while the bill does not specify 
the specific permit addressed by this provision, this analysis assumes the bill is 
referring to an air quality permit to construct); and  
 
is installed at a facility that is part of critical infrastructure if the facility complies 
with all applicable regulations regarding noise level and testing hours. 
 
“Generating station” also does not include a combination of two or more generating units 
or facilities that satisfy the above requirements. 
 
“Critical infrastructure” means assets, systems, and networks, whether physical or virtual, 
considered by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security to be so vital to the United States 
that their incapacitation or destruction would have a debilitating effect on one or more of 
the following:  (1) security; (2) national economic security; (3) national public health; or 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 474/ Page 3 
(4) safety. “Critical infrastructure” includes a hospital or health care facility and a data 
center as defined in § 11-239 of the Tax-General Article.  
 
Reporting Requirements 
 
Owners or Operators of Generating Units or Facilities:  By December 1, 2025, and each 
December 1 thereafter, the owner or operator of a generating unit or facility exempted from 
the CPCN process under the bill must submit a report to MDE that includes (1) dates on 
which the generating unit or facility was used for the previous 12 months; (2) the length of 
time the generating unit or facility was operated for the previous 12 months; and (3) for 
each instance the generating unit or facility was operated over the previous 12 months, the 
reason the generating unit or facility was operated.  
 
The reports must be made publicly available and may not be redacted, unless MDE 
determines that a report poses a risk to cybersecurity, national security, or the security of 
the State.  
 
Maryland Energy Administration:  By December 1, 2025, and every two years thereafter, 
MEA, in consultation with the Department of Commerce and industry representatives 
selected by Commerce, must submit a report to the General Assembly that details the 
following:  (1) advancements in backup generation technologies; (2) the commercial 
availability of new backup generation technologies that can be procured; and (3) the 
affordability of adopting new backup generation technologies.  
 
Distribution of Specified Corporate Income Tax Revenues  
 
After certain existing required distributions, the Comptroller must distribute 15% of the 
remaining income tax revenue from corporations that is attributable to qualified data 
centers, within the meaning of § 11-239 of the Tax-General Article (sales and use tax 
exemption for qualified data center personal property), that are operational on or after 
January 1, 2026, to SEIF.  
 
Current Law:  Under § 11-239 of the Tax-General Article, “data center” means a building 
or group of buildings used to house computer systems, computer storage equipment, and 
associated infrastructure that businesses or other organizations use to organize, process, 
store, and disseminate large amounts of data.  
 
Generating Stations 
 
Chapter 460 of 2023 specified that a generating station, as defined, does not include a 
generating unit or facility that is used to produce electricity, has a capacity of up to 
2 megawatts (MW), and is installed with equipment that prevents the flow of electricity to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 474/ Page 4 
the electric grid during times when the electric grid is out of service. Additionally, a 
generating station does not include a combination of two or more generating units or 
facilities, 
located 
on 
the 
same 
property 
or 
adjacent 
properties, 
that  
(1) are used to produce electricity from a solar photovoltaic system or an eligible 
customer-generator that is subject to the State’s net metering law; (2) have individual 
capacities of up to 2 MW and a cumulative capacity of more than 2 MW, but not more than  
14 MW; (3) are separately metered by the electric company; and (4) do not export 
electricity 
for 
sale 
on 
the 
wholesale 
market 
under 
an 
agreement 
with 
PJM Interconnection, LLC. 
 
For general information on the CPCN process, please see the Appendix – Certificate of 
Public Convenience and Necessity. 
 
Air Quality Permits to Construct 
 
Title 2, Subtitle 4 of the Environment Article authorizes MDE to adopt regulations that 
require a person to obtain a permit or registration before the construction, modification, 
operation, or use of a source that may cause or control emissions into the air. MDE 
regulations define the types of sources that are subject to the permit requirements. MDE 
may not, however, require a permit or registration for the construction of a generating 
station constructed by a person that is required to obtain a CPCN. Title 2, Subtitle 4 
includes a requirement applicable to specified permits to construct a new source or 
significantly modify (or replace components of) an existing permitted source that 
documentation be submitted to MDE that demonstrates compliance with all applicable 
local zoning and land use requirements.  
 
Distribution of Corporate Income Tax Revenues 
 
After an allowance for refunds (§ 2-613 of the Tax-General Article), the Comptroller must 
distribute 6% and 9.15% of remaining corporate income tax revenues to the Higher 
Education Investment Fund (HEIF) and the general fund, respectively (§ 2-613.1). After a 
subsequent distribution to an administrative cost account, the Comptroller must distribute 
a specified percentage of the remaining corporate income tax revenues to the Gasoline and 
Motor Vehicle Revenue Account in the Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) (20% for 
fiscal 2024, 21% for fiscal 2025, 22% for fiscal 2026 and 2027, and 20% for fiscal 2028 
and beyond) (§ 2-614). Remaining corporate income tax revenues are distributed to the 
general fund (§ 2-615).  
 
Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Qualified Data Center Personal Property 
 
Chapter 640 of 2020 established a sales and use tax exemption for the sale of qualified data 
center personal property for use at a qualified data center. “Qualified data center” means a 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 474/ Page 5 
data center located in the State in which an individual or a corporation, within three years 
after submitting an application for the sales and use tax exemption, has invested at least 
$5.0 million (for a data center located within a Tier I county, $2.0 million) in qualified data 
center personal property and created at least five qualified positions. “Qualified data 
center” includes (1) a data center that is a co-located or hosting data center where 
equipment, space, and bandwidth are available to lease to multiple customers and (2) an 
enterprise data center owned and operated by the company it supports.  
 
To qualify for the sales and use tax exemption, an individual or corporation must file an 
application for an exemption certificate with the Department of Commerce. Commerce 
must annually provide the Comptroller with a list of individuals and corporations that the 
department determines are eligible for the exemption; within 30 days after receiving the 
list, the Comptroller must issue an exemption certificate to each eligible individual and 
corporation. An exemption certificate issued by the Comptroller must be renewed annually 
and may not be renewed for more than 10 consecutive years (20 consecutive years if the 
individual or corporation invests at least $250.0 million in qualified data center personal 
property).  
 
Background:  In August 2023, PSC denied a CPCN exemption request sought by  
Aligned Data Centers (ADC) to install up to 168 diesel generators – rated at 3 MW each – 
as a backup power source at a proposed data center site in Frederick County. In denying 
ADC’s exemption request, PSC raised concerns about the environmental impact of the 
proposed generators and noted that granting an exemption would allow ADC, under certain 
circumstances, to operate all 168 diesel generators simultaneously, which would be the 
equivalent of operating a 504 MW diesel power plant. PSC authorized a provisional 
exemption for 70 MW of generation, subject to additional requirements. In October 2023, 
ADC announced it would not proceed with its project due to PSC’s decision. The PSC 
determination and ADC decision to pull out of the project illustrates the potentially 
substantial energy needs and regulatory considerations for data center development in the 
State. 
 
Maryland has the potential to become a hub for data center development. Its next-door 
neighbor, Virginia, is home to approximately 35% of all known hyperscale data centers 
worldwide, most of which are in Fairfax County and Loudoun County. With space 
constraints in those two counties and a diminishing appetite among residents for further 
data center development, the industry is looking at new jurisdictions (including Maryland) 
in which it can build data centers. 
 
The industry’s first major foray into Maryland came in June 2021, when Quantum 
Loophole, Inc. acquired more than 2,100 acres of land near Adamstown in 
Frederick County for the development of Quantum Frederick, a first-of-its kind 
“master-planned data center campus” that Quantum Loophole envisions as a gigawatt-scale 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 474/ Page 6 
technology hub that will offer city-scale infrastructure for hyperscale, colocation, and 
purpose-built data center developers. Quantum Frederick will be connected to 
Data Center Alley in Northern Virginia through an underground hyperscale fiber network 
ring referred to as the “QLoop.” Proponents of the project point to potential economic 
benefits, including jobs and tax revenues, and contend that it is being located on the 
grounds of an abandoned aluminum smelting factory, a prime location for responsible 
cleanup and redevelopment. However, concerns have been raised by members of the 
public, advocacy groups, and governmental entities about the impact Quantum Frederick 
could have on the environment and energy use.  
 
State Revenues:   
 
Distribution of Specified Corporate Income Tax Revenues 
 
After the distributions required under §§ 2-613 (to refund account), 2-613.1 (to HEIF and 
general fund), and 2-614 of the Tax-General Article (to administrative cost account and 
TTF), the Comptroller must distribute 15% of the remaining income tax revenue from 
corporations that is attributable to qualified data centers that are operational on or after  
January 1, 2026, to SEIF. In the absence of the bill, such revenues would be distributed to 
the general fund in accordance with § 2-615 of the Tax-General Article. This analysis 
assumes that the bill’s distribution requirement generally begins with tax year 2026. 
 
Thus, SEIF revenues increase – and general fund revenues decrease – by an estimated  
$2.3 million in fiscal 2026 (reflecting approximately 30% of the tax year 2026 effect), 
$7.9 million in fiscal 2027, $9.0 million in fiscal 2028, and $9.9 million in fiscal 2029. Due 
to taxpayer confidentiality requirements, DLS does not have access to income tax return 
data; this estimate is based on an analysis of corporation tax statistics published by the 
Internal Revenue Service and Economic Census data published by the U.S. Census Bureau. 
For context, Commerce advises that five data centers filed for the sales and use tax 
exemption for qualified data center personal property in fiscal 2023. This estimate does not 
account for the State income tax effects of any increase in data center development 
generated as a direct result of the bill.  
 
Air Quality Permit Application Fees 
 
To the extent that the bill results in an increase in the number of applications for air quality 
permits to construct submitted to MDE, special fund revenues from permit application fees 
increase accordingly. Because MDE cannot reliably estimate the number of additional 
permit applications it may receive, a reliable estimate of the potential magnitude of the 
bill’s impact on special fund revenues cannot be made at this time. Pursuant to current 
regulations, the relevant application fee for an air quality permit to construct for a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 474/ Page 7 
generating unit/facility affected by the bill ranges from $400 for an individual generating 
unit to $20,500 for a major source (such as a cluster of back-up generators at a data center).  
 
State Expenditures:  Although the bill does not materially affect State expenditures, PSC, 
the Department of Natural Resources, and MDE may have fewer CPCN applications to 
review while, as noted above, MDE may have additional air quality permits to construct to 
process.  
 
MEA can submit the required reports using existing budgeted resources – and Commerce 
can assist with the reports as required using existing budgeted resources. In addition, 
although the bill may result in an increase in workload for MDE due to the requirement 
that it review the annual reports submitted by owners and operators of generating units and 
facilities, MDE advises that it can handle any increase in workload with existing budgeted 
resources. 
 
The Comptroller’s Office advises that it must hire a full-time, dedicated accountant 
beginning in fiscal 2026 to administer the distribution of specified corporate income tax 
revenues to SEIF. However, DLS advises that the bill’s corporate income tax distribution 
likely applies to a very limited number of corporate returns. (For reference – as noted 
above, in fiscal 2023, a total of five qualified data centers filed for the existing sales and 
use tax exemption for qualified data center personal property.) Thus, it is assumed that the 
Comptroller’s Office can implement the bill’s corporate income tax distribution 
requirement with existing budgeted resources.  
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill’s impact on local expenditures cannot be reliably estimated; 
however, in some jurisdictions, the impact may be significant. The impact varies by local 
jurisdiction and depends on a variety of factors, including a jurisdiction’s geography, its 
existing approach to electric generation projects, and the number and type of electric 
generating stations under consideration for construction in the jurisdiction.  
 
The bill enables a developer to bypass the CPCN process for a project that, among other 
requirements, produces electricity for emergency backup when service from the electric 
company is interrupted and test and maintenance operations necessary to ensure systems 
function properly in the event of a service interruption. It is unknown to what extent 
developers will attempt to use this exemption, but the number of developers that do so 
could be significant (particularly for the construction of data centers).  
 
To the extent that the number of applications for CPCNs decreases under the bill, a local 
jurisdiction may have fewer CPCN cases to intervene in. On the other hand, if the bill’s 
changes lead to a significant increase in the number of electric generation projects in the 
State that bypass the CPCN process, a local government may feel compelled to more 
actively regulate and/or scrutinize such projects within its jurisdictional limits. A local 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 474/ Page 8 
government could incur significant expenditures if it (1) imposes new requirements on 
developers of electric generation projects; (2) employs engineers and other personnel to 
study and review prospective electric generation projects; or (3) hires external consultants 
to study a project’s possible environmental, economic, and/or socioeconomic impacts. 
Additionally, a local government may choose to adopt regulations setting maximum 
allowable noise levels that generating units or facilities may emit and/or limiting the hours 
in which generating units or facilities may conduct testing and maintenance operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  To the extent that additional generating stations are built in the 
State as a result of the bill, small businesses that participate in the construction and/or 
maintenance of the generating stations benefit. Small businesses may also benefit from 
providing construction and/or maintenance services for new data centers if the bill 
incentivizes data center development in the State that otherwise would not have moved 
forward.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 579 (The Speaker, et al.) (By Request - Administration) - 
Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office; Maryland 
Department of the Environment; Maryland Energy Administration; Department of 
Commerce; Department of Natural Resources; Office of People’s Counsel; Public Service 
Commission; Comptroller’s Office; Internal Revenue Service; U.S. Census Bureau; 
Bay Journal; Virginia Economic Development Partnership; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Ralph W. Kettell and 
Elizabeth J. Allison  
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 474/ Page 9 
Appendix – Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity 
 
 
General Overview 
 
The Public Service Commission (PSC) is the lead agency for licensing the siting, 
construction, and operation of power plants and related facilities in the State through 
Certificates of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN). The CPCN process is 
comprehensive and involves several other State agencies, including the Department of 
Natural Resources (and its Power Plant Research Program), and the Maryland Department 
of the Environment. Subject to limited exemptions described below, a person may not 
begin construction in the State of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or 
qualified generator lead line unless a CPCN is first obtained from PSC. 
 
State law provides that a “generating station” excludes a facility with up to 2 megawatts of 
capacity if it meets other specified requirements. Additionally, pursuant to Chapter 460 of 
2023, a generating station excludes a combination of two or more co-located or adjacent 
facilities used for electricity production from solar photovoltaic systems or specified 
eligible customer-generators that have a maximum cumulative capacity of 14 megawatts 
(including maximum individual capacities of 2 megawatts) and meet other requirements. 
 
The CPCN process, detailed further below, involves the notification of specified 
stakeholders, the holding of public hearings, the consideration of recommendations by 
State and local government entities, and the consideration of the project’s effects on various 
aspects of the State infrastructure, economy, and environment. 
 
In December 2020, PSC initiated a rulemaking (RM 72) to revise regulations governing 
CPCNs for generating stations. Updated regulations became effective in September 2021. 
Among other changes, the regulations contain additional information requirements – to 
assist in project evaluation – and allow for electronic submission and distribution of 
application materials. 
 
Notification Process 
 
Upon receipt of a CPCN application, PSC – or the CPCN applicant, if required by PSC – 
must immediately provide notice to specified recipients, including the executive and 
governing body of affected local governments, affected members of the General Assembly, 
and other interested persons. When providing the notice, PSC must also forward the CPCN 
application to each appropriate unit of State and local government for review, evaluation, 
and comment and to each member of the General Assembly who requests a copy. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 474/ Page 10 
Public Hearing and Comment 
 
PSC must provide an opportunity for public comment and hold a public hearing on a 
CPCN application in each county and municipality in which any portion of the construction 
of a generating station, overhead transmission line, or qualified generator lead line is 
proposed to be located. PSC must hold the hearing jointly with the governing body of the 
county or municipality and must provide weekly notice during the four weeks prior to the 
hearing, both in a newspaper and online, and must further coordinate with each local 
government to identify additional hearing notification options. PSC must ensure 
presentation and recommendations from each interested State unit and must allow 
representatives of each State unit to sit during the hearing of all parties. PSC must then 
allow each State unit 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing to modify the unit’s initial 
recommendations. 
 
Public Service Commission Considerations 
 
PSC must take final action on a CPCN application only after due consideration of 
(1) recommendations of the governing body of each county or municipality in which any 
portion of the project is proposed to be located; (2) various aspects of the State 
infrastructure, economy, and environment; and (3) the effect of climate change on the 
project. For example, PSC must consider the effect of the project on the stability and 
reliability of the electric system and, when applicable, air and water pollution. There are 
additional considerations specifically for a generating station or an overhead transmission 
line. For example, PSC must consider the impact of a generating station on the quantity of 
annual and long-term statewide greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Generating Station Exemptions 
 
There are three general conditions under which a person constructing a generating station 
may apply to PSC for an exemption from the CPCN requirement: 
 
 
the facility is designed to provide onsite generated electricity, the capacity is up to 
70 megawatts, and the excess electricity can be sold only on the wholesale market 
pursuant to a specified agreement with the local electric company;  
 
at least 10% of the electricity generated is consumed onsite, the capacity is up to 
25 megawatts, and the excess electricity is sold on the wholesale market pursuant 
to a specified agreement with the local electric company; or  
 
the facility is wind-powered and land-based, the capacity is up to 70 megawatts, and 
the facility is no closer than a PSC-determined distance from the Patuxent River 
Naval Air Station, among other requirements. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 474/ Page 11 
However, PSC must require a person who is exempted from the CPCN requirement to 
obtain approval from the commission before the person may construct a generating station 
as described above. The application must contain specified information that PSC requires, 
including proof of compliance with all applicable requirements of the independent system 
operator. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 474/ Page 12 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL: Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity and Related 
Approvals 
- 
Definition 
of 
Generating 
Station 
(Critical 
Infrastructure Streamlining Act of 2024) 
 
BILL NUMBER: 
SB0474 
 
PREPARED BY: 
Governor’s Legislative Office 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
___ 
WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
   X    WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND SMALL 
BUSINESSES 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 

END OF PAGE 12