START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 448 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 448 
(Senator Muse, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Commission to Study African American Civil War Soldiers in Maryland 
 
 
This bill establishes the Commission to Study African American Civil War Soldiers in 
Maryland. The commission must (1) study the history of African American Civil War 
soldiers who fought for the Union Army in Maryland, including muster rolls, locations of 
services, and all distinguished honors and recognitions awarded and (2) make findings and 
recommendations regarding the funding, design, construction, and location of an 
appropriate memorial dedicated to the African American Civil War soldiers in Maryland. 
The Maryland State Archives (MSA) must staff the commission. A member of the 
commission may not receive compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
By December 1, 2024, the commission must report its findings and recommendations to 
the Governor and the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and 
terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $63,800 in FY 2025 only for 
contractual support to staff the commission and complete the required report. Expense 
reimbursements for commission members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. No effect on revenues. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
63,800 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($63,800) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 448/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Commission on African American History and Culture 
 
The Commission on African American History and Culture, among its other powers and 
duties, must operate the Banneker-Douglass Museum in Annapolis to house and display 
photographs, objects, oral history tapes, artifacts, and other materials of African American 
historic and cultural significance. The commission may seek money from the federal 
government, foundations, and private sources in addition to State financing. It may accept 
gifts, grants, donations, bequests, or endowments for any of its purposes.  
 
Governor’s Commission on Maryland Military Monuments 
 
Established by executive order and administered by the Maryland Department of Planning, 
the Governor’s Commission on Maryland Military Monuments must undertake an 
inventory of Maryland military monuments, as specified. The commission must make a 
determination, based on historical significance, design, financial need, and physical 
condition, as to which monument must receive assistance with the cost of restoration. The 
commission must procure sufficient funds for the restoration of the monuments, including 
contributions secured from grants and fundraising efforts, and must prepare education and 
tourism materials for public distribution.  
 
State Expenditures:  MSA advises it is unable to absorb additional duties and has 
determined that one temporary contractual staff member is needed to staff the commission. 
Given the limited timeframe for the commission to produce its report and the intricacy of 
the commission’s duties, the Department of Legislative Services concurs.  
 
Thus, MSA general fund expenditures increase by $63,813 in fiscal 2025, which accounts 
for the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one contractual archivist trainee to staff the commission and produce the mandatary report, 
which includes travel costs in order to research relevant historical sites. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, travel and historical site visit costs, and operating 
expenses.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$53,265 
Travel and Historical Site Visit Costs 
3,022 
Operating Expenses 
7,526 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$63,813 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 448/ Page 3 
This estimate assumes that the contractual position terminates June 30, 2025, concurrent 
with the termination of the commission.  
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 133 (Delegate Bouchat, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Archives; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3