START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 468 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 468 
(Senator McCray)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Criminal Law - Private Home Detention Monitoring - Notification 
 
 
This bill alters notification requirements for private home detention monitoring agencies 
(PHDMAs) when monitored individuals violate conditions of pretrial release or probation, 
including the criteria for mandatory notification, the deadlines for notification, and the 
recipients of this mandatory notice. The bill authorizes the Secretary of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services to impose civil penalties on companies that fail to provide the 
required notice. The bill also clarifies that a person is released, rather than committed, to 
private home detention monitoring under the prohibition on escape in the second degree 
contained in § 9-405(b) of the Criminal Law Article.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Judiciary and the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) can implement the bill with existing budgeted resources. The bill’s civil penalty 
provisions are not expected to materially affect State revenues.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Within 24 hours of determining that a defendant subject to private home 
detention monitoring as a condition of the defendant’s pretrial release has violated a 
condition of monitoring, the monitoring PHDMA must notify the court that ordered the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 468/ Page 2 
monitoring and the court-designated law enforcement agency. If the violation involved 
tampering with or failing to properly maintain home detention monitoring equipment as 
required by a court order, the notification must be made within one hour. If the violation 
involved the defendant entering an area the defendant was expressly prohibited from 
entering as a condition of pretrial release, the notification must be immediate. 
 
Within 24 hours of determining that an individual subject to private home detention 
monitoring as a condition of probation has violated a condition of monitoring, the 
monitoring PHDMA must notify the Division of Parole and Probation (DPP). If the 
violation involved tampering with or failing to properly maintain home detention 
monitoring equipment as required by a court order, the notification must be made within 
one hour. If the violation involved the individual entering an area the individual was 
expressly prohibited from entering as a condition of pretrial release, the notification must 
be immediate.  
 
A PHDMA may not knowingly fail to give mandatory notice, as described above. The 
Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services may impose the following civil 
penalties on a PHDMA for a violation:  $1,000 for the first day the PHDMA failed to give 
notice; and $250 for each subsequent day the PHDMA failed to give notice. 
 
Current Law:  
 
Private Home Detention Monitoring Agencies  
 
Generally, under § 5-201 of the Criminal Procedure Article, in accordance with eligibility 
criteria, conditions, and procedures required under the Maryland Rules, the court may 
require, as a condition of a defendant’s pretrial release, that the defendant be monitored by 
a PHDMA licensed under Title 20 of the Business Occupations and Professions Article. 
PHDMAs are licensed by DPSCS.  
 
Upon determining that a defendant subject to private home detention monitoring under the 
provisions of § 5-201(b) has been missing for 24 hours, the PHDMA responsible for 
monitoring the defendant must, on the next business day, notify the court that ordered 
private home detention monitoring as a condition of the defendant’s pretrial release. If the 
court that ordered private detention monitoring as a condition of a defendant’s pretrial 
release requests that it be notified if the defendant violates any other conditions of pretrial 
release, the PHDMA responsible for monitoring the defendant must provide the court with 
the requested notice. 
 
Upon determining that an individual who is subject to private home detention monitoring 
as a condition of probation has been missing for 24 hours, the PHDMA responsible for 
monitoring the individual must, on the next business day, notify DPP. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 468/ Page 3 
The Code of Maryland Regulations (COMAR 12.11.10.09) requires PHDMAs to have 
policies and procedures for the immediate notification to the local law enforcement agency, 
and next working day notification to the court that ordered home detention, the 
State’s Attorney, and the supervising probation agent, if applicable, when a monitored 
individual is determined to have escaped. 
 
Escape in the Second Degree 
 
Section 9-405(b) of the Criminal Law Article prohibits specified individuals, including a 
person committed to a PHDMA, from knowingly violating any restriction on movement 
imposed on them; failing to return to a place of confinement as required; or removing, 
blocking, deactivating, or otherwise tampering with a monitoring device they are required 
to wear or carry to track their location, including an ankle or wrist bracelet, global position 
satellite offender tracking technology, or comparable equipment or system. Violators are 
guilty of escape in the second degree, which is a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment 
for up to three years and/or or a $5,000 maximum fine. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 614 (Delegate Smith, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Office of the 
Public Defender; Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association; Department of Public Safety 
and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 14, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3