START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 429 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 429 
(Senator Bailey) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Economic Matters 
 
Corporations and Associations - Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese of 
Washington 
 
 
This bill generally (1) repeals uncodified provisions of law (Maryland Vestry Act) 
governing the Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese of Washington and (2) codifies 
provisions applicable to every religious corporation formed in Maryland by a parish or 
separate congregation that is in union with (or intending to apply for union with) the 
Convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Diocese of Washington, as specified. 
The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase minimally to the extent parishes file articles 
of incorporation. The State Department of Assessments and Taxation (SDAT) can 
implement the bill with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Repeal of Maryland Vestry Act 
 
Chapter 96 of 1976 decodified provisions of the Maryland Vestry Act in the Corporations 
and Associations Article governing the Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 429/ Page 2 
Washington, by transferring those statutory provisions to the Session Laws. The bill repeals 
Chapter 96 and substitutes new codified language (modeled after existing provisions of the 
Corporations and Associations Article relating to the Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese 
of Easton), thereby allowing the parishes in the Diocese of Washington to form a religious 
corporation. 
 
Applicability of Bill 
 
The bill applies to every religious corporation formed by a parish or separate congregation 
in union with the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Diocese of Washington, as specified. 
To the extent allowed by the U.S. Constitution and the Maryland Constitution, it amends 
the charter of each parish or congregation to conform to the general provisions governing 
religious corporations in the Corporations and Associations Article until the charter is 
otherwise amended under the statute. Parishes or congregations incorporated before the 
effective date of the Maryland Constitution of 1851 continue to be governed by the statute 
under which they were incorporated unless specified conditions are met. 
 
Religious Corporation – Bylaws 
 
Each parish or separate congregation, under the bill, that forms a religious corporation must 
adopt bylaws to govern its corporate and temporal affairs. Bylaws may be adopted by a 
majority of the qualified voters voting at a regular or special congregational meeting. Each 
religious corporation is subject at all times to the Constitution and Canons of the 
Convention of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the Diocese of Washington and of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States. 
 
Uncodified Provisions 
 
The bill:   
 
 
authorizes SDAT to file and record certificates of incorporation offered by any 
parish or separate congregation, as specified; 
 
recognizes the legal existence (and does not prohibit the dissolution or merger, as 
specified) of specified parishes and separate congregations in the diocese as 
corporate bodies; and 
 
prohibits all persons, entities, and instrumentalities from denying the legal and 
corporate existence of the specified parishes and separate congregations. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 429/ Page 3 
Current Law:   
 
Religious Corporations – In General 
 
The Corporations and Associations Article specifies requirements to form a religious 
corporation, including that the adult members of a church (any church, religious society, 
or congregation of any sect, order, or denomination) must elect at least four individuals to 
act as trustees in the name of and on behalf of the church, and prepare a plan of the church. 
Trustees of a religious corporation (1) are the corporators appointed or elected, for churches 
related to the Roman Catholic Church and (2) are the members of the vestry, for churches 
related to the Protestant Episcopal Church, Diocese of Maryland or the Protestant 
Episcopal Church, Diocese of Easton. The plan of the church must include, among other 
items, the purposes for which the religious corporation is formed, and the time and manner 
for election and succession of trustees. 
 
When SDAT accepts the articles of incorporation for record, the trustees become a body 
corporate under the name stated in the articles of incorporation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 391 (Delegate T. Morgan, et al.) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); State Department of Assessments and Taxation; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - March 27, 2024 
Enrolled - April 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 19, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3