START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 402 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 402 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Correctional Training Commission - Membership - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the membership of the Correctional Training Commission (CTC) by 
(1) repealing the representative of the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP); (2) increasing the 
number of members appointed by the Governor who are correctional officers or officials 
(from four to five); (3) repealing the requirement that one of the four correctional officers 
or officials appointed by the Governor be a Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) 
employee or official; and (4) specifying that the five members appointed by the Governor 
must be from local correctional facilities and represent each geographic area of the State 
(“the Capital region,” “the Central region,” the Eastern Shore region,” the 
Southern region,” and “the Western region,” as defined). Those five members are excluded 
from the authorization to serve personally at a meeting or designate a representative to act 
on their behalf, as specified. The bill also establishes provisions governing the terms of the 
members appointed by the Governor. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Altering the membership of CTC does not materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for additional local members can be handled 
with existing resources. Otherwise, local government finances are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 402/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Capital region” means Frederick, Montgomery, and Prince George’s 
counties. “Central region” means Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, 
Harford, and Howard counties. “Eastern Shore region” means Caroline, Cecil, Dorchester, 
Kent, Queen Anne’s, Somerset, Talbot, Wicomico, and Worcester counties. “Southern 
region” means Calvert, Charles, and St. Mary’s counties. “Western region” means 
Allegany, Garrett, and Washington counties. 
 
Current Law:  CTC within the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services 
(DPSCS) consists of the following 16 members:   
 
 
the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
 
the Secretary of Juvenile Services; 
 
a representative of DPSCS, designated by the Secretary of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; 
 
a representative of DJS, designated by the Secretary of Juvenile Services; 
 
a Deputy Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
 
the president of the Maryland Correctional Administrators Association; 
 
the president of the Maryland Sheriffs Association; 
 
the president of the Maryland Criminal Justice Association; 
 
a representative of BOP, designated by its Director; 
 
the Maryland Attorney General; 
 
the president of a university or college in the State with a correctional education 
curriculum, appointed by the Maryland Higher Education Commission;  
 
one correctional officer of the State recommended by the exclusive representative 
for the officers, as specified, and appointed by the Governor; and 
 
four correctional officers or officials of the State appointed by the Governor. 
 
The Governor must appoint, with the advice and consent of the Senate, four correctional 
officers or officials to be members of the commission, at least one of whom must be an 
employee or official of DJS. The four members appointed by the Governor must represent 
different geographic areas of the State. The term of each of these appointed members is 
three years and staggered. At the end of a term, such an appointed member continues to 
serve until a successor is appointed and qualifies. A member who is appointed after a term 
has begun serves only for the remainder of the term and until a successor is appointed and 
qualifies. 
 
Except for the four members appointed by the Governor, a member of the commission may 
serve personally at a commission meeting or designate a representative from the member’s 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 402/ Page 3 
unit or association who may act at any meeting to the same effect as if the member were 
personally present. 
 
Commission members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
expenses under the standard State travel regulations, as provided in the State budget. 
 
CTC has several enumerated powers and duties, including:   
 
 
to prescribe standards for the approval and continuation of approval of schools that 
conduct correctional, parole, or probation entrance level and in-service training 
courses; 
 
to approve and issue certificates of approval to correctional training schools; 
 
to inspect correctional training schools; 
 
to revoke, for cause, any approval or certificate of approval issued to a correctional 
training school; 
 
to prescribe the curriculum, courses of study, attendance and eligibility 
requirements, equipment and facilities, standards of operation, and minimum 
qualifications for instructors; 
 
to certify and issue appropriate certificates to qualified instructors for approved 
correctional training schools; 
 
to certify and issue appropriate certificates to correctional officers who satisfactorily 
complete training programs; 
 
to conduct and operate approved correctional training schools; 
 
to adopt regulations necessary to carry CTC duties, as specified; 
 
to make a continuous study of correctional training methods and procedures for all 
correctional training schools; 
 
to consult with and accept the cooperation of any recognized federal, State, or 
municipal correctional agency or educational institution; 
 
to consult and cooperate with universities, colleges, and institutions to develop all 
general and specialized courses of study for correctional officers; 
 
to consult and cooperate with other units of the State concerned with correctional 
training; 
 
to develop and implement specific program design and appropriate course 
curriculum and training for DJS employees, subject to certain conditions; and 
 
to perform any other act that is necessary or appropriate to carry out CTC 
requirements. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 402/ Page 4 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Governor’s Office; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4