START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 439 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 439 
(Senator Elfreth, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings and Budget and Taxation 
Judiciary 
 
Family Law - Victims of Domestic Violence Program - Certification and Grant 
Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the Victims of Domestic Violence Program Grant Fund, a special fund 
administered by the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy (GOCPP), formerly 
the Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention, Youth, and Victim Services, to provide grants 
to public or private nonprofit comprehensive domestic violence programs certified by the 
federally recognized State domestic violence coalition. The Governor may include in the 
annual budget bill an appropriation of $5.0 million for the fund. The bill further requires 
domestic violence programs, as established under existing statute, to be certified by the 
federally recognized State domestic violence coalition as a comprehensive domestic 
violence program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $2.9 million annually beginning in 
FY 2025, under the assumptions discussed below. Special fund revenues increase by  
$5.0 million annually beginning in FY 2025, reflecting receipt of existing funding assumed 
to be available for the Victims of Domestic Violence Program Grant Fund (and not shown 
below) and additional funding assumed to be provided; special fund expenditures increase 
correspondingly for grant awards. 
 
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
GF Expenditure 
$2.9 
$2.9 
$2.9 
$2.9 
$2.9 
SF Expenditure 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
$5.0 
Net Effect 
($2.9) 
($2.9) 
($2.9) 
($2.9) 
($2.9)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 439/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget to the fund, 
any interest earnings of the fund, and any other money from any other source accepted for 
the benefit of the fund. Grants from the fund may be used by programs certified by the 
federally recognized State domestic violence coalition for program operations, including 
establishing additional shelters. GOCPP must establish procedures for awarding grant 
funding. The Executive Director of GOCPP must attempt to secure funding for the fund, 
including in-kind contributions from the federal government, local governments, and 
private sources. 
 
Current Law:  Statute requires the establishment of a program within GOCPP to help 
victims of domestic violence and their children. Specifically, the program’s purpose is to 
provide, for victims of domestic violence and their children in each region of the State, 
temporary shelter or help in obtaining shelter, counseling, information, referral, and 
rehabilitation. GOCPP is responsible for, among other tasks, supervising the program, 
setting standards of care and admission policies, and monitoring the operation of the 
program and annually evaluating its effectiveness. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  As part of the Maryland Domestic Violence (DOMV) program, as 
established within GOCPP, State funds are provided to comprehensive domestic violence 
programs, including private and nonprofit organizations. The fiscal 2025 budget as 
introduced includes $2.1 million in general funds for the DOMV program, similar to 
amounts provided in recent years. Given the similarities between the existing DOMV 
program and the purposes of the special grant fund created by the bill, for purposes of this 
analysis, it is assumed that (1) though discretionary, general funds consistent with the 
authorized appropriation of $5.0 million are provided each year to the newly created 
special fund beginning in fiscal 2025; (2) a portion of the discretionary funding is made 
available from general funds that would have otherwise been provided directly to the 
DOMV program and are instead distributed via the special fund established by the bill (and 
continue to be used to provide grants to comprehensive domestic violence programs); and 
(3) funding for the DOMV program would have continued in the same amount in the 
absence of the bill. Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $2.9 million 
annually beginning in fiscal 2025, reflecting the difference in general funds historically 
provided to the DOMV program and those assumed to be provided under the bill to the 
special fund. Special fund revenues increase by $5.0 million annually, reflecting the receipt 
of the general funds assumed to be provided/appropriated to the fund each year; 
special fund expenditures correspondingly increase as the fund is used to provide grants. 
Despite the bill’s effective date of October 1, 2024, this analysis assumes discretionary 
funding of the full authorized amount ($5.0 million) is provided in fiscal 2025 and 
distributed via the special fund established in the bill. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 439/ Page 3 
Because this analysis assumes that grant funding currently managed under the DOMV 
program is instead administered via the new special fund, it is also expected that GOCPP 
can administer the fund using existing resources. Although higher awards are possible if 
the funding assumed in this analysis is provided, the bill does not appear to materially 
expand the pool of potential grantees (comprehensive domestic violence programs). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 656 (Delegate Ivey) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3