START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 418 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 418 
(Senator Watson) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Seed Community Development Anchor Institution Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose and eligible use of the Seed Community Development 
Anchor Institution Fund in the Department of Housing and Community Development 
(DHCD) to include providing grants and loans to anchor institutions for community 
projects in sustainable communities in the State. The bill also expands the definition of 
“anchor institution” to include departments, foundations, and other entities of institutions 
of higher education and hospital institutions in the State. Finally, the bill repeals the 
requirement that required matching funds be from a private source. The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Overall finances of the Seed Community Development Anchor Institution 
Fund are not affected. Due to the expansion of the eligible use of the fund and the change 
in the definition of “anchor institution,” some State entities may receive more funding, 
while others may receive less. In addition, the repeal of the requirement that required 
matching funds be from a private source may enable additional entities to apply for 
funding. DHCD can handle any administrative changes with existing budgeted resources. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 418/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:      
 
Seed Community Development Anchor Institution Fund 
 
Chapter 31 of 2016 established the Seed Community Development Anchor Institution 
Fund within DHCD. The fund provides grants and loans to anchor institutions for 
community development projects in blighted areas of the State. “Anchor institution” means 
an institution of higher education in the State or a hospital institution in the State that  
(1) has at least five physicians who are organized as medical staff for the institution;  
(2) maintains facilities to provide, under the supervision of the medical staff, diagnostic 
and treatment services for two or more unrelated individuals; and (3) admits or retains the 
individuals for overnight care. 
 
To be eligible for a grant or loan, an anchor institution must provide evidence of matching 
funds from a private source. The Governor must include in the annual budget bill or the 
capital budget bill an appropriation of $10.0 million for the fund. The fiscal 2025 
capital budget as passed by the General Assembly includes $10.0 million in 
general obligation bond proceeds for the fund. 
 
Sustainable Communities and Priority Funding Areas 
 
A sustainable community is defined as a part of a priority funding area that (1) is designated 
by the Smart Growth Subcabinet on the recommendation of the Secretary of Housing and 
Community Development; (2) has been designated as a Base Realignment and Closure 
Revitalization Incentive Zone; or (3) has been designated a transit-oriented development. 
 
Chapter 759 of 1997 established that State spending on certain growth-related activities 
must be directed to priority funding areas. Growth-related projects include most State 
programs that encourage or support growth and development such as highways, sewer and 
water construction, economic development assistance, and State leases or construction of 
new office facilities. Priority funding areas include all municipalities that existed in the 
State in 1997; areas inside the Washington Beltway and the Baltimore Beltway; and areas 
designated as enterprise zones, neighborhood revitalization areas, heritage areas, and 
certain industrial areas. Areas that were annexed by a municipality after 1997 may also be 
designated priority funding areas, as long as the areas satisfy specified requirements in 
statute generally related to density, water and sewer access, and other related factors.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 418/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 891 (Delegate Holmes) - Environment and Transportation. 
 
Information Source(s):  University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - February 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 2, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:  Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3