START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 430 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 430 
(Senator M. Washington, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program and Fund - Establishment 
 
 
This bill codifies the existing Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program and 
establishes a related special fund within the Department of Housing and Community 
Development (DHCD). The purpose of the program is to provide financial assistance in 
the form of grants for eligible projects that improve the quality of life within, and economic 
potential of, Maryland communities by making targeted investments in crime prevention 
strategies, as specified. DHCD must administer the program and adopt regulations to carry 
out the program. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $10.0 million annually 
beginning in FY 2025 to capitalize the fund, under the assumptions discussed below; 
special fund revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly. DHCD can administer 
the program using existing staff, as discussed below. Higher education revenues and 
expenditures increase correspondingly to the extent State institutions of higher education 
apply for and receive grants (not reflected below). 
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
SF Revenue 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
GF Expenditure 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
SF Expenditure 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
Net Effect 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0) 
($10.0)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent local 
governments apply for and receive grants for eligible projects, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal or none. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 430/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The Community Health and Safety Works Grant Program consists of 
three types of eligible projects, each discussed in more detail below:   
 
 
facility and community improvement projects; 
 
business district and neighborhood security projects; and 
 
community-centered crime and violence intervention projects. 
 
Facility and Community Improvement Projects 
 
A facility and community improvement project is a physical project or a community service 
that (1) makes a facility or a community-managed open space safer for residents and 
visitors; (2) encourages the authorized uses of a facility or community-managed open 
space; or (3) supports community-led efforts to improve the appearance of a facility or a 
community-managed open space. It includes, among other things, the removal of graffiti 
and the purchase or installation of landscape architectural design features, as specified. 
 
Eligible applicants are nonprofit organizations. If an eligible applicant submits an 
application for a grant for a facility and community improvement project to purchase or 
install a network of cameras or license readers, the eligible applicant must include with the 
application (1) a monitoring plan; (2) evidence of a partnership with law enforcement, the 
governmental unit responsible for traffic enforcement for the political subdivision, and any 
other relevant public agencies; and (3) a list of possible locations of cameras and license 
readers and a plan for providing notice of locations to protect owners. 
 
DHCD may award an eligible applicant who submits a complete application for financial 
assistance under the program for a facility and community improvement project a grant 
between $25,000 and $50,000. 
 
Business District and Neighborhood Security Projects 
 
A business district and neighborhood security project is a comprehensive plan for 
enhancing the visual perception of safety along commercial corridors and adjacent areas. 
It includes, among other things, specified contracted security services or the purchase and 
installation of specified equipment. 
 
Eligible applicants are nonprofit organizations, local governments, or institutions of higher 
education in collaboration with a local neighborhood association. If an eligible applicant 
submits an application for a grant under the program for a business district and 
neighborhood security project to purchase or install a network of cameras or license 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 430/ Page 3 
readers, the eligible applicant must include with the application (1) a monitoring plan and 
(2) evidence of a partnership with local law enforcement, the governmental unit 
responsible for traffic enforcement for the political subdivision, and any other relevant 
public agencies. 
 
DHCD may award an eligible applicant who submits a complete application for financial 
assistance under the program for a business district and neighborhood security project a 
grant between $75,000 and $150,000. 
 
Community-centered Crime and Violence Intervention and Prevention Projects 
 
A community-centered crime and violence intervention and prevention project is a 
comprehensive strategy that integrates partnerships and coordinated activities that 
(1) directly engage individuals who are at risk of becoming involved with or affected by 
violence and crime and (2) reduce crime and disorder, as specified. 
 
Eligible applicants are nonprofit organizations. DHCD may award an eligible applicant for 
a community-centered crime and violence intervention and prevention project a grant that 
does not exceed $250,000. 
 
Community Health and Safety Works Grant Fund 
 
The Community Health and Safety Works Grant Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund 
administered by DHCD. The purpose of the fund is to provide financial assistance in the 
form of grants under the program for eligible projects, and the fund may only be used for 
that purpose. The fund consists of (1) money appropriated in the State budget to the fund; 
(2) earnings from the investment of money in the fund; (3) interest earnings of the fund; 
and (4) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
Current Law:  The Community Health and Safety Works Program, which is administered 
by DHCD, was created as part of Governor Lawrence J. Hogan Jr.’s Re-Fund the Police 
Initiative in fiscal 2022. The program provides grants for business district or facility 
improvements to Main Street communities or other community development nonprofit 
organizations. Grants can be used for surveillance tools such as lighting and cameras; 
pedestrian and vehicle traffic management tools, such as landscaping, fencing, or 
expanding restaurant space to sidewalks and roadways; and other improvements that 
renovate and improve public spaces to remove signals of blight. DHCD expanded the 
eligible uses in fiscal 2023 to include grants for crime and violence intervention and 
prevention, including social services and direct outreach. The program received 
$10.0 million in federal funds from the federal American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 in both 
fiscal 2022 and 2023 and $10.0 million in general funds in fiscal 2024. The fiscal 2025 
budget as introduced does not include any funding for the program. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 430/ Page 4 
Among other responsibilities, DHCD provides financing for the economic development 
and maintenance of affordable housing and communities in Maryland. DHCD also 
provides funding for community revitalization projects. As passed by the 
General Assembly, the fiscal 2025 capital and operating budgets include a mixture of 
general obligation bond funds, general funds, special funds, and federal funds for the 
following DHCD programs that provide assistance to homebuyers and facilitate 
community revitalization in Maryland:   
 
 
Strategic Demolition Fund ($60.0 million); 
 
Housing and Building Energy Programs ($38.4 million); 
 
Neighborhood Business Development Program ($28.3 million); 
 
Baltimore Regional Neighborhood Initiative ($20.7 million); 
 
Homeownership Programs ($21.0 million);  
 
Special Loan Programs ($13.4 million); 
 
National Capital Strategic Economic Development Program ($19.0 million); 
 
Community Development Block Grant Program ($12.0 million); 
 
Seed Community Development Anchor Institution Fund ($10.0 million); 
 
Appraisal Gap Program ($10.0 million); 
 
Downtown Partnership of Baltimore ($9.0 million); 
 
Community Legacy Program ($8.0 million); and 
 
Business Façade Improvement Program ($5.0 million). 
 
State Expenditures:   
 
Capitalizing the Community Health and Safety Works Grant Fund 
 
The existing program – which is codified by the bill – has been funded for three years, but 
the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced does not include funding for the program. 
Accordingly, this analysis assumes that, in the absence of the bill, the program terminates 
at the end of fiscal 2024. 
 
In order to capitalize the fund, therefore, this analysis assumes that general fund 
expenditures increase by an estimated $10.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2025. This 
estimate is based on prior funding levels for the program, as discussed above. Special fund 
revenues to and expenditures from the fund increase correspondingly, assuming that the 
full amount of the appropriation is distributed as grants each year. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 430/ Page 5 
Administrative Expenses 
 
DHCD advises that the program is currently supported by one full-time employee and 
one contractual employee. DHCD further advises that, in the absence of the bill, it plans to 
shift the full-time employee to other responsibilities within the department and retain the 
contractual employee to continue to monitor grant awards that have already been made 
under the existing program. As DHCD anticipates retaining the employees even in the 
absence of the bill, this analysis assumes that DHCD can oversee the program’s 
continuation and the new fund using existing staff. 
 
Other Effects 
 
Higher education revenues and expenditures increase correspondingly to the extent State 
institutions of higher education apply for and receive grants under the bill. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  As discussed above, although the program has been funded for 
three years, funding for the program is not included in the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced. 
Therefore, this analysis assumes that the program terminates in the absence of the bill. As 
a result, local government revenues and expenditures increase to the extent local 
governments apply for and receive grants under the bill for eligible projects. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 874 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; City of Annapolis; Howard and 
Prince George’s counties; Maryland Department of Transportation; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 430/ Page 6 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6