START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 222

Chapter 222

(Senate Bill 500)

AN ACT concerning

Education – Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund –
Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the qualifications for an award from the Child Care Career
and Professional Development Fund to include a certain service obligation; requiring
the Office of Child Care to prioritize grant awards to certain applicants; requiring
certain award recipients to repay certain award funding except under certain
circumstances; and generally relating to the Child Care Career and Professional
Development Fund.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 9.5–905
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

9.5–905.

(a) There is a Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund.

(b) The Office may award funding from the Fund to an individual who has:

(1) Obtained at least a level 2 in the Maryland Child Care Credential
Program under § 9.5–904 of this subtitle;

(2) Documented at least 1 year of experience working with groups of
children in an approved setting; [and]

(3) Been accepted by an accredited college or university for enrollment in
at least one course for credit toward a degree in early childhood education or A related field;
AND

(4) COMMITTED TO WORK IN AN APPROVED CHILD CARE SETTING
FOR AT LEAST 20 HOURS PER WEEK FOR A PERIOD OF TIME DETERMINED BY THE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 222 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

OFFICE AFTER COMPLETING THE COURSE OF STUDY UNDER SUBSECTION (D)(2) OF
THIS SECTION.

(C) TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM, AWARDS SHALL BE
PRIORITIZED TO THE FOLLOWING APPLICANTS:

(1) AN APPLICANT WHO HAS NOT COMPLETED ANY COLLEGE
COURSES FOR CREDIT FROM AN ACCREDITED COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY; AND

(2) AN APPLICANT WHO ATTENDS OR HAS BEEN ACCEPTED BY AN
ACCREDITED COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY THAT OFFERS NATIVE LANGUAGE OR
BILINGUAL COURSEWORK IN EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION OR A RELATED FIELD.

[(c)] (D) An award under this section may only be:

(1) Applied toward the cost of:

(i) Tuition and fees; or

(ii) Textbooks required by a course in which the awardee is enrolled;
and

(2) Used by the awardee for the actual expense of college coursework
incurred subsequent to an award toward the completion of:

(i) A college degree in early childhood education or a related field;
or

(ii) Developmental coursework required to meet prerequisites for a
degree program in early childhood education or a related field.

(E) (1) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT, AN AWARD
RECIPIENT SHALL REPAY THE OFFICE THE FUNDS RECEIVED UNDER THIS SECTION
IF THE RECIPIENT DOES NOT PERFORM THE SERVICE OBLIGATION REQUIRED
UNDER SUBSECTION (B)(4) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) THE OFFICE MAY WAIVE OR DEFER PAYMENT IF THE RECIPIENT
PROVIDES TO THE OFFICE SATISFACTORY EVIDENCE OF EXTENUATING
CIRCUMSTANCES, INCLUDING ILLNESS OR DISABILITY, THAT PREVENT THE
RECIPIENT FROM FULFILLING THE SERVICE OBLIGATION REQUIRED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B)(4) OF THIS SECTION.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 222

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall be construed to
apply only prospectively and may not be applied or interpreted to have any effect on the
requirements for the receipt, retention, or repayment of an award from the Child Care
Career and Professional Development Fund under § 9.5–905 of the Education Article for
which an applicant applied or was awarded funding before the effective date of this Act.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3