START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 456

Chapter 456

(Senate Bill 539)

AN ACT concerning

Commercial Law – Consumer Protection – Sale and Resale of Tickets

FOR the purpose of requiring the listing for a ticket and each step of a transaction to
purchase a ticket to disclose certain information; ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~reseller~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~the~~
~~contact~~ ~~information~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~resale~~ ~~ticket~~ ~~purchaser~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~ticket~~ ~~issuer~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~purpose;~~ ~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~reseller~~ ~~from~~ ~~selling~~ ~~or~~ ~~offering~~ ~~to~~ ~~sell~~ ~~a~~ ~~ticket~~ ~~for~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~
~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~price;~~ ~~limiting~~ ~~the~~ ~~fee~~ ~~that~~ ~~a~~ ~~secondary~~ ~~ticket~~ ~~exchange~~ ~~may~~ ~~charge~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~service~~ ~~of~~ ~~providing~~ ~~a~~ ~~marketplace~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~resale~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~ticket;~~ ~~prohibiting~~ ~~a~~ ~~person~~ ~~from~~
~~restricting~~ ~~the~~ ~~transfer~~ ~~or~~ ~~resale~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~ticket~~ ~~that~~ ~~was~~ ~~made~~ ~~available~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~general~~
~~public~~ ~~for~~ ~~purchase,~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~certain~~ ~~restrictions;~~ repealing the exceptions to the
prohibition against a reseller selling or offering to sell speculative tickets; prohibiting
a secondary ticket exchange from providing a marketplace for the resale of a ticket
that violates this Act; requiring a ticket issuer, secondary ticket exchange, or reseller
to provide a refund under certain conditions; and generally relating to consumer
protection and the sale and resale of tickets.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–310.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–310.1.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) (i) “Resale” means the second or subsequent sale of a ticket.

(ii) “Resale” includes a sale by any means, including in person, by
telephone, by mail, by e–mail, by facsimile, or through a website or other electronic means.

(3) “Reseller” means a person [who offers a ticket for resale] ENGAGED IN
THE RESALE OF TICKETS.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 456 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) “SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE” MEANS AN ELECTRONIC
MARKETPLACE THAT ENABLES CONSUMERS A PERSON TO SELL, PURCHASE, AND
RESELL TICKETS.

(5) (i) “Speculative ticket” means a ticket that is not in the actual or
constructive possession of a reseller at the time of sale, ADVERTISEMENT, OR LISTING.

(ii) “Speculative ticket” includes a ticket sold by a reseller that, at
the time of resale:

1. Is not in the physical possession of the reseller;

2. Is not owned by the reseller; or

3. Is not under contract to be transferred to the reseller.

[(5)] (6) “Ticket” means physical, electronic, or other evidence, that
grants the possessor of the evidence [permission] LICENSE to enter a place of
entertainment for one or more events at a specified date and time.

(7) (I) “TICKET ISSUER” MEANS A PERSON THAT, DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY, ISSUES INITIAL TICKETS FOR AN ENTERTAINMENT EVENT.

(II) “TICKET ISSUER” INCLUDES:

1. A MUSICIAN OR MUSICAL GROUP;

2. AN OPERATOR OF A VENUE;

3. A SPONSOR OR A PROMOTER OF AN ENTERTAINMENT
EVENT;

4. A SPORTS TEAM PARTICIPATING IN AN
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT;

5. A SPORTS LEAGUE WHOSE TEAMS ARE
PARTICIPATING IN AN ENTERTAINMENT EVENT;

6. A THEATER COMPANY;

7. A MARKETPLACE OPERATED FOR CONSUMERS TO
MAKE AN INITIAL PURCHASE OF TICKETS; OR

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 456

8. AN AGENT OF ANY OF THE PERSONS LISTED IN ITEMS
1 THROUGH 7 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH.

(B) (1) THIS SUBSECTION APPLIES ONLY TO SECONDARY TICKET
EXCHANGES, TICKET ISSUERS, AND RESELLERS.

(2) THE LISTING FOR A TICKET AND EACH STEP OF A TRANSACTION
TO PURCHASE A TICKET SHALL:

(I) CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSE THE TOTAL
PRICE OF THE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES OTHER THAN SHIPPING
COSTS THAT ARE NOT DETERMINABLE AT A STEP IN THE TRANSACTION;

(II) PROVIDE AN ITEMIZED LISTING OF ALL CHARGES THAT
COMPRISE THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES; AND

(III) IDENTIFY THE SEAT NUMBER AND ZONE OR SECTION OF THE
TICKET, TO THE EXTENT APPLICABLE TO THE SEAT AND VENUE.

(3) (I) THE TOTAL PRICE OF A TICKET UNDER PARAGRAPH (2)(I)
OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE INCREASED IN A NONINITIAL STEP OF A TRANSACTION
BY THE AMOUNT OF REASONABLE SHIPPING COSTS FOR PHYSICALLY DELIVERED
TICKETS.

(II) THE SHIPPING COSTS ALLOWED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (I)
OF THIS PARAGRAPH MAY VARY WITH THE PURCHASER’S LOCATION RELATIVE TO
THE SHIPMENT’S LOCATION OF ORIGIN AND THE DELIVERY METHOD SELECTED BY
THE PURCHASER.

(III) THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES,
TAXES, AND SHIPPING COSTS, SHALL BE CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY DISCLOSED
PRIOR TO FINAL PURCHASE OF THE TICKET.

(C) A RESELLER SHALL PROVIDE THE TICKET ISSUER WITH THE CONTACT
~~INFORMATION~~ ~~OF~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESALE~~ ~~TICKET~~ ~~PURCHASER~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ENABLE~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TICKET~~ ~~ISSUER~~
~~TO~~ ~~NOTIFY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESALE~~ ~~TICKET~~ ~~PURCHASER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~ANY~~ ~~CHANGE~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~EVENT~~
CIRCUMSTANCES, SUCH AS AN EVENT CANCELLATION OR RESCHEDULING.

(D) (1) THIS SUBSECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO A FEE THAT A SECONDARY
~~TICKET~~ ~~EXCHANGE~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~CHARGE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~SERVICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~MARKETPLACE~~
FOR THE RESALE OF A TICKET.

(2) (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED UNDER SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH, THE TOTAL PRICE AT WHICH A RESELLER MAY SELL OR OFFER TO SELL
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 456 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

A TICKET MAY NOT EXCEED THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE INITIAL TICKET, INCLUDING
ALL FEES AND TAXES IN CONNECTION WITH THE INITIAL TICKET.

(II) IF INITIAL TICKETS WERE PURCHASED FOR A SERIES OF
EVENTS, SUCH AS SEASON TICKETS FOR A SPORTS TEAM, THE TOTAL RESALE PRICE
~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~TICKET~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~A~~ ~~SINGLE~~ ~~EVENT~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~ ~~EXCEED~~ ~~THE~~ ~~TOTAL~~ ~~PRICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~
COMPARABLE TICKET, INCLUDING ALL FEES AND TAXES.

(E) THE FEE THAT A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE MAY CHARGE FOR THE
~~SERVICE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~PROVIDING~~ ~~A~~ ~~MARKETPLACE~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~THE~~ ~~RESALE~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~TICKET~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~NOT~~
EXCEED 10% OF THE TOTAL PRICE OF THE INITIAL TICKET.

(F) SUBJECT TO REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY A TICKET
ISSUER, A PERSON MAY NOT PROHIBIT OR RESTRICT THE TRANSFER OR RESALE OF
A TICKET THAT WAS MADE AVAILABLE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC FOR PURCHASE.

[(b)] (G) (C) A reseller may not sell or offer to sell speculative tickets [unless the
reseller, clearly and conspicuously, discloses to a prospective purchaser at the outset of the
sales transaction:

(1) That the tickets are speculative tickets, and the reseller is not in
possession of the tickets;

(2) That the reseller is making an offer to procure the tickets for the
prospective purchaser;

(3) An approximate date on which the tickets will be delivered to the
purchaser;

(4) The name or a description of the event for which the tickets will permit
entry;

(5) The total number of tickets included in the transaction;

(6) The number of tickets for seats that are together;

(7) The zone or section number of the tickets, to the extent applicable to
the venue; and

(8) For reserved seat tickets:

(i) The seat numbers of the tickets; or

(ii) If applicable, that the reseller cannot guarantee the specific seats
because the tickets are speculative tickets.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 456

(c) (1) A reseller shall refund to a purchaser any consideration or deposit paid
for tickets sold under this section if the reseller fails to obtain the tickets:

(i) Within 24 hours after the approximate date of delivery specified
in subsection (b)(2) of this section, but before the commencement of the event for which the
tickets were sold; or

(ii) In conformity with the disclosures required under this section.

(2) A reseller shall make a refund required under this subsection not later
than 10 days after the final day of the event for which the tickets were sold].

(H) (D) A SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE MAY NOT PROVIDE A
MARKETPLACE FOR THE SALE OR RESALE OF A TICKET THAT VIOLATES THIS
SECTION.

(E) A TICKET ISSUER, SECONDARY TICKET EXCHANGE, OR RESELLER WHO
DIRECTLY ENGAGES IN A SALES TRANSACTION WITH A PURCHASER FOR THE
PURCHASE OF A TICKET SHALL PROVIDE ~~A~~ THE PURCHASER WITH A FULL REFUND
OF THE TOTAL AMOUNT PAID, INCLUDING THE PRICE OF THE TICKET AND ANY FEES
AND TAXES, IF:

(1) THE TICKET PURCHASED IS COUNTERFEIT;

(2) THE EVENT FOR WHICH THE TICKET IS PURCHASED IS CANCELED;
OR

(3) THE TICKET FAILS TO CONFORM TO THE DESCRIPTION AS
ADVERTISED OR REPRESENTED TO THE PURCHASER BY THE SELLER.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Consumer Protection Division of the Office of the Attorney General, with
input from relevant stakeholders, shall conduct a review of the event ticket market in the
State.

(b) The review required under subsection (a) of this section shall include, to the
extent feasible, an assessment of:

(1) how event tickets are obtained for resale by professional resellers and
brokers;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 456 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) the cost of event tickets offered to and purchased by consumers on the
resale market when compared with the face values and total event ticket prices for tickets
offered to and purchased by consumers in the primary event ticket market;

(3) factors contributing to the cost of event tickets sold and offered for sale
on the resale market;

(4) problems consumers are encountering relating to the purchase of event
tickets sold and offered for sale on the resale market, including:

(i) the fraudulent sale of event tickets;

(ii) the sale of counterfeit tickets;

(iii) the denial of entry to events for which tickets were purchased by
consumers; and

(iv) the use of bots to purchase for resale tickets for in–demand
events;

(5) the impact of any measures taken in other states to protect consumers
in the event ticket market, such as through resale price caps, limits on fees and charges by
secondary market resale platforms, requiring the transferability of event tickets, and
restrictions on the use of bots to purchase tickets for resale; and

(6) any other matters identified as relevant to the protection of consumers
in the event ticket market.

(c) On or before December 1, 2024, the Consumer Protection Division of the Office
of the Attorney General shall submit a report with findings and recommendations from the
review required under this section to the Senate Finance Committee and the House
Economic Matters Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6