START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 530 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 530 
(Cecil County Senators) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Cecil County – Annual Financial Report – Filing Date 
 
 
This bill alters the filing date by which Cecil County must submit its annual financial report 
to the Department of Legislative Services (DLS) and its annual audit to the State 
Legislative Auditor from October 31 to December 31. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  None. Altering Cecil County’s annual financial and audit report deadline 
will not affect county finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Counties, municipalities, and special taxing districts must file a financial 
report covering the full period of the previous fiscal year by October 31 to DLS. Local 
jurisdictions with a population greater than 400,000, however, may take until December 31 
to file their financial report. Baltimore City and Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Montgomery, 
and Prince George’s counties are the only jurisdictions whose population is greater than 
400,000. In recent years, the General Assembly has extended the reporting deadlines in 
multiple counties. The annual financial report for Howard County is due by November 30; 
whereas, the annual financial reports for 11 counties (Allegany, Calvert, Caroline, Charles, 
Frederick, Garrett, Queen Anne’s, St. Mary’s, Somerset, Talbot, and Wicomico) are due 
by December 31. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 530/ Page 2 
The annual financial report due to DLS is commonly known as the Uniform Financial 
Report (UFR). It has been common practice for DLS to grant an extension of the UFR upon 
receipt of a reasonable request from a local jurisdiction. Local jurisdictions must also 
submit an annual audit report covering the full period of the previous fiscal year to the State 
Legislative Auditor. Chapter 493 of 2008 tied the due date for the annual audit report to 
the due date for the annual financial report. 
 
If a local jurisdiction does not submit its annual UFR on time, the Comptroller, on notice 
from the Executive Director of DLS may order the discontinuance of all money, grants or 
State aid the local jurisdiction is entitled to receive under State law, including (1) the 
income tax; (2) the tax on racing; (3) the recordation tax; (4) the admissions and amusement 
tax; and (5) the license tax. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Cecil County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - January 29, 2024 
Third Reader - February 14, 2024 
 
js/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Valarie P. Munroe 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2