START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 587 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 587 
(Senator McCray) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Procurement - Minority Business Participation - Real Property Title Insurance 
Services Reporting 
 
 
This bill requires State procurement units and the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, 
and Women Business Affairs (GOSBA) to include in their mandated annual reports 
specified data on minority business enterprise (MBE) participation in State contracting for 
real property title insurance services, including commercial real property title insurance 
services. The bill also prohibits GOSBA from waiving the reporting requirement if the 
spending threshold for real property title insurance service contracts is too low for a 
procurement unit to provide sufficient data. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The change is procedural in nature and does not directly affect 
governmental finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  “Industry type” is defined as the following procurement categories:   
 
 
construction; 
 
architectural and engineering services and other construction-related services; 
 
maintenance; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 587/ Page 2 
 
information technology; 
 
services; and 
 
goods, supplies, and equipment. 
 
The bill adds real property title insurance services (including commercial real property title 
insurance services) as a separate industry type, thereby requiring procurement units and 
GOSBA to include it as a separate category in their reporting, described below. 
 
Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, each procurement unit must report to 
GOSBA and the Maryland Department of Transportation specified information about total 
and MBE contracting for the recently completed fiscal year, including: 
 
 
the total number and value of procurement contracts with certified MBEs, by 
specific categories of MBEs and by industry type; 
 
the percentage that those contracts represent, by specific categories of MBE and by 
industry type, of the total value and number of procurement contracts; and 
 
for each MBE included in the report, all procurement contracts awarded to the MBE, 
including a description of the contract and industry type. 
 
In turn, by December 31 of each year, GOSBA must submit a report to the Board of Public 
Works and specified committees of the General Assembly that summarizes the information 
received from procurement units. If applicable, the report must include MBE participation 
data for each unit by industry type. GOSBA may waive the requirement for procurement 
units to report MBE participation by industry type if the spending threshold for the industry 
type is too low for a unit to provide sufficient data. 
 
For more information on Maryland’s MBE program please see the Appendix – Minority 
Business Enterprise Program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of General Services; Board of Public Works; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 587/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 587/ Page 4 
Appendix – Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
 
The State’s Minority Business Enterprise (MBE) program requires that a statewide goal 
for MBE contract participation be established biennially through the regulatory process 
under the Administrative Procedure Act. The biennial statewide MBE goal is established 
by the Special Secretary for the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women 
Business Affairs (GOSBA), in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation and the 
Office of the Attorney General (OAG). In a year in which there is a delay in establishing 
the overall goal, the previous year’s goal applies. The Special Secretary is also required to 
establish biennial guidelines for State procurement units to consider in deciding whether 
to establish subgoals for different minority groups recognized in statute. In a year in which 
there is a delay in issuing the guidelines, the previous year’s guidelines apply. The 
Maryland Department of Transportation is the State’s MBE certification agency. 
 
In August 2013, GOSBA announced a new statewide goal of 29% MBE participation that 
applied to fiscal 2014 and 2015; as no new goal has been established, the 29% goal remains 
in effect for fiscal 2024. GOSBA issued subgoal guidelines in July 2011 and then updated 
them effective August 2020, as summarized in Exhibit 1. The guidelines state that subgoals 
may be used only when the overall MBE goal for a contract is greater than or equal to the 
sum of all recommended subgoals for the appropriate industry, plus two. MBE prime 
contractors may count their own work for up to 50% of a contract’s MBE goal and up to 
100% of any contract subgoal. Their full participation counts toward the State’s 29% goal. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Subgoal Guidelines for Minority Business Enterprise Participation 
 
 
Construction 
Architectural/ 
Engineering Maintenance 
Information 
Technology Services 
Supplies/ 
Equipment 
African 
American 
8% 
7% 
9% 
10% 
- 
6% 
Hispanic 
- 
- 
3% 
- 
2% 
2% 
Asian 
- 
- 
2% 
- 
3% 
- 
Women 
11% 
10% 
- 
10% 
10% 
8% 
Total 
19% 
17% 
14% 
20% 
15% 
16% 
Total +2 
21% 
19% 
16% 
22% 
17% 
18% 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 587/ Page 5 
There are no penalties for agencies that fail to reach the statewide target. However, 
Chapters 155 and 156 of 2022 require GOSBA to refer prime contractors that persistently 
fail to meet MBE participation goals on their contracts to OAG for debarment for up to 
three years. 
 
History and Rationale of the Minority Business Enterprise Program 
 
In 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court held in the City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Co. that state 
or local MBE programs using race-based classifications are subject to strict scrutiny under 
the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. In 
addition, the ruling held that an MBE program must demonstrate clear evidence that the 
program is narrowly tailored to address actual disparities in the marketplace for the 
jurisdiction that operates the program. As a result, prior to each reauthorization of the 
State’s MBE program, the State conducts a disparity study to determine whether there is 
continued evidence that MBEs are underutilized in State contracting. 
 
The disparity study completed in 2017 serves as the basis for the most recent 
reauthorization of the MBE program. It found continued and ongoing disparities in the 
overall annual wages, business earnings, and rates of business formation between 
nonminority males and minorities and women in Maryland. For instance, average annual 
wages for African Americans (both men and women) were 37% lower than for comparable 
nonminority males; average annual wages for nonminority women were 33% lower than 
for comparable nonminority males. It also found continued disparities in the use of MBEs 
by the State compared to their availability in the marketplace to perform work in designated 
categories of work. For instance, African American-owned construction businesses were 
paid 5.1% of State construction contract dollars, but they made up 10.3% of the 
construction sector in the relevant State marketplace. Nonminority women-owned 
construction businesses were paid 7.5% of State construction contract dollars but made up 
13.7% of the construction sector. According to the analysis, these differences were large 
and statistically significant. 
 
The MBE program is scheduled to terminate July 1, 2025; Chapters 137 and 138 of 2023, 
which reauthorized the program for the tenth time since its inception, also extended the due 
date for the new disparity study to September 2024 to inform the subsequent 
reauthorization process. Exhibit 2 provides MBE participation rates for major 
Executive Branch agencies based on contract awards made during fiscal 2022 and 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 587/ Page 6 
 
Exhibit 2 
Minority Business Enterprise Participation Rates, by Agency 
Fiscal 2022 and 2023 
 
% MBE Participation 
Cabinet Agency 
FY 2022 
FY 2023 
Aging 
4.2% 
1.2% 
Agriculture 
4.4% 
3.2% 
Budget and Management 
7.4% 
32.9% 
Commerce 
1.8% 
53.8% 
Education 
23.0% 
11.5% 
Environment 
18.9% 
37.9% 
Executive Department 
6.6% 
4.6% 
General Services 
20.1% 
19.5% 
Health 
5.5% 
8.4% 
Higher Education Commission 
2.1% 
3.0% 
Housing and Community Development 
36.7% 
48.5% 
Human Services 
15.0% 
10.5% 
Information Technology 
1.6% 
14.4% 
Juvenile Services 
6.0% 
6.5% 
Labor 
1.4% 
18.6% 
Military 
0.7% 
22.3% 
Natural Resources 
0.6% 
10.2% 
Planning 
0.3% 
0.0% 
State Police 
13.3% 
20.9% 
Public Safety and Correctional Services 
41.0% 
6.2% 
Transportation – Aviation Administration 
22.6% 
22.1% 
Transportation – Motor Vehicle Administration 
61.8% 
20.2% 
Transportation – Office of the Secretary 
26.9% 
48.5% 
Transportation – Port Administration 
9.7% 
13.1% 
Transportation – State Highway Administration 
20.9% 
21.7% 
Transportation – Transit Administration 
24.8% 
12.0% 
Transportation – Transportation Authority 
18.8% 
19.4% 
Statewide Total1 
17.3% 
17.9% 
 
1 Includes the University System of Maryland, Morgan State University, St. Mary’s College of Maryland, 
and non-Cabinet agencies. 
 
Source:  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 587/ Page 7 
Requirements for Minority Business Enterprise Certification 
 
An MBE is a legal entity, other than a joint venture, that is: 
 
 
organized to engage in commercial transactions; 
 
at least 51% owned and controlled by one or more individuals who are socially and 
economically disadvantaged; and 
 
managed by, and the daily business operations of which are controlled by, one or 
more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
 
A socially and economically disadvantaged individual is defined as a citizen or legal 
U.S. resident who is African American, Native American, Asian, Hispanic, physically or 
mentally disabled, a woman, or otherwise found by the State’s MBE certification agency 
to be socially and economically disadvantaged. An MBE owned by a woman who is also 
a member of an ethnic or racial minority group may be certified as being owned by both a 
woman and by a member of a racial or ethnic minority, but for the purpose of participating 
on a contract as an MBE, it can only be counted as one or the other. 
 
A socially disadvantaged individual is someone who has been subject to racial or ethnic 
prejudice or cultural bias within American society because of his or her membership in a 
group and without regard to individual qualities. An economically disadvantaged 
individual is someone who is socially disadvantaged whose ability to compete in the 
free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities 
compared with those who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual with a personal net 
worth in excess of $1.5 million, adjusted annually for inflation, is not considered 
economically disadvantaged. The inflation-adjusted limit for calendar 2024 is $2,073,412. 
 

END OF PAGE 7