START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 580 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 580 
(Senator Guzzone, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Sales and Use Tax - Nonprofit Organizations Maintaining Memorials - 
Exemption 
 
 
This bill exempts from the State sales and use tax sales made by specified nonprofit 
organizations that maintain a memorial on property that is owned by the State if the 
proceeds of the sale are used to maintain a memorial on State-owned property. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund and Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund (BMFF) revenues 
decrease by a minimal amount beginning in FY 2025. Expenditures are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The State sales and use tax does not apply to sales made by a bona fide 
religious organization, if the sale is made for the general purposes of the organization. In 
addition, sales made by the following organizations are also exempt from the State sales 
and use tax, including:   
 
 
a gift shop at a mental hospital operated by the Department of Health; 
 
a hospital thrift shop operated by volunteers; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 580/ Page 2 
 
specified vending facilities operated under the Maryland Vending Program for the 
Blind; 
 
an elementary or secondary school or a nonprofit parent-teacher organization for the 
sale of magazine subscriptions in a fundraising campaign; and 
 
a parent-teacher organization or other organization within an elementary or 
secondary school in the State or within a school system in the State. 
 
The sales tax also does not apply to a sale of food if the proceeds are used to support a 
bona fide nationally organized and recognized veterans’ organization or auxiliary. 
 
State Sales and Use Tax 
 
The sales and use tax is the State’s second largest source of general fund revenue, 
accounting for approximately $5.9 billion in fiscal 2024 and $6.1 billion in fiscal 2025, 
according to the December 2023 revenue forecast. Exhibit 1 shows the sales and use tax 
rates in surrounding states and the District of Columbia. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Sales and Use Tax Rates in Maryland and Surrounding States 
 
Delaware 
0.0% 
District of Columbia 
6.0%; 10.0% for liquor sold for on-the-premises consumption and 
restaurant meals; 10.25% for alcoholic beverages for consumption 
off the premises, tickets to specified sporting events, and specified 
rental vehicles; 8.0% for specified soft drinks; 14.95% for transient 
accommodations; 18% for motor vehicle parking in commercial 
lots 
Maryland 
6.0% 
9.0% for alcoholic beverages 
Pennsylvania 
6.0% plus 1.0% or 2.0% in certain local jurisdictions 
Virginia* 
5.3%; 1.0% for eligible food items; 1.0% for specified essential 
personal hygiene items 
West Virginia 
6.0% plus 1.0% in specified municipalities 
 
* An additional state tax of (1) 0.7% is imposed in localities in Central Virginia, Northern Virginia, and the 
Hampton Roads region; (2) 1.0% in Charlotte, Gloucester, Halifax, Henry, Northampton, Patrick, and 
Pittsylvania counties, and the City of Danville; and (3) 1.7% is imposed in James City County, 
York County, and Williamsburg (Historic Triangle). The sales and use tax rate for food and personal 
hygiene products decreased to 1.0% as of January 1, 2023. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 580/ Page 3 
Blueprint for Maryland’s Future Fund 
 
Chapter 33 of 2022 altered the distribution of sales and use tax revenues beginning in 
fiscal 2023. Chapter 33 requires the Comptroller, after making certain other distributions, 
to pay to BMFF the following percentage of the remaining sales and use tax revenues:   
 
 
9.2% for fiscal 2023; 
 
11.0% for fiscal 2024; 
 
11.3% for fiscal 2025; 
 
11.7% for fiscal 2026; and 
 
12.1% for fiscal 2027 and each subsequent fiscal year. 
 
Chapter 33 also repealed the distribution of sales and use tax revenues to the BMFF from 
marketplace facilitators, certain out-of-state vendors, and specified digital products or 
digital codes. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund and BMFF revenues decrease by a minimal amount 
beginning in fiscal 2025. At least one organization – the Maryland Fire-Rescue Memorial 
Foundation – meets the exemption qualifications of the bill. The organization reports 
remitting approximately $7,250 in sales and use taxes since 2009 from the sale of 
merchandise at various events, which is approximately $480 in sales and use taxes 
annually. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of General Services; Maryland 
State Archives; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3