START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 687

Chapter 687

(Senate Bill 530)

AN ACT concerning

Cecil County – Annual Financial Report – Filing Date

FOR the purpose of altering the date by which Cecil County is required to file a certain
financial report with the Department of Legislative Services; and generally relating
Cecil County’s annual financial report.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Local Government
Section 16–304
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Local Government

16–304.

(a) (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, on or before
October 31 after the close of its fiscal year, each county, municipality, and special taxing
district shall file with the Department of Legislative Services a financial report for that
fiscal year.

(2) (i) A county, municipality, or special taxing district with a
population of over 400,000 may file its financial report on or before December 31 after the
close of its fiscal year.

(ii) Unless subparagraph (i) of this paragraph applies, Howard
County may file its financial report on or before November 30 after the close of its fiscal
year.

(iii) Allegany County, Calvert County, Caroline County, CECIL
COUNTY, Charles County, Frederick County, Garrett County, Queen Anne’s County, St.
Mary’s County, Somerset County, Talbot County, and Wicomico County may file the
county’s financial report on or before December 31 after the close of the county’s fiscal year.

(b) The financial report required under subsection (a) of this section shall be:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 687 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) prepared on the form established by the Department of Legislative
Services; and

(2) verified by the chief executive officer of the county, municipality, or
special taxing district.

(c) If a county, municipality, or special taxing district does not comply with
subsection (a) of this section, the Comptroller, on notice from the Executive Director of the
Department of Legislative Services, may order the discontinuance of all money, grants, or
State aid that the county, municipality, or special taxing district is entitled to receive under
State law, including money from:

(1) the income tax;

(2) the tax on racing;

(3) the recordation tax;

(4) the admissions and amusement tax; and

(5) the license tax.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2