START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 556 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 556 
(Senator Salling) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Procurement – Construction Contingency Fund 
 
 
This bill authorizes payments from the Construction Contingency Fund (CCF), under 
specified conditions in current law, for construction contracts that include price 
adjustments for material price fluctuations of identified eligible project-specific materials. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No material effect on State operations or finances, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill applies only to State contracts. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Mandated Study  
 
Chapter 516 of 2022 required the Secretary of Transportation and the Secretary of General 
Services, by December 1, 2022, to each report to the General Assembly on (1) the number 
and percentage of State construction procurements using a fixed-price contract with price 
adjustment and (2) for price adjustments executed under those contracts, the material types 
affected and the average price adjustment for each material type. The reports were required 
to include data from fiscal 2019 through 2021. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 556/ Page 2 
In response to Chapter 516, the Department of General Services advised that it had no 
fixed-price construction contracts with price adjustments for the reporting period. For the 
Maryland Department of Transportation, Exhibit 1 summarizes the data on construction 
contracts for the reporting period. 
 
 
Exhibit 1 
Maryland Department of Transportation Fixed-price Construction Contracts 
Fiscal 2019-2021 
 
 
FY 2019 
FY 2020 
FY 2021 
Total Construction Contracts 
144 
99 
71 
Fixed-price Contracts with Price Adjustment 
83 
54 
37 
Number of Contracts with Adjustments Made 
83 
54 
37 
 
Source:  Maryland Department of Transportation 
 
 
Construction Contingency Fund  
 
CCF is a continuing, nonlapsing, revolving fund that consists of (1) money appropriated to 
the fund, as specified; (2) unspent proceeds of an enabling act allocated to the fund by the 
Governor; or (3) amounts appropriated in an annual General Construction Loan Act or in 
the Maryland Consolidated Capital Bond Loan Act that are in excess of the amount needed 
for a project in the Act and that are allocated to CCF by the Governor. 
 
With the approval of the Governor, the Secretaries of Budget and Management and of 
General Services may request that the Board of Public Works authorize an expenditure 
from CCF to supplement any capital appropriation or to conduct value engineering on a 
project. The appropriation must be (1) for a project to be owned by the State and contained 
in a capital appropriation of an annual budget or similar vehicle and (2) insufficient to 
permit the initial award of a contract for a project in accordance with applicable State law, 
or to cover specified change orders. 
 
State Expenditures:  CCF ended calendar 2023 with a balance of $14.7 million. In 
addition to receiving allocations of recycled funds from capital projects that were 
completed under budget, CCF also receives periodic appropriations from the capital 
budget, including $8.0 million in the fiscal 2024 capital budget and $2.5 million in the 
fiscal 2025 capital budget as introduced. Therefore, it is assumed that costs identified for 
reimbursement under the bill are covered by CCF and that the bill has no further material 
effect on State finances.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 556/ Page 3 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses working on State construction contracts may 
receive compensation from CCF if the cost of materials used in their project increase. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None.. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Department of General 
Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; Board of Public Works; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Michael C. Rubenstein 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3