START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 500 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 500 
(Senator M. Washington) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Education - Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the qualifications for an award from the Child Care Career and Professional 
Development Fund to include an individual who has committed to work in an approved 
child care setting for at least 20 hours per week for a period of time determined by the 
Office of Child Care (OCC) within the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) 
after completing a required course of study. The bill requires awards from the fund to be 
prioritized to the following applicants:  (1) an applicant who has not completed any college 
courses for credit from an accredited college or university and (2) an applicant who attends 
(or has been accepted) by an accredited college or university that offers native language or 
bilingual coursework in early childhood education (or a related field). An award recipient 
must repay OCC the funds received if the recipient does not perform the service obligation. 
However, the repayment may be waived or deferred if the recipient provides satisfactory 
evidence of extenuating circumstances (e.g., illness or disability) that prevent the recipient 
from fulfilling the service obligation. The bill applies only prospectively. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  MSDE can implement the required changes with existing resources. 
Revenues are not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 500/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Child Care Career and Professional Development Fund within MSDE 
may award funding to an individual who has:   
 
 
obtained at least a level two in the Maryland Child Care Credential Program; 
 
documented at least one year of experience working with groups of children in an 
approved setting; and 
 
been accepted by an accredited college or university for enrollment in at least 
one course for credit toward a degree in early childhood education or related field. 
 
An award may only be:   
 
 
applied toward the cost of (1) tuition and fees or (2) textbooks required by a course 
in which the awardee is enrolled; and 
 
used by the awardee for the actual expense of college coursework incurred 
subsequent to an award to the completion of (1) a college degree in early childhood 
education or a related field or (2) developmental coursework required to meet 
prerequisites for a degree program in early childhood education or a related field. 
 
Additional Comments:  MSDE advises that the fiscal 2025 budget as introduced does not 
include funding for the program. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 600 (Delegate Palakovich Carr) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland State Department of Education; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 6, 2024 
Third Reader - March 1, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2