START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 441

Chapter 441

(Senate Bill 524)

AN ACT concerning

General Assembly – Committee Chairs and Vice Chairs – Gender–Neutral
Language

FOR the purpose of altering certain terminology that refers to chairs and vice chairs of
committees of the General Assembly to be gender–neutral; and generally relating to
chairs and vice chairs of committees of the General Assembly.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 2–403(a), 2–404, 2–405(b), 2–406(b)(1), 2–504, 2–604, 2–704(a), 2–804,
2–805(b), 2–904, 2–1003(a)(2) and (b), 2–10A–01(d), 2–10A–06(f),
2–1224(d)(2), 2–1258(a)(2), 2–1505(c)(2) and (f), 2–1605, and 2–1609(h)(2)(v)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Government

2–403.

(a) The Legislative Policy Committee consists of the following 28 members:

(1) from the Senate:

(i) the President;

(ii) the President Pro Tem;

(iii) the Majority Leader;

(iv) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Budget and Taxation Committee;

(v) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the [Education, Health, and
Environmental Affairs Committee] COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE
ENVIRONMENT;

(vi) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Finance Committee;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 441 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(vii) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Judicial Proceedings Committee;

(viii) the Minority Leader; and

(ix) 1. 6 other Senators, appointed by the President and approved
by majority vote of the Senate; or

2. if a Senator simultaneously serves in 2 of the positions set
forth in items (ii) through (vii), inclusive, of this [paragraph] ITEM, 7 other Senators,
appointed by the President and approved by majority vote of the Senate; and

(2) from the House:

(i) the Speaker;

(ii) the Speaker Pro Tem;

(iii) the Majority Leader;

(iv) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Appropriations Committee;

(v) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Health and Government
Operations Committee;

(vi) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Economic Matters Committee;

(vii) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Environment and Transportation
Committee;

(viii) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Judiciary Committee;

(ix) the [Chairman] CHAIR of the Ways and Means Committee;

(x) the Minority Leader; and

(xi) 1. 4 other Delegates, appointed by the Speaker and approved
by majority vote of the House; or

2. if a Delegate simultaneously serves in 2 of the positions
set forth in items (ii) through (ix), inclusive, of this [paragraph] ITEM, 5 other Delegates,
appointed by the Speaker and approved by majority vote of the House.

2–404.

The President and the Speaker are [cochairmen] COCHAIRS of the Committee.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 441

2–405.

(b) (1) If a vacancy occurs in one of the offices of [cochairmen] COCHAIRS of
the Committee, a successor shall be elected:

(i) for the Senate [cochairman] COCHAIR, by the Senators on the
Committee; and

(ii) for the House [cochairman] COCHAIR, by the Delegates on the
Committee.

(2) If vacancies occur in both offices of the [cochairmen] COCHAIRS of the
Committee, the successors shall be elected from among the remaining members of the
Committee by those members. One of the [cochairmen] COCHAIRS shall be a Senator, and
one shall be a Delegate.

2–406.

(b) (1) The Committee shall meet as often as necessary, at the times and places
that its [cochairmen] COCHAIRS determine.

2–504.

The Senate [Chairman] CHAIR and the House [Chairman] CHAIR of the Committee
shall be appointed by the President and the Speaker, respectively, from the membership of
the Committee. One shall be a Senator appointed by the President, and the other shall be
a Delegate appointed by the Speaker. The presiding [chairmanship] CHAIRSHIP and
[cochairmanship] COCHAIRSHIP shall be alternated annually between the Senate and the
House.

2–604.

The President and the Speaker jointly shall appoint the [chairman] CHAIR and the
vice [chairman] CHAIR of the Committee.

2–704.

(a) The President and the Speaker:

(1) jointly shall appoint a [chairman] CHAIR and a vice [chairman] CHAIR
of the Committee; or

(2) each shall appoint a [cochairman] COCHAIR of the Committee.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 441 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2–804.

The President and the Speaker jointly shall appoint the [chairman] CHAIR and the
vice [chairman] CHAIR of the Committee.

2–805.

(b) The Committee shall meet:

(1) at the times and places that it determines; and

(2) at the call of its [chairman] CHAIR or, if the [chairman] CHAIR is
absent, at the call of its vice [chairman] CHAIR.

2–904.

(a) The President and the Speaker jointly shall appoint a [chairman] CHAIR and
a vice [chairman] CHAIR of the Committee.

(b) (1) The President shall appoint a [chairman] CHAIR of the Senate
members of the Committee.

(2) The Speaker shall appoint a [chairman] CHAIR of the House members
of the Committee.

2–1003.

(a) On or before June 1 of each year, the Legislative Policy Committee shall create
a Spending Affordability Committee comprised of an equal number of Senators and
Delegates. The Committee membership includes:

(2) the [chairmen] CHAIRS of the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee
and the House Appropriations Committee;

(b) The [chairman] CHAIR of the Committee shall be designated jointly by the
President and the Speaker.

2–10A–01.

(d) The President and the Speaker shall jointly appoint a Senator and a Delegate
each to serve as [cochairman] COCHAIRS.

2–10A–06.

(f) (1) From among the membership of the Committee, the President shall

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 441

appoint a Senator to serve as the Senate [chairman] CHAIR of the Committee and the
Speaker shall appoint a Delegate to serve as the House [chairman] CHAIR of the
Committee.

(2) The Senate [chairman] CHAIR and the House [chairman] CHAIR shall
alternate annually as presiding [chairman] CHAIR and [cochairman] COCHAIR of the
Committee.

2–1224.

(d) The Legislative Auditor shall send a copy of the report to:

(2) the [Chairmen] CHAIRS of the Senate Budget and Taxation and House
Appropriations Committees;

2–1258.

(a) (2) On request, the Department shall provide one additional copy of an
annotated code of Maryland to each:

(i) presiding officer;

(ii) pro tempore officer;

(iii) [chairman] CHAIR of a standing committee;

(iv) majority leader; and

(v) minority leader.

2–1505.

(c) (2) If the [chairman] CHAIR of the committee to which a bill is referred
certifies that prompt committee action on the bill is needed to conduct legislative business
and, before the Department prepares the fiscal note for the bill, holds a hearing on the bill,
the Department shall prepare the note as soon after the hearing as possible.

(f) As soon as possible after the adoption of an amendment that changes the fiscal
impact of a bill, the Department of Legislative Services shall:

(1) prepare a revised fiscal note for the bill; and

(2) send the revised note:

(i) to the [chairman] CHAIR of the committee to which the bill is
referred in the house of origin;
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 441 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) if the bill has reached the opposite house, to the [chairman]
CHAIR of the committee to which the bill is referred in that house;

(iii) if the bill is in the custody of either the Secretary of the Senate
or the Chief Clerk of the House, to that officer; and

(iv) to the primary sponsor of the bill.

2–1605.

(a) An investigating committee shall have the [chairman and vice chairman]
CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR who:

(1) are appointed by the resolution that establishes the investigating
committee; or

(2) if the resolution does not appoint these officers, are elected by
affirmative vote of a majority of all of the members of the investigating committee.

(b) The rules of an investigating committee shall provide for the selection of a
presiding officer to act if the [chairman and vice chairman] CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR are
absent or unable to act.

(c) (1) At a hearing of an investigating committee, the presiding officer shall
be:

(i) the [chairman] CHAIR of the investigating committee;

(ii) if the [chairman] CHAIR is absent or otherwise unable to preside,
the vice [chairman] CHAIR; or

(iii) if the [chairman and vice chairman] CHAIR AND VICE CHAIR
are absent or otherwise unable to preside, the individual who is selected under the rules of
the investigating committee.

(2) At a hearing, the presiding officer:

(i) shall examine the witnesses or supervise the examination by any
other member of the investigating committee or by staff who are authorized to examine
witnesses; and

(ii) may direct a witness to answer a relevant question or to provide
a relevant book, document, or paper.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 441

2–1609.

(h) (2) The record shall include:

(v) any other matter that the investigating committee or its
[chairman] CHAIR directs.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7