START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 579 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 579 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation and Education, Energy, 
and the Environment 
Ways and Means 
 
Primary and Secondary Education - Breakfast and Lunch Programs - Universal 
Expansion Report 
 
 
This bill requires the Maryland State Department of Education (MSDE) to report to the 
General Assembly on the cost to provide free breakfast and lunch to all students in public 
schools in the State by December 1, 2024. Specified items that MSDE must consider for 
each county in determining the cost include the current rate of providing free breakfast and 
lunch through (1) Maryland Meals for Achievement and (2) participation in the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Community Eligibility Program (CEP). Also, in 
determining the cost, specified data by county must be considered and must be 
disaggregated by (1) elementary, middle, and high school and (2) breakfast and lunch. 
MSDE must also compile research completed in other states that have established universal 
meal programs and prepare a summary of any findings in those reports. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. MSDE can handle the bill’s requirements using existing resources. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 579/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
School Nutrition Programs 
 
The School Breakfast Program and the National School Lunch Program are federally 
assisted meal programs for schools. The School Breakfast Program subsidizes public and 
participating nonprofit private schools of high school grade or lower and participating 
residential child care institutions for breakfast meals served to children. Similarly, the 
National School Lunch Program subsidizes public and participating nonprofit private 
schools of high school grade or lower and participating residential child care institutions 
for lunches served to children. In both programs, federal funds pass through MSDE to 
participating schools and institutions. 
 
Maryland Meals for Achievement 
 
Maryland Meals for Achievement (MMFA) is a joint effort of MSDE and local boards of 
education or sponsoring agencies for eligible nonpublic schools. MMFA provides funding 
for schools that make an in-class breakfast available to all students enrolled in schools in 
which 40% or more of the students qualify for free or reduced priced meals (FRPMs). A 
school that for one year falls below the 40% FRPM student population eligibility threshold 
is eligible for MMFA funding in that year. However, the school is no longer eligible for 
MMFA funding if its percentage of students falls below 40% in a second consecutive year. 
 
Schools are selected to participate in the program and must serve breakfasts that meet 
MSDE guidelines and federal nutritional standards for schools that participate in the federal 
school breakfast program. Participating schools must serve breakfasts in the classroom 
after arrival of students to the school. However, secondary schools (middle schools and 
high schools) that participate in MMFA may serve breakfast in any part of the school, 
including from “Grab and Go” carts, after arrival of students to the school. Under 
Chapter 628 of 2023, the Governor must include in the annual budget bill $12.05 million 
for MMFA. Accordingly, the fiscal 2025 allowance includes $12.05 million for MMFA.   
 
Maryland Cares for Kids Act 
 
Under the Maryland Cares for Kids Act (Chapter 560 of 2018), the State is responsible for 
the student share of the costs of (1) reduced-price breakfasts provided under the federal 
School Breakfast Program by fiscal 2022 and (2) reduced-price lunches provided under the 
National School Lunch Program by fiscal 2023. A local board of education or participating 
nonpublic school is prohibited from charging a student who is eligible for a reduced-price 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 579/ Page 3 
breakfast or a reduced-price lunch, for any portion of the cost of a meal. The fiscal 2025 
allowance includes $3.9 million for this reduced-price meals program.   
 
Community Eligibility Program 
 
The Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010, in part, amended the federal National School 
Lunch Act to provide the CEP alternative to household applications for FRPM in 
high-poverty local education agencies (LEAs) and schools. To be eligible, LEAs and 
schools must meet a minimum level of students directly certified for free meals (25% of 
enrollment) in the year prior to implementing the option, agree to serve free lunches and 
breakfasts to all students, and agree to cover with nonfederal funds any costs of providing 
free meals to all students above amounts provided in federal assistance. 
 
Reimbursement is based on claiming percentages derived from the percentage of students 
directly certified as increased by use of a multiplier determined by USDA, which has been 
set at 1.6 since the inception of CEP. An LEA may participate in CEP for all schools in an 
LEA or only some schools, depending on the eligibility of the individual schools and 
financial considerations based on the anticipated level of federal reimbursement and other 
nonfederal support that may be available. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 628 and SB 557 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 696 (Delegate Palakovich Carr, et al.) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Anne Arundel County Public 
Schools; St. Mary’s County Public Schools; Baltimore County Public Schools; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Budget and Management; American 
Heart Association; Food Research & Action Center; Maryland State Department of 
Education; U.S. Department of Agriculture; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Scott P. Gates 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3