START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 330

Chapter 330

(Senate Bill 564)

AN ACT concerning

Real Estate Brokers – Licensing – License Renewals and Continuing Education

FOR the purpose of repealing certain processes regarding the expiration of certain licenses
for real estate brokers, associate real estate brokers, and real estate salespersons;
requiring that certain licenses expire on a staggered basis; modifying and setting
certain time frames for certain processes regarding the expiration of certain licenses;
authorizing the State Real Estate Commission to set a certain fee under certain
circumstances; ~~repealing~~ ~~a~~ ~~requirement~~ ~~that~~ ~~certain~~ ~~ethics~~ ~~courses~~ ~~discuss~~ ~~certain~~
~~flipping~~ ~~and~~ ~~fraudulent~~ ~~practices;~~ altering certain regulatory requirements for
conducting certain continuing education courses; repealing certain requirements for
completion and submission of certain continuing education courses; requiring that
certain entities submit certain continuing education course information to the
Commission under certain circumstances; and generally relating to licensing of real
estate brokers by the State Real Estate Commission.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Business Occupations and Professions
Section 17–314 and 17–315
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Business Occupations and Professions

17–314.

(a) [Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, unless a real estate broker
license is renewed for a 2–year term as provided in this section, the license expires on the
first March 1 that comes:

(1) after the effective date of the license; and

(2) in an even–numbered year.

(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, unless an associate real
estate broker or real estate salesperson license is renewed for a 2–year term as provided in
this section, the license expires on the first April 30 that comes:

(1) after the effective date of the license; and
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 330 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) in an even–numbered year.

(c) The Secretary may determine that licenses] LICENSES issued under this title
shall expire on a staggered basis.

[(d)] (B) (1) At least [1 month] 60 DAYS before a license expires, the
Commission shall mail or electronically transmit to the licensee, as provided in paragraph
(2) of this subsection:

(i) a renewal application form; and

(ii) a notice that states:

1. the date on which the current license expires; and

2. the amount of the renewal fee.

(2) (i) If the licensee is a real estate broker, the Commission shall mail
or electronically transmit the renewal application form and notice to the principal office of
the broker.

(ii) If the licensee is an associate real estate broker or a real estate
salesperson, the Commission shall mail or electronically transmit the renewal application
form and notice to the principal office of the real estate broker with whom the licensee is
affiliated.

(3) If an electronic transmission under paragraph (1) or (2) of this
subsection is returned to the Commission as undeliverable, the Commission shall mail to
the licensee, at the last known address of the licensee, the materials required under
paragraph (1) of this subsection within 10 business days of the date the Commission
received the notice that the electronic transmission was undeliverable.

[(e)] (C) (1) Before a license expires, the licensee periodically may renew it
for an additional 2–year term, if the licensee:

[(1)] (I) otherwise is entitled to be licensed;

[(2)] (II) pays to the Commission a renewal fee set by the Commission;

[(3)] (III) submits to the Commission a renewal application on the form
that the Commission provides;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 330

[(4)] (IV) [submits to the Commission the original certificate of completion
verifying that the licensee] NOT LATER THAN 30 DAYS BEFORE THE LICENSE EXPIRES,
has complied with the continuing education requirements under § 17–315 of this subtitle;

[(5)] (V) notifies the Commission of the name of each real estate broker
with whom the licensee then is affiliated; and

[(6)] (VI) for the renewal of a real estate broker license:

[(i)] 1. submits to the Commission, by a credit reporting agency
approved by the Commission, a credit report that contains the information required by the
Commission; or

[(ii)] 2. pays to the Commission or the Commission’s designee a
credit report fee in an amount not to exceed the cost charged by a credit reporting agency
approved by the Commission to obtain a credit report that contains the information
required by the Commission for renewal of a real estate broker license.

(2) A LICENSEE WHO FAILS TO COMPLY WITH PARAGRAPH (1)(IV) OF
THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE SUBJECT TO A ~~REASONABLE~~ ~~PROCESSING~~
REINSTATEMENT FEE SET BY THE COMMISSION.

[(f)] (D) The Commission shall renew the license of and issue a renewal
certificate and pocket card to each licensee who meets the requirements of this section.

[(g)] (E) The Commission shall reinstate the license of a licensee under this title
whose license has expired if the licensee:

(1) applies to the Commission for reinstatement within 3 years after the
license expires;

(2) meets the requirement of good character and reputation;

(3) complies with the applicable continuing education requirement for the
period during which the individual was not licensed; and

(4) pays to the Commission a reinstatement fee set by the Commission.

17–315.

(a) (1) To qualify for renewal of a license under this subtitle, a licensee shall
complete at least 15 clock hours of continuing education instruction, as provided in
subsection (b) of this section, during the preceding 2–year term.

(2) For a licensee who provides real estate brokerage services solely in
connection with nonresidential real estate, of the clock hours required under paragraph (1)
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 330 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

of this subsection, 1.5 clock hours may be satisfied by a course regarding fair housing laws
and regulations or the federal Americans with Disabilities Act.

(3) A licensee holding a license from another state must complete at least
the number of clock hours of continuing education instruction required under paragraph
(1) of this subsection during each 2–year license term and may substitute clock hours of
continuing education instruction earned in another state, if those clock hours:

(i) are approved as real estate continuing education in that state;
and

(ii) meet the distribution requirements of subsection (b)(2) of this
section.

(4) The Commission shall grant the substitution of clock hours in
paragraph (3) of this subsection only if the other state permits the substitution of clock
hours of continuing education instruction approved by the Commission for a licensee of this
State.

(b) (1) The Commission shall approve the form, substance, and, as provided
under paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, subject matter of all continuing education
courses.

(2) For a licensee who has been issued a renewal certificate under § 17–314
of this subtitle, the subject matter approved by the Commission shall:

(i) relate to real estate or to a subject matter intended to assist a
licensee in providing real estate brokerage services to the public in a more efficient and
effective manner, provided that the subject matter is related to helping the public buy or
sell real estate;

(ii) every 2 years, include at least one 3 clock hour course that
outlines relevant changes that have occurred in federal, State, or local laws and
regulations, court cases and industry trends that have an impact on those laws and
regulations, or any combination of those laws, regulations, court cases, and industry trends;

(iii) every 2 years, include at least one 1.5 clock hour course that
outlines federal, State, and local fair housing laws and regulations, including fair housing
advertising;

(iv) every 2 years, include at least one 3 clock hour ethics course that
includes a discussion of:

1. the Maryland Code of Ethics; AND

2. [the practice of flipping;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 330

3. fraudulent real estate practices; and

4.] professionalism as it relates to the Maryland Code of
Ethics, including a discussion relating to conflict resolution and a licensee’s duty to respect
the public, peers, and property;

(v) every 2 years, include at least one 3 clock hour course that
includes the principles of real estate brokerage relationships and disclosures; and

(vi) every 2 years for the renewal of a real estate broker license and
the renewal of the license of an individual designated as a branch office manager or a team
leader, include at least one 3 clock hour course that includes the requirements of broker
supervision.

(3) For a licensee who was issued an initial license under § 17–309 of this
subtitle, the subject matter approved by the Commission shall include:

(i) at least one 3 clock hour course for each of the following topics:

1. outlining contract writing, standard contract provisions,
key regional contract requirements, and standard addenda and contingencies;

2. the principles of real estate brokerage relationships and
disclosures and disclosure requirements for sellers;

3. the principles of real estate practice in relation to:

A. advertising requirements for licensees;

B. the handling and disclosure of escrow funds; and

C. common ownership communities; and

4. property management and landlord and tenant laws; and

(ii) at least one 1.5 clock hour course for each of the following topics:

1. professionalism as it relates to the Maryland Code of
Ethics, including a discussion relating to conflict resolution and a licensee’s duty of respect
for the public, peers, and property; and

2. real estate financing.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 330 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) The requirement of paragraph (2)(iii) of this subsection does not apply
to a licensee who provides real estate brokerage services solely in connection with
nonresidential real estate.

(5) To be acceptable for credit as a continuing education course under this
section, the course shall cover 1 or more topics approved by the Commission.

(c) (1) Continuing education courses may be conducted by:

(i) the Maryland Association of Realtors or its member boards;

(ii) the Real Estate Brokers of Baltimore, Inc.;

(iii) any similar professional association; or

(iv) an educational institution approved by the Commission.

(2) Continuing education courses shall be taught by a qualified instructor
who is experienced in the real estate industry.

(3) [On or before January 1, 2003, the] THE Commission shall adopt
regulations that provide for the conduct of continuing education instruction courses by[:

(i) remote access satellite;

(ii) closed–circuit video;

(iii) computer, including transmission over the Internet and the
World Wide Web;

(iv) home study; and

(v) any other delivery system approved by the Commission]
VIRTUAL OR REMOTE MEANS.

(4) To verify the identity of an individual enrolled in a continuing education
course, the entity that conducts the continuing education course shall require, as a
condition of participating in the course, that the individual provide:

(i) for an in–person course, a photo identification; and

(ii) for a virtual or other remote course, a signed affidavit attesting
to the identity of the individual.

(d) If feasible, continuing education courses shall be offered at reasonable
intervals in each county and in each major geographic area of the larger counties.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 330

(e) [(1) Subject to subsection (f) of this section, on completion of a continuing
education course by a licensee, the entity that conducted the course or the instructor shall
issue to the licensee a certificate of completion that states the number of clock hours of that
course.

(2) The Commission shall accept as evidence of completion of a continuing
education course the certificate of completion, a photocopy of the certificate, an electronic
mail certificate, or a photocopy of an electronic mail certificate.

(f) (1) Instead of providing a certificate of completion to the licensee under
subsection (e) of this section,] WITHIN 14 DAYS AFTER COMPLETION OF A CONTINUING
EDUCATION COURSE, the entity that conducted the course may submit the course
completion information directly to the Commission and the licensee by electronic means.

[(2) On or after January 1, 2013, the Commission may require all entities
conducting continuing education courses to submit course completion information only by
electronic means.]

[(g)] (F) The Commission may waive the requirements of this section for a
licensee if the licensee shows good cause for being unable to meet the requirements.

[(h)] (G) The Commission shall require each course provider to pay a continuing
education course application fee of $25.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7