START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 539 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 539 
(Senator Gile, et al.) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Commercial Law – Consumer Protection – Sale and Resale of Tickets 
 
 
This bill establishes numerous consumer protections and disclosure requirements relating 
to the sale and resale of tickets. The bill also requires the Office of the Attorney General 
(OAG) to conduct a review of the event ticket market in the State. By December 1, 2024, 
OAG must report its findings and recommendations from the review to specified 
committees of the General Assembly. Violation of the bill is an unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act (MCPA), subject to 
MCPA’s civil and criminal penalty provisions. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by approximately $200,000 in FY 2025 
for OAG’s Consumer Protection Division to hire a consultant to conduct the review 
required by the bill. General fund expenditures likely further increase beginning in 
FY 2025, at least minimally, for OAG enforcement efforts, as discussed below. The bill’s 
imposition of existing penalty provisions is not anticipated to have a material impact on 
State revenues. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill’s imposition of existing penalty provisions does not have a material 
impact on local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “secondary ticket exchange” means an electronic marketplace that 
enables a person to sell, purchase, and resell tickets. A “ticket issuer” means a person that, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 539/ Page 2 
directly or indirectly, issues initial tickets for an entertainment event. The bill expands the 
definition of “speculative ticket” to mean a ticket that is not in the actual or constructive 
possession of a reseller at the time of sale, advertisement, or listing. 
 
The listing for a ticket (and each step of a transaction to purchase a ticket) must (1) clearly 
and conspicuously disclose the total price of the ticket, including all fees and taxes other 
than shipping costs that are not determinable at a step in the transaction; (2) provide an 
itemized listing of all charges that comprise the total price of the ticket, including all fees 
and taxes; and (3) identify the seat number and zone or section of the ticket, to the extent 
applicable to the seat and venue. These requirements apply only to secondary ticket 
exchanges, ticket issuers, and resellers. 
 
The total price of a ticket may be increased in a noninitial step of a transaction by the 
amount of reasonable shipping costs for physically delivered tickets. The shipping costs 
may vary with the purchaser’s location relative to the shipment’s location of origin and the 
delivery method selected by the purchaser. The total price of the ticket, including all fees, 
taxes, and shipping costs, must be clearly and conspicuously disclosed prior to final 
purchase of the ticket. 
 
A secondary ticket exchange may not provide a marketplace for the sale or resale of a ticket 
that violates the bill’s provisions. 
 
A ticket issuer, secondary ticket exchange, or reseller who directly engages in a sales 
transaction with a purchaser for the purchase of a ticket must provide the purchaser with a 
full refund of the total amount paid (including the price of the ticket and any fees and taxes), 
if (1) the ticket purchased is counterfeit; (2) the event for which the ticket is purchased is 
canceled; or (3) the ticket fails to conform to the description as advertised or represented 
to the purchaser by the seller. 
 
Finally, the bill repeals several exceptions to the prohibition against a reseller selling (or 
offering to sell) speculative tickets and provisions relating to required refunds; as a result, 
a reseller may not sell or offer to sell speculative tickets under the bill. 
 
Review of the Event Ticket Market by the Office of the Attorney General 
 
The bill requires OAG’s Consumer Protection Division, with input from relevant 
stakeholders, to conduct a review of the event ticket market in the State. The review must 
include, to the extent feasible, an assessment of:   
 
 
how event tickets are obtained for resale by professional resellers and brokers; 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 539/ Page 3 
 
the cost of event tickets offered to (and purchased by) consumers on the resale 
market when compared with the face values and total event ticket prices for tickets 
offered to (and purchased by) consumers in the primary event ticket market; 
 
factors contributing to the cost of event tickets sold and offered for sale on the resale 
market; 
 
problems consumers are encountering relating to the purchase of event tickets sold 
and offered for sale on the resale market including (1) the fraudulent sale of event 
tickets; (2) the sale of counterfeit tickets; (3) the denial of entry to events for which 
tickets were purchased by consumers; and (4) the use of bots to purchase for resale 
tickets for in-demand events; 
 
the impact of any measures taken in other states to protect consumers in the event 
ticket market, such as through resale price caps, limits on fees and charges by 
secondary market resale platforms, requiring the transferability of event tickets, and 
restrictions on the use of bots to purchase tickets for resale; and 
 
any other matters identified as relevant to the protection of consumers in the event 
ticket market. 
 
Current Law:  A “speculative ticket” is a ticket that is not in the actual or constructive 
possession of the reseller at the time of sale. A speculative ticket includes a ticket sold by 
a reseller that, at the time of resale, is not (1) in the physical possession of the reseller; 
(2) owned by the reseller; or (3) under contract to be transferred to the reseller. 
 
A “resale” is the second or subsequent sale of a ticket. A “reseller” is a person who offers 
a ticket for resale. A “ticket” means physical, electronic, or other evidence that grants the 
possessor permission to enter a place of entertainment for one or more events at a specified 
date and time. 
 
Disclosure and Refund Requirements 
 
A ticket reseller is prohibited from selling (or offering to sell) a speculative ticket (a ticket 
that is not in the actual or constructive possession of the reseller at the time of sale) unless 
the reseller discloses specified information to a prospective purchaser at the outset of the 
sales transaction. Specifically, the reseller must clearly and conspicuously disclose (1) that 
the tickets are speculative tickets, and the reseller is not in possession of the tickets; (2) that 
the reseller is making an offer to procure the tickets for the prospective purchaser; (3) an 
approximate date on which the tickets will be delivered to the purchaser; (4) the name or a 
description of the event for which the tickets will permit entry; (5) the total number of 
tickets included in the transaction; (6) the number of tickets for seats that are together; 
(7) the zone or section number of the tickets (if applicable to the venue); and (8) the seat 
numbers of any reserved seat tickets or, if applicable, that the reseller cannot guarantee the 
specific seats because the tickets are speculative tickets. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 539/ Page 4 
A ticket reseller must refund any consideration or deposit paid for tickets if the reseller 
fails to obtain the tickets (1) within 24 hours after the approximate date of specified 
delivery but before the commencement of the event or (2) in conformity with the 
disclosures noted above. A reseller must make required refunds within 10 days after the 
final day of the event for which the tickets were sold. 
 
Maryland Consumer Protection Act 
 
An unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice under MCPA includes, among other acts, 
any false, falsely disparaging, or misleading oral or written statement, visual description, 
or other representation of any kind which has the capacity, tendency, or effect of deceiving 
or misleading consumers. The prohibition against engaging in any unfair, abusive, or 
deceptive trade practice encompasses the offer for or actual sale, lease, rental, loan, or 
bailment of any consumer goods, consumer realty, or consumer services; the extension of 
consumer credit; the collection of consumer debt; or the offer for or actual purchase of 
consumer goods or consumer realty from a consumer by a merchant whose business 
includes paying off consumer debt in connection with the purchase of any consumer goods 
or consumer realty from a consumer. 
 
The Consumer Protection Division is responsible for enforcing MCPA and investigating 
the complaints of aggrieved consumers. The division may attempt to conciliate the matter, 
issue a cease and desist order, or file a civil action in court. A merchant who violates MCPA 
is subject to a fine of up to $10,000 for each violation and up to $25,000 for each repetition 
of the same violation. In addition to any civil penalties that may be imposed, any person 
who violates MCPA is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is subject to a fine of 
up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for up to one year. 
 
State Expenditures:  In fiscal 2025 only, OAG advises that it requires a consultant to 
assist with the required study of the event ticket market. Thus, general fund expenditures 
increase by approximately $200,000 for that purpose. 
 
General fund expenditures likely further increase, at least minimally, for OAG to handle 
enforcement under the bill. OAG advises that it may require as many as three additional 
positions (one full-time assistant Attorney General, one investigator, and one mediator) 
with corresponding general fund expenditures of up to $309,100 in fiscal 2025, which 
reflects a 90-day start-up delay from the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date, and $417,900 by 
fiscal 2029. 
 
However, the Department of Legislative Services advises that the extent of ongoing 
resources potentially needed by OAG is dependent on the number of complaints filed under 
the bill and the level of effort involved in each case. While generally acknowledging that 
expenditures likely increase at least minimally for enforcement efforts, without experience 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 539/ Page 5 
under the bill, the need for additional staff is unclear. To the extent that additional staffing 
resources are required, OAG may request them through the annual budget process. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any ticket issuers or resellers that are small businesses are subject 
to additional requirements under the bill (e.g., disclosure requirements, limitations on fees 
that may be charged, required refunds, etc.) and may be meaningfully affected by the bill’s 
requirements. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Cross File:  HB 701 (Delegate Wilson) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 27, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 27, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 5