START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 564 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 564 
(Senator Watson, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Economic Matters 
 
Real Estate Brokers - Licensing - License Renewals and Continuing Education 
 
 
This bill makes numerous technical and procedural changes to licensing and continuing 
education requirements for real estate brokers, associate real estate brokers, and real estate 
salespersons. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The State Real Estate Commission can implement the bill’s changes with 
existing resources. Some of the changes conform statute to current practice. Revenues are 
likely not materially affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Staggered Licenses 
 
Under current law, a real estate broker, real estate salesperson, or associate real estate 
broker license is renewed every two years on March 1, subject to specified requirements. 
The Secretary of the Department of Labor may determine that licenses expire on a 
staggered basis. Under the bill, licenses must expire on a staggered basis. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 564/ Page 2 
Renewal Process 
 
Under current law, at least one month before a license expires, the State Real Estate 
Commission must mail or electronically transmit to a licensee a renewal application form 
and a notice stating (1) the date on which the current license expires and (2) the amount of 
the renewal fee. The bill requires the notice to be sent at least 60 days before a license 
expires. 
 
Under current law, before a license expires, the licensee periodically may renew it for an 
additional two-year term if the licensee, among other things, submits to the commission 
the original certificate of completion verifying that the licensee has complied with the 
relevant continuing education requirements. The bill repeals the requirement that a licensee 
submit an original certificate of completion and instead requires the continuing education 
requirements be completed within 30 days before the license expires. If a licensee fails to 
comply with this requirement, the licensee is subject to a reinstatement fee set by the 
commission. 
 
Virtual or Remote Courses 
 
The commission is required to adopt regulations related to the conduct of continuing 
education instruction courses by (1) remote access satellite; (2) closed-circuit video; 
(3) computer; (4) home study; and (5) any other delivery system approved by the 
commission. The bill repeals these provisions and instead requires the commission to adopt 
regulations related to the conduct of continuing education by virtual or remote means. 
 
Certificate of Completion 
 
Under current law, the entity or instructor that conducts a continuing education course must 
issue to the licensee a certificate of completion that states the number of clock hours of that 
course. The commission must accept the original certificate, a photocopy, an email 
certificate, or a photocopy of an email certificate as evidence of completion of a continuing 
education course. However, instead of providing a certificate of completion to the licensee, 
the entity that conducted the course may submit the course completion information directly 
to the commission and the licensee by electronic means. Under the bill, the entity 
conducting the course is instead required to submit the course completion information 
directly the commission and the licensee by electronic means within 14 days after 
completion of the course. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 564/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 859 (Delegate A. Johnson) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 13, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3