START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 633 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 633 
(Senator Klausmeier) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Maryland Self-Service Storage Act - Sale of Personal Property in Satisfaction of 
Liens - Means of Advertising 
 
 
This bill authorizes a self-service storage facility operator to advertise a lien sale via email 
or a website without the occupant’s prior written authorization in the storage agreement. 
The bill also alters a related statement that must be contained in a self-service storage 
facility rental agreement. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Maryland Self-Service Storage Act was adopted in 1983 and applies 
to all rental agreements entered into or renewed after July 1, 1983. 
 
Under the Act, a “self-service storage facility” is any real property used for renting or 
leasing individual storage spaces in which the occupants themselves store and remove their 
own personal property on a “self-service” basis. An “operator” is defined as the owner, 
operator, lessor, sublessor, agent, or any other person authorized to manage the self-service 
storage facility. An “occupant” is defined as a person, sublessee, successor, or assignee 
entitled to use the leased space at a self-service storage facility under a rental agreement. 
“Personal property” is any movable property not affixed to land, and includes goods, wares, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 633/ Page 2 
merchandise, motor vehicles, watercraft, and household items and furnishings. “Default” 
is defined as the failure to perform an obligation or duty set forth in the rental agreement 
on time.  
 
An operator of a self-service storage facility has a lien on all personal property stored in 
each leased space for rent, labor, or other charges, and for expenses reasonably incurred in 
its sale. 
 
A rental agreement between an operator and occupant of a self-service storage facility must 
contain a statement, in bold type, advising the occupant that, in the event of the occupant’s 
default, the lien sale of personal property stored in the leased space may be advertised (1) in 
a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction where the sale is to be held; (2) by 
email; or (3) on a website. 
 
At least three days before conducting a sale of the personal property, the operator must 
advertise the time, place, and terms of the sale via the methods noted above. The operator 
may not advertise the sale through email or a website unless the occupant initials the 
required statement in the rental agreement. Additionally, notice of default may not be given 
through email unless so specified in a statement, in bold type, in the rental agreement and 
the occupant initials the statement.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 29, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Eric F. Pierce 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2