START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 615 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 615 
(Senator Simonaire, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
General Provisions - Commemorative Days - Maryland Veterans Suicide 
Prevention Day 
 
 
This bill requires the Governor to annually proclaim September 30 as Maryland Veterans 
Suicide Prevention Day. The proclamation must declare Maryland Veterans Suicide 
Prevention Day (1) a day of reflection, recollection, and determination for Maryland 
veterans, service members, family members, and all Marylanders to remember the human 
tragedy that is associated with veteran suicide and (2) a pledge to our veteran community 
to work to destigmatize mental health support, create more opportunities for those with 
mental health issues to speak freely and get the support they need, and encourage veterans 
to reach out for help. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Commemorating Maryland Veterans Suicide Prevention Day does 
not affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Nineteen official commemorative days, seven months, and one week are 
recognized in State law, as shown in Exhibit 1. The Governor also must issue a 
proclamation each year encouraging citizens and other individuals to observe a moment of 
silence at 3:00 p.m. on Memorial Day to unite in remembrance and commemorate the 
heroic acts and efforts of Marylanders who have served and died in the U.S. Armed Forces. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 615/ Page 2 
 
Exhibit 1 
Official Commemorative Days and Months in Maryland 
 
Asian Lunar New Year Day1 
January/February 
Maryland Holocaust Remembrance Day 
January 27 
Black History Month 
February 
Irish-American Heritage Month 
March 
Women’s History Month 
March 
6888th Central Postal Directory Battalion Day 
March 9 
Tuskegee Airmen Commemoration Day2 
March 
Welcome Home Vietnam Veterans Day 
March 30 
Crime Victim and Advocate Commemorative Day 
April 3 
John Hanson’s Birthday3 
April 13 
National Healthcare Decisions Day 
April 16 
Maryland Centenarians Day4 
May 
Negro Baseball League Day5 
May 
Law Day U.S.A. 
May 1 
Fire, Rescue, and Emergency Services Workers Day6 
June 
Chesapeake Bay Awareness Week7 
June 
Maryland Charter Day 
June 20 
Thurgood Marshall Day 
July 2 
Caribbean Heritage Month 
August 
Hispanic Heritage Month8 
September/October 
German-American Heritage Month 
October 
South Asian American Heritage Day 
October 2 
Dashain Day 
October 5 
Poetry Day 
October 15 
American Indian Heritage Month 
November 
Maryland Emancipation Day 
November 1 
Annapolis Charter Day 
December 17 
 
1 Day designated as new year on the Asian lunar calendar. 
2 Commemorated on the fourth Thursday in March. 
3 John Hanson served as the first president of the Continental Congress under the Articles of Confederation from 
1781 to 1782. 
4 Commemorated on the second Thursday in May. 
5 Commemorated on the second Saturday in May. 
6 Commemorated on the first Sunday in June. 
7 Commemorated during the second week in June. 
8 Commemorated from September 15 to October 15. 
 
Source:  Department of Legislative Services 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 615/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Veterans Affairs; Department 
of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Arnold H. Adja 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3