START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 643 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 643 
(Senator Carter)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Public Information Act - Surveillance Images - Illegal Dumping in Baltimore 
City 
 
 
This bill (1) alters provisions under the Public Information Act (PIA) to require a custodian 
of a surveillance image to allow employees or agents of the Baltimore City Department of 
Housing and Community Development (DHCD) to inspect surveillance images of illegal 
dumping in Baltimore City (rather than employees or agents of the Baltimore City 
Department of Public Works (DPW), as specified under existing statute); (2) authorizes the 
Baltimore City DHCD to publicly disseminate surveillance images of illegal dumping in 
Baltimore City as part of an investigation; and (3) makes conforming and technical 
changes. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect State finances or operations, 
including District Court caseloads. 
  
Local Effect:  Potential minimal increase in fine revenues distributed to Baltimore City, 
as discussed below. To the extent the bill reduces illegal dumping in Baltimore City or 
violators of illegal dumping laws reimburse the city for litter removal costs, local 
expenditures related to litter removal may decrease. The bill’s provisions can be 
implemented with existing resources. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 643/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Illegal Dumping in Baltimore City 
 
Surveillance Systems (unchanged by the bill):  Section 10-112 of the Criminal Law Article 
authorizes the Baltimore City DHCD or another department designated by the Mayor of 
Baltimore City to place surveillance systems at dumping sites and use surveillance images 
to enforce the State Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law (discussed below) or local 
laws relating to the unlawful disposal of litter. A “dumping site” is a location in 
Baltimore City that is (1) owned by Baltimore City or the State and (2) identified by the 
department as property that has been repeatedly used for the disposal of litter in violation 
of State law or a local law or ordinance. 
 
A “surveillance system” is a collection of one or more cameras located at a dumping site 
that produces a surveillance image. A “surveillance image” means an image recorded by a 
surveillance system on a photograph, a micrograph, an electronic image, videotape, or any 
other medium showing (1) the front or rear of a motor vehicle, and, on at least one image 
or portion of the tape, clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle 
and (2) an individual committing a violation of the State illegal dumping and little control 
law or a local law or ordinance relating to the unlawful disposal of litter  
 
Enforcement/Penalties (unchanged by the bill):  A person who violates the State Illegal 
Dumping and Litter Control Law or a local law or ordinance relating to the unlawful 
disposal of litter that occurs at a dumping site monitored by a surveillance system is subject 
to a civil penalty of up to $1,000. Unless the person committing a violation received a 
citation from a police officer at the time of the violation, the owner of the vehicle used to 
commit the violation is subject to the civil penalty. 
 
The Baltimore City DHCD (or a designated department) must mail the owner a citation 
that includes the (1) name and address of the registered owner of the vehicle; (2) the 
registration number of the vehicle; (3) the violation charged; (4) the location where the 
violation occurred; (5) the date and time of the violation; (6) a copy of the surveillance 
image; (7) the amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by it must be paid; and 
(8) other specified information. The citation must be mailed no later than two weeks after 
the alleged violation occurred, except as specified. A person who receives a citation may 
pay the civil penalty directly to Baltimore City or elect to stand trial in the District Court 
for the alleged violation. 
 
The District Court may consider in defense of a violation the fact that the vehicle or its 
registration plates were stolen prior to the violation and that they were not in the possession 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 643/ Page 3 
of the owner at the time of the violation. Additionally, the District Court may consider in 
defense of a violation evidence that the person named in the citation was not the person in 
the surveillance image committing the violation. 
 
Failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of 
liability; the Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) is required to suspend and refuse to 
transfer the registration of a vehicle involved in a violation under these circumstances if it 
receives the appropriate notification or if the District Court notifies MVA that the alleged 
violator elected to stand trial and failed to appear in court. 
 
Inspections of Surveillance Images:  Under current law, § 4-322 of the General Provisions 
Article, part of the PIA, generally requires a “custodian” of a “surveillance image,” as 
defined in § 10-112 of the Criminal Law Article, to deny inspection of the surveillance 
image. However, a custodian must permit inspection of a surveillance image (1) by any 
person issued a citation under § 10-112 or by an attorney of record for the person; (2) by 
an employee or agent of the Baltimore City DPW in an investigation or a proceeding 
relating to the imposition or indemnification from civil liability under § 10-112; or (3) as 
required in § 10-112. Under the PIA, a “custodian” means (1) the official custodian or 
(2) any other authorized individual who has physical custody and control of a public record.  
 
The bill removes the reference to required inspection of an image under § 10-112 and 
replaces the reference to the Baltimore City DPW with the Baltimore City DHCD. The bill 
specifies that notwithstanding the general requirement that a custodian of a surveillance 
image deny inspection of the image, the Baltimore City DHCD is authorized to publicly 
disseminate a surveillance image of illegal dumping in Baltimore City as part of an 
investigation. 
 
State Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law – § 10-110 of the Criminal Law Article 
(unchanged by the bill) 
 
Under § 10-110 of the Criminal Law Article, a person is prohibited from (1) disposing of 
litter on a highway or performing an act that violates the State Vehicle Laws regarding 
disposal of litter, glass, and other prohibited substances on highways or (2) disposing or 
causing or allowing the disposal of litter on public or private property unless authorized or 
the litter is placed into a proper receptacle.  
 
An individual who violates § 10-110 is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the 
following penalties, depending on the weight or volume of the disposed litter:   
 
 
up to 100 pounds or 27 cubic feet (not for commercial gain) – imprisonment for up 
to 30 days and/or a $1,500 maximum fine; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 643/ Page 4 
 
more than 100 pounds or 27 cubic feet and up to 500 pounds or 216 cubic feet (not 
for commercial gain) – imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $12,500 maximum 
fine; and  
 
more than 500 pounds or 216 cubic feet (not for commercial gain) or any amount 
for commercial gain – imprisonment for up to five years and/or a $30,000 maximum 
fine. 
 
The court may also require cleanup of the disposed litter, repair or restoration of damaged 
property, payment of damages for the disposal of the litter, community service, or 
reimbursement of the appropriate governmental entity for specified costs incurred. If the 
violator used a motor vehicle to commit the violation, the court must notify MVA; 
violations are subject to the assessment of points. MVA is required to suspend and refuse 
to transfer the registration of a vehicle involved in a violation if it receives the appropriate 
notification that a person cited for a violation failed to pay the fine or elect to stand trial or 
if the District Court notifies MVA that the cited person elected to stand trial and failed to 
appear in court. 
 
Fines collected for violations of the State Illegal Dumping and Litter Control Law must be 
disbursed to the county or municipality where the violation occurred or, under specified 
circumstances, to the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission or the 
Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission. Disbursed fines must be used for specified 
litter-related purposes.  
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill gives the Baltimore City DHCD the ability to release 
surveillance images of persons engaging in illegal dumping activities to the press and social 
media. By disseminating surveillance images publicly, Baltimore City advises that 
members of the public may be able to provide information that leads to the identification 
of persons engaged in illegal dumping. 
 
To the extent that the public dissemination of surveillance images by the Baltimore City 
DHCD results in the identification of persons engaged in illegal dumping, additional 
persons may be charged with and convicted of violating the State Illegal Dumping and 
Litter Control Law. If additional convictions are obtained as a result of the bill, fines 
collected by the District Court and the State’s circuit courts increase, and Baltimore City 
revenues increase. Local expenditures for litter removal in Baltimore City may decrease if 
the city is reimbursed for litter removal costs or if the bill reduces illegal dumping in the 
city. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 643/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of General Services; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/aad 
 
Analysis by:  Ralph W. Kettell 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5