START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 665 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 665 
(Senator Charles) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Maryland Condominium Act - Amendments to the Declaration 
 
 
This bill reduces, from 80% to 66 2/3%, the threshold of unit owners listed on the current 
roster of a condominium needed to consent to an amendment of the condominium’s 
declaration once all units have been sold by a developer. However, the existing threshold 
of 80% is still applicable if any of the units of the condominium are owned by the 
developer.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  A condominium’s declaration must contain specified information, 
including (1) the name of the condominium; (2) a description of the condominium and a 
statement of the owner’s intent to subject the property to a condominium regime; (3) a 
general description of each unit, including its perimeters and location; (4) a general 
description of the condominium’s common elements and limited common elements; 
(5) each unit owner’s undivided percentage interest in the common elements; and (6) the 
votes apportioned to each unit at meetings of the council of unit owners. 
 
Generally, the declaration of a condominium may be amended only with the written 
consent of 80% of the unit owners listed on the current roster. The restriction is not 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 665/ Page 2 
applicable to a corrective amendment, as specified. Unless otherwise expressly permitted 
or required, an amendment to the declaration may not change the boundaries of any unit, 
the undivided percentage interest in the common elements of any unit, the liability for 
common expenses or rights to common profits of any unit, or the number of votes in the 
council of unit owners of any unit without the written consent of each unit owner and 
mortgagee. Statute includes other limitations regarding permissible amendments. 
 
For more information on condominiums – which, along with homeowners associations and 
cooperative housing corporations, are commonly referred to as common ownership 
communities – see the Appendix – Common Ownership Communities. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 434 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1496 (Delegate J. Long) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General (Consumer Protection Division); 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 665/ Page 3 
Appendix – Common Ownership Communities 
 
 
When a person purchases a single-family home, condominium, or an interest in a 
cooperative housing corporation, he or she may also be required to join an association of 
owners, which is intended to act in the common interests of all the homeowners, 
condominium unit owners, or cooperative owners in the community. Collectively, these 
associations are often referred to as common ownership communities (COCs). In 
Maryland, a growing number of newly constructed or newly converted residences are 
located in some form of a COC. Because registration of the various COCs is not required 
statewide, the exact number of COCs in Maryland is unknown. However, the Foundation 
for Community Association Research estimated that there were 7,100 community 
associations with an estimated 1 million residents in these associations in the State in 2023. 
 
The affairs of a condominium are governed by a council of unit owners, which comprises 
all unit owners. Among other powers, the council of unit owners has the power to impose 
assessments on the unit owners to pay common expenses. A council of unit owners may 
delegate its powers to a board of directors, officers, or a managing agent. Condominiums 
are governed under Title 11 of the Real Property Article. 
 
Many new housing developments are subject to a homeowners association (HOA) that is 
created by a governing document and has the authority to impose mandatory fees on lots 
in the development in connection with the provision of services or for the benefit of the 
lots, the lot owners, or the common areas. HOAs are governed under Title 11B of the Real 
Property Article. 
 
A cooperative housing corporation or “cooperative” is a corporation that owns real 
property. A resident of a cooperative does not own his or her unit; instead, the person owns 
an interest in the corporation, which leases the unit to the person for residential use. 
Cooperatives are governed by the laws in Title 5, Subtitle 6B of the Corporations and 
Associations Article. 
 
Condominiums and HOAs may be authorized by their governing documents to impose 
liens on units or lots to collect unpaid assessments or fees. In a cooperative, the governing 
documents usually provide for the collection of delinquent fees, and evictions for 
outstanding fees are generally pursued by way of a landlord-tenant action. 
 
Task Force on Common Ownership Communities 
 
With a growing number of Marylanders residing in COCs, and evidence that some COCs 
had issues with governance, dispute resolution, and financial stability, the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 665/ Page 4 
General Assembly created the Task Force on Common Ownership Communities in 2005 
(Chapter 469 of 2005). The issues addressed by the task force included the availability of 
alternative dispute resolution services, special considerations of aging COCs, collection of 
assessments, and resale of homes within COCs. The task force met 10 times, held 
five public hearings, and submitted its final report in December 2006. The report’s findings 
and recommendations have served, in subsequent years, as the basis for numerous pieces 
of legislation intended to improve the operation of COCs. 
 
The task force’s report also featured findings and recommendations relating to the creation 
of an ombudsman in local governments. Since the report’s release, Prince George’s County 
created its Common Ownership Communities Program in 2007 with the stated purpose of 
assisting governing bodies, as well as owners and residents of HOAs, residential 
condominiums, and cooperative housing corporations, with education, training, and 
alternative dispute resolution. Charles and Montgomery counties have offices dedicated to 
COCs that predate the task force. 
 

END OF PAGE 4