START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 669 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 669 
(Senator Charles) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Government - Attorney General - Reports 
 
 
This bill repeals the requirement that the Attorney General, by December 1 of each year, 
report to the Governor and the Legislative Policy Committee on any action taken under the 
Maryland Defense Act regarding the investigation, prosecution, or defense against any 
action or inaction by the federal government that threatens the public interest and welfare 
of the State’s residents, as specified. The bill also repeals the requirement that the Office 
of the Attorney General (OAG) annually publish its annual report and opinions of the 
Attorney General from the preceding year in a bound volume; instead, OAG must publish 
the information on its website. Finally, the bill (1) repeals a requirement for the annual 
report to include an itemized statement of the receipts and disbursements of the 
Attorney General during the preceding fiscal year and (2) specifies that the annual report 
must also be submitted to the General Assembly. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not expected to have a material effect on State operations or 
finances, but OAG may experience administrative efficiencies as a result of the bill. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 669/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  
 
Maryland Defense Act  
 
Chapter 26 of 2017 (the Maryland Defense Act) authorizes the Attorney General to 
investigate, commence, and prosecute or defend any civil or criminal suit or action that is 
based on the federal government’s action or inaction that threatens the public interest and 
welfare of the residents of the State with respect to (1) protecting the health of the residents 
of the State and ensuring the availability of affordable health care; (2) safeguarding public 
safety and security; (3) protecting civil liberties; (4) preserving and enhancing the 
economic security of workers and retirees; (5) protecting financial security of the residents 
of the State, as specified; (6) protecting the residents of the State against fraud and other 
deceptive and predatory practices; (7) protecting the natural resources and environment of 
the State; (8) protecting the residents of the State against illegal and unconstitutional federal 
immigration and travel restrictions; or (9) otherwise protecting as parens patriae, the 
State’s interest in the general health and well-being of its residents.  
 
Before commencing a suit or action, the Attorney General must provide the Governor with 
written notice and an opportunity for review and comment, unless the Attorney General 
determines that emergency circumstances require immediate action. If the Governor 
objects to the intended suit or action, then the Governor must provide in writing to the 
Attorney General the reasons for the objection within 10 days after receiving the notice. 
Unless there are emergency circumstances that require the immediate commencement of 
the suit or action, the Attorney General must consider the Governor’s objection before 
proceeding. If the Attorney General determines that emergency circumstances require the 
immediate commencement of a suit or action to protect the public interest and welfare of 
the residents of the State, as specified, the Attorney General must provide the Governor 
notice of the suit or action as soon as reasonably practicable. Annually by December 1, the 
Attorney General must report to the Governor and the Legislative Policy Committee, as 
specified. The Governor must include an appropriation of at least $1.0 million in the annual 
budget for the authorized activities and to employ five attorneys.  
 
Annual Report of the Attorney General 
 
Annually by January 1, the Attorney General must submit a report to the Governor that 
(1) describes the business and proceedings of the office during the preceding calendar year; 
(2) includes an itemized statement of the receipts and disbursements of the  
Attorney General during the preceding fiscal year; and (3) includes any recommendations 
that the Attorney General considers appropriate.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 669/ Page 3 
Publication of Opinions and Annual Report 
 
Among other things, the Attorney General must annually have published, in bound volume 
(1) the opinions that OAG issued during the preceding year, and (2) the annual report for 
the preceding year.   
 
Maryland Uniform Electronic Legal Materials Act 
 
Under Title 10, Subtitle 16 of the State Government Article (the Maryland Uniform 
Electronic Legal Materials Act), a State agency designated as an “official publisher” that 
publishes legal material only in an electronic record must designate the electronic record 
as official. To designate the electronic record as official, the official publisher must 
authenticate the electronic record in a specified manner, take specified actions to preserve 
and secure the record, and ensure that the material is reasonably available for use by the 
public on a permanent basis. The Act creates a legal presumption that authenticated legal 
material in an electronic record is an accurate copy of the legal material.  
 
An “official publisher” includes OAG for an opinion issued by the office; “legal material” 
includes, whether or not in effect, an opinion issued by OAG.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.   
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 15, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3