START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 674 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 674 
(Senator Elfreth, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Abandoned or Sunken Vessels and Waterway Improvement Fund Grants 
 
 
This bill requires, beginning in fiscal 2026, the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) 
to distribute at least $250,000 annually from the Waterway Improvement Fund (WIF) to a 
qualifying statewide Maryland-based historic preservation nonprofit organization to 
establish, operate, and administer a maritime heritage competitive grant program to provide 
grants to certain entities engaged in maritime heritage preservation, interpretation, or 
conservation, as specified. The bill also modifies requirements and processes for DNR to 
contact vessel owners during emergencies and when seizing, removing, or taking into 
custody abandoned or sunken vessels. Finally, the bill authorizes DNR to establish and 
administer a voluntary vessel turn-in program that allows State residents to turn in their 
vessels to the department to be destroyed, subject to specified requirements. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures increase by at least $125,000 in FY 2025 and by 
at least $375,000 annually thereafter, under the assumptions discussed below. Revenues 
and expenditures for the Maryland Historical Trust (MHT) may increase minimally 
beginning in FY 2026 from maritime heritage grants (not shown). This bill establishes a 
mandated distribution beginning in FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
125,000 
375,000 
375,000 
375,000 
375,000 
Net Effect 
($125,000) 
($375,000) 
($375,000) 
($375,000) 
($375,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures increase minimally from maritime heritage 
grants beginning in FY 2026. Local governments may benefit indirectly from a DNR 
voluntary vessel turn-in program, as discussed below. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 674/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Minimum Required Grant from Waterway Improvement Fund to Nonprofit 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for fiscal 2026 and each fiscal year thereafter, 
DNR must distribute at least $250,000 from WIF to a statewide Maryland-based historic 
preservation nonprofit organization with demonstrated experience in grantmaking. A 
nonprofit organization that receives funding under the bill must use the funding to 
establish, operate, and administer a maritime heritage competitive grant program to provide 
grants to nonprofit organizations in the State and instrumentalities of the State, counties, 
or municipalities engaged in maritime heritage preservation, interpretation, or 
conservation.  
 
By November 30 each year, a nonprofit organization that receives funding for a maritime 
heritage competitive grant program must report to DNR on the guidelines, promotion, 
selection, recipients, and impact of the organization’s program.  
 
Contact Information and Procedures 
 
The owner of a vessel must include specified contact information with the application for 
a certificate of number from DNR. The information is to be used in the event of an 
emergency or if the vessel is at risk of becoming an abandoned or sunken vessel, as defined. 
The contact information must include the mailing address, telephone number, and email 
address for each vessel owner. DNR may require the vessel owner to provide alternate 
emergency contact information. 
 
DNR must also attempt to contact the registered owner and, if applicable, an alternate 
emergency contact, by email and telephone when an abandoned or sunken vessel is to be 
seized, removed, or taken into custody. The same requirements are added for when DNR 
takes an abandoned or sunken vessel into custody.  
 
If all existing and newly authorized direct contact methods fail, DNR may provide general 
notice (1) by publication in a newspaper (as allowed under current law); (2) through digital 
media; or (3) by attaching a distinctively colored notification sticker or tag containing 
specified information to the vessel in a clearly visible place. If DNR affixes a sticker or tag 
on the vessel to fulfill its general notice requirements, the department must wait for 60 days 
to allow the owner or secured party to claim the vessel before disposing of the vessel, as 
specified. For the other general notice methods, DNR only needs to wait for three weeks 
(which is the standard required wait time after general notice under current law).  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 674/ Page 3 
Voluntary Vessel Turn-in Program 
 
DNR may establish and administer a voluntary vessel turn-in program that allows the 
owner of a vessel to turn the vessel in to the department to be destroyed. If DNR establishes 
the program, it must adopt related regulations. 
 
To apply to participate in the program, a vessel owner must submit to DNR an application 
in the form that the department requires. In order to participate the program, the vessel 
owner must demonstrate to the satisfaction of DNR that the applicant is the owner of the 
vessel and is a State resident. 
 
In evaluating a vessel’s eligibility for the program, DNR must prioritize, in order of 
priority, the following vessels:  
 
 
an abandoned or sunken vessel;  
 
a vessel that risks becoming abandoned or sunken if specified criteria are met; and  
 
any other vessel that DNR determines is eligible for program participation.  
 
DNR, in its sole discretion, may determine eligibility for participation in the program. 
DNR, or a person removing, towing, storing, or disposing of a vessel that is accepted into 
the program on behalf of the department, may not be held liable for any damage to the 
vessel which may occur during its removal, storage, or custody. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Certificate of Number 
 
Generally, any vessel equipped with propulsion machinery of any type on the waters of the 
State must be numbered for identification in accordance with the State Boat Act and any 
related DNR regulations. The application is on forms approved by DNR, accompanied by 
the requisite fee, and signed by every vessel owner. There are certain exceptions and 
exemptions, such as a vessel propelled only by sail. 
 
Abandoned or Sunken Vessels 
 
DNR is authorized to seize, remove, and take into custody any abandoned or sunken vessel. 
The department may use its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or use other persons, 
equipment, and facilities for removing, preserving, or storing abandoned or sunken vessels. 
DNR, or a person removing, preserving, or storing an abandoned or sunken vessel on the 
department’s behalf, may not be held liable for any damage to an abandoned or sunken 
vessel, which may occur during removal, storage, or custody of the vessel. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 674/ Page 4 
“Abandoned or sunken vessel” means any vessel that:   
 
 
is left illegally or has remained without permission for more than 30 days on public 
property, including public marinas, docks, or boatyards; 
 
has remained for more than 60 days at a private marina or boatyard, or property 
operated by a private marina or boatyard, without the consent of the owner or person 
in control of the property; 
 
has remained for more than 30 days at a private dock or at or near waters’ edge on 
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the 
property; 
 
has remained on any other private property for more than 180 days without the 
consent of the owner or person in control of the property; or 
 
has been found adrift or unattended in or upon the waters of the State and is found 
in condition of disrepair, presents a potential health or environmental hazard, and is 
not specified historic property. 
 
Generally, no later than 15 days before an abandoned or sunken vessel is seized, removed, 
or taken into custody, DNR must send a specified notice to the last known registered owner 
of the vessel, as shown on the department’s records. If DNR is unable to determine the 
owner, or the notice is returned as undeliverable, the department must publish notice in at 
least one local newspaper. If the owner or secured party of an abandoned or sunken vessel 
fails to claim the vessel within three weeks after notice is given, DNR may sell the vessel 
at public auction, proceed to receive the title to the vessel, or otherwise dispose of the 
vessel. 
 
DNR may delegate its authority to remove and dispose of abandoned or sunken vessels to 
any local jurisdiction that consents to the delegation. 
 
Waterway Improvement Fund 
 
The provisions establishing and pertaining to WIF are contained within the State Boat Act. 
WIF finances projects and activities that promote, develop, and maintain Maryland’s 
waterways for the benefit of the boating public. With certain exceptions, a local 
government and WIF must jointly finance projects to construct marine facilities beneficial 
to the boating public. The contribution of WIF must be limited to no more than 50% of the 
cost of each project. WIF may, however, finance completely any construction project 
beneficial to the boating public, which costs $250,000 or less, regardless of its location. 
 
Other types of projects that may be financed solely by WIF include projects for dredging 
and marking channels and harbors, construction of jetties and breakwaters, and clearing 
debris, aquatic vegetation, and obstructions in navigable waters, as well as construction of 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 674/ Page 5 
marine facilities located within lands owned by DNR and construction of pump-out stations 
for use by the general boating public at public and private marinas. 
 
State Expenditures:  Beginning in fiscal 2026, DNR must distribute at least $250,000 
annually from WIF to a statewide Maryland-based historic preservation nonprofit 
organization with demonstrated experience in grantmaking. This estimate assumes WIF 
fund balance is used for such purposes, leaving other WIF expenditures unchanged. The 
nonprofit must use the funds to establish, operate, and administer a maritime heritage 
competitive grant program to provide grants to nonprofit organizations in the State and 
instrumentalities of the State, counties, or municipalities engaged in maritime heritage 
preservation, interpretation, or conservation. MHT, an instrumentality of the State within 
the Maryland Department of Planning, is likely an eligible potential grant recipient; 
accordingly, MHT revenues and expenditures may increase minimally beginning in 
fiscal 2026 as grant funds are received and used for eligible purposes.   
 
This estimate also assumes that DNR establishes and administers a voluntary vessel turn-in 
program in fiscal 2025, as authorized by the bill. The scope of the program depends on 
public interest; if it is relatively modest, existing DNR staff can implement a program for 
an annual cost of approximately $125,000. An additional staff may be required if the 
program generates substantial interest. Once again, this estimate assumes WIF fund 
balance is used for such purposes, leaving other WIF expenditures unchanged. 
 
DNR can add contact information for vessel registrations or certifications with its existing 
licensing system at no additional cost. Advertising costs for DNR related to abandoned 
vessels decrease minimally beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for DNR increase by at least $125,000 in 
fiscal 2025 and by at least $375,000 annually thereafter to provide the minimum required 
distribution to a nonprofit and establish a voluntary vessel turn-in program, offset 
minimally by reduced advertising costs. 
 
For context, the projected fiscal 2025 beginning fund balance for WIF is $29.2 million, 
estimated revenues in fiscal 2025 are $25.0 million, and estimated expenditures in 
fiscal 2025 are $35.3 million (these amounts include both operating and capital 
expenditures). 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Local revenues and expenditures may increase minimally beginning 
in fiscal 2026 from maritime heritage grants received under the bill; however, overall 
funding is limited, and local governments are not the only eligible recipients. Of note, the 
funding source for the maritime heritage grants, WIF, is used in combination with local 
governments to jointly finance projects to construct marine facilities beneficial to the 
boating public. WIF also fully finances certain types of projects that also indirectly benefit 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 674/ Page 6 
local governments. Local governments may also benefit indirectly from a voluntary vessel 
turn-in program established under the bill. 
 
Additional Comments:  While nonprofits are not considered small businesses for 
purposes of fiscal and policy notes, they potentially benefit from maritime heritage grant 
funding under the bill beginning in fiscal 2026 (and a statewide nonprofit benefits from the 
direct WIF funding to establish, operate, and administer the grant program). 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1461 (Delegate Allen) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Budget and 
Management; Maryland Department of Planning; cities of Baltimore and Havre de Grace; 
Anne Arundel, Prince George’s, Queen Anne’s, and St. Mary’s counties; Town of 
Leonardtown; Department of Legislative Services. 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 18, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6