START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 805

Chapter 805

(Senate Bill 615)

AN ACT concerning

General Provisions – Commemorative Days – Maryland Veterans Suicide
~~Awareness~~ Prevention Day

FOR the purpose of requiring the Governor to annually proclaim a certain day as Maryland
Veterans Suicide ~~Awareness~~ Prevention Day.

BY renumbering
Article – General Provisions
Section 7–416 through 7–420
to be Section 7–417 through 7–421, respectively
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – General Provisions
Section 7–416
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Too many veterans’ lives are lost to suicide; and

WHEREAS, Family members, veterans, service members, and others need to take
action when they believe a veteran is at risk of suicide; and

WHEREAS, There needs to be greater awareness of veteran suicide and the tools
available to help veterans; now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That Section(s) 7–416 through 7–420 of Article – General Provisions of the Annotated Code
of Maryland be renumbered to be Section(s) 7–417 through 7–421, respectively.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – General Provisions

7–416.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 805 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) THE GOVERNOR ANNUALLY SHALL PROCLAIM JULY 11 SEPTEMBER 30
AS MARYLAND VETERANS SUICIDE AWARENESS PREVENTION DAY.

(B) THE PROCLAMATION SHALL DECLARE MARYLAND VETERANS SUICIDE
~~AWARENESS~~ PREVENTION DAY:

(1) A DAY OF REFLECTION, RECOLLECTION, AND DETERMINATION
FOR MARYLAND VETERANS, SERVICE MEMBERS, FAMILY MEMBERS, AND ALL
MARYLANDERS TO REMEMBER THE HUMAN TRAGEDY THAT IS ASSOCIATED WITH
VETERAN SUICIDE; AND

(2) A PLEDGE TO OUR VETERAN COMMUNITY TO:

(I) WORK TO DESTIGMATIZE MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORT;

(II) CREATE MORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR THOSE WITH MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES TO SPEAK FREELY AND GET THE SUPPORT THEY NEED; AND

(III) ENCOURAGE VETERANS TO REACH OUT FOR HELP.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2