START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 687 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 687 
(Senator Smith)(By Request - Maryland Judicial 
Conference) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Criminal Procedure - Bail Bonds - Seventh Judicial Circuit 
 
 
This bill repeals provisions relating to bail bonds in the Seventh Judicial Circuit. 
Specifically, the bill repeals § 5-203(b) of the Criminal Procedure Article governing bail 
bondspersons and related fees in the Seventh Judicial Circuit and repeals § 5-209(b) of the 
Criminal Procedure Article exempting the Seventh Judicial Circuit from certain 
requirements for property bondspersons.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances, 
as discussed below. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None.   
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:  The Seventh Judicial Circuit is comprised of Calvert, 
Charles, Prince George’s, and St. Mary’s counties. 
 
Under current law, except as otherwise specified, a circuit court may adopt rules setting 
the terms and conditions of bail bonds filed in that court and rules on the qualifications of 
and fees charged by bail bondsmen.  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 687/ Page 2 
Under current law, in the circuit courts of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, an approved bail 
bondsman must pay a license fee of 1% of the gross value of all bail bonds written in all 
courts of the circuit, if the fee is approved by the court of the county in which it applies. 
The fee must be paid to the court as required by the rules of court and must be used to pay 
the expenses of administering bonds in accordance with statute, as specified. Any absolute 
bail bond forfeitures collected may be used to pay the expenses of carrying out specified 
related provisions. The bill repeals the provisions relating to bonds in the Seventh Circuit. 
 
A “property bondsman” is a person other than a defendant who executes a bail bond 
secured by real estate in the State. Under current law, except for in the Seventh Judicial 
Circuit, a property bondsman may authorize an agent in writing to execute on behalf of the 
property bondsman a bail bond and a declaration of trust or deed of trust to secure a bail 
bond by real estate. If all other requirements of law are met, a person authorized by law to 
take a bail bond must take a bail bond secured by declaration of trust or deed of trust on 
real estate properly executed by an authorized agent of a property bondsman. A person who 
acts as a property bondsman for compensation must provide to the court documentation of 
ownership, tax status, and liens against the property posted. It is a misdemeanor punishable 
by imprisonment for up to one year and/or a $1,000 maximum fine for such a person to 
willfully provide false documentation. The bill repeals the exception for the Seventh 
Judicial Circuit under these provisions. 
 
State and Local Fiscal Effect:  The Judiciary advises that it does not anticipate a fiscal or 
operational impact as these revisions are conforming changes that bring consistency 
between the Criminal Procedure Article and the Maryland Rules governing bail and 
property bondspersons.   
 
According to the Judiciary, the Seventh Judicial Circuit rescinded its separate bail bonds 
system in 2022. The bill clarifies the existing process and updates statute to reflect that the 
Seventh Judicial Circuit no longer has a separate bail bonds system and follows the bail 
bonds statutes applicable to the rest of the State. Pursuant to a judicial administrative order, 
as of July 1, 2022, (1) the local bail bonds rules were rescinded; (2) Seventh Judicial Circuit 
licensure was no longer required; (3) all bondspersons writing on insurance in the 
Seventh Judicial Circuit are required to hold Maryland State licensure and be subject to all 
State laws and regulations; and (4) the Seventh Judicial Circuit no longer collects the 
1% license fees for bonds written in the circuit. 
 
Charles County advises that the bill eliminates approximately $8,500 in annual fee 
revenues to the county’s circuit court. However, given that the bill reflects changes to 
procedures in the Seventh Judicial Circuit that have been in place since 2022, the 
Department of Legislative Services advises that the bill is unlikely to materially affect local 
finances. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 687/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Charles, Prince George’s, and St. Mary’s counties; Judiciary 
(Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
km/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3