START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 697 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 697 
(Senator Gile, et al.) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland National Guard - Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program - 
Alterations 
 
 
This bill repeals the $60 monthly cap on a grant award that the Military Department 
(MMD) may provide to an eligible recipient under the TRICARE Premium Reimbursement 
Program. However, the total amount of grants awarded to eligible recipients in a fiscal year 
may not exceed the annual appropriation in the State budget for the program. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Although the bill authorizes MMD to provide grants greater than 
$60 per month to an eligible recipient, as the total amount of grants awarded in a fiscal year 
may not exceed the program’s annual appropriation, additional general fund expenditures 
are not required. Instead, the annual appropriation for the program is more likely to be fully 
expended under the bill or a cap may need to be instituted if demand is greater than 
available funding. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 612 of 2023 established a TRICARE Premium Reimbursement 
Program in MMD. The department may award grants of up to $60 per month to a member 
of the Maryland National Guard (MDNG) who is eligible for TRICARE Reserve Select. 
Grants may be provided for a premium paid for individual coverage or for any member of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 697/ Page 2 
the applicant’s immediate family under the TRICARE Reserve Select Program or the 
TRICARE Dental Program. The program officially launched on November 1, 2023. 
Applications can be accessed through the Maryland OneStop Portal. As of 
January 17, 2024, there were 383 individuals enrolled in the program (9% of eligible 
MDNG members). The fiscal 2025 budget includes $871,300 in general funds for the 
program. 
 
TRICARE Reserve Select is a premium-based health insurance plan available for Selected 
Reserves members and their families who are not on active duty, not covered under the 
Transitional Assistance Management Program (TAMP), and not eligible for or enrolled in 
the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program. Individuals enrolled in TRICARE Reserve 
Select pay monthly premiums, an annual deductible, copayments for in-network covered 
services, and a percentage cost share for out-of-network covered services. For 
calendar 2024, premiums are $51.95 per month for individual/sponsor coverage and 
$256.87 per month for family coverage. 
 
The TRICARE Dental Program is a premium-based dental plan for National 
Guard/Reserve members who are not on active duty, not covered under TAMP, family 
members of a National Guard/Reserve member, or family members of an active-duty 
service member. For calendar 2024, premiums are $12.36 per month for sponsor-only 
coverage, $30.89 for single coverage, $80.33 for family coverage, and $111.22 for sponsor 
and family coverage. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced in the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1504 (Delegate Ebersole) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Military Department; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 25, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Jennifer B. Chasse 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2