START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 343

Chapter 343

(Senate Bill 665)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Condominium Act – Amendments to the Declaration

FOR the purpose of reducing the percentage of unit owners listed on the current roster of
a condominium needed to consent to an amendment of a condominium’s declaration
if none of the units of the condominium are owned by a developer of the
condominium; and generally relating to amendments to the declaration of a
condominium.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11–103(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Real Property
Section 11–103(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Real Property

11–103.

(c) (1) (I) 1. [Except for a corrective amendment under § 11–103.1 of
this title or as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection or subsection (d) of this section,
the declaration may be amended only with the written consent of 80 percent of the unit
owners listed on the current roster] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 2 OF
THIS SUBPARAGRAPH, THE DECLARATION MAY BE AMENDED ONLY WITH THE
WRITTEN CONSENT OF 66 2/3 PERCENT OF THE UNIT OWNERS LISTED ON THE
CURRENT ROSTER.

2. SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH DOES
NOT APPLY:

A. TO A CORRECTIVE AMENDMENT UNDER § 11–103.1 OF
THIS TITLE;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 343 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

B. AS PROVIDED IN SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS
PARAGRAPH; OR

C. AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(II) 1. IF ANY OF THE UNITS OF THE CONDOMINIUM ARE
OWNED BY THE DEVELOPER, THE DECLARATION MAY BE AMENDED ONLY WITH THE
WRITTEN CONSENT OF 80% OF THE UNIT OWNERS LISTED ON THE CURRENT ROSTER.

2. SUBSUBPARAGRAPH 1 OF THIS SUBPARAGRAPH DOES
NOT APPLY:

A. TO A CORRECTIVE AMENDMENT UNDER § 11–103.1 OF
THIS TITLE;

B. AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS
SUBSECTION; OR

C. AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(2) Amendments under this section are subject to the following limitations:

(i) Except to the extent expressly permitted or expressly required
by other provisions of this title, an amendment to the declaration may not change the
boundaries of any unit, the undivided percentage interest in the common elements of any
unit, the liability for common expenses or rights to common profits of any unit, or the
number of votes in the council of unit owners of any unit without the written consent of
every unit owner and mortgagee.

(ii) An amendment to the declaration may not modify in any way
rights expressly reserved for the benefit of the developer or provisions required by any
governmental authority or for the benefit of any public utility.

(iii) Except to the extent expressly permitted by the declaration, an
amendment to the declaration may not change residential units to nonresidential units or
change nonresidential units to residential units without the written consent of every unit
owner and mortgagee.

(iv) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this title and by the
declaration, an amendment to the declaration may not redesignate general common
elements as limited common elements without the written consent of every unit owner and
mortgagee.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 343

(v) 1. Except as provided in subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph,
if the declaration contains a provision requiring any action on the part of the holder of a
mortgage or deed of trust on a unit in order to amend the declaration, that provision shall
be deemed satisfied if the procedures under this subparagraph are satisfied.

2. If the declaration contains a provision described in
subsubparagraph 1 of this subparagraph, the council of unit owners shall cause to be
delivered to each holder of a mortgage or deed of trust entitled to notice a copy of the
proposed amendment to the declaration.

3. If a holder of the mortgage or deed of trust that receives
the proposed amendment fails to object, in writing, to the proposed amendment within 60
days after the date of actual receipt of the proposed amendment, the holder shall be deemed
to have consented to the adoption of the amendment.

(vi) Subparagraph (v) of this paragraph does not apply to
amendments that:

1. Alter the priority of the lien of the mortgage or deed of
trust;

2. Materially impair or affect the unit as collateral; or

3. Materially impair or affect the right of the holder of the
mortgage or deed of trust to exercise any rights under the mortgage, deed of trust, or
applicable law.

[(2)] (3) (i) The council of unit owners may petition the circuit court
in equity for the county in which the condominium is located to correct:

1. An improper description of the units or common elements;
or

2. An improper assignment of the percentage interests in the
common elements, common expenses, and common profits.

(ii) The petition may be brought only if:

1. The unit owners, at a special meeting called for that
purpose, vote to petition the court to correct a specific error by a vote of at least 66 2/3
percent of the unit owners present and voting at a properly convened meeting;

2. The council of unit owners gives notice of the special
meeting to each mortgagee of record for the condominium; and

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 343 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

3. An opportunity is provided for the mortgagees to speak at
the special meeting upon written request to the council of unit owners.

(iii) The court may reform the declaration to correct the error or
omission as the court considers appropriate, if:

1. The council of unit owners gives notice of the filing of the
petition to each mortgagee and unit owner within 15 days of filing;

2. The council of unit owners files an affidavit with the court
stating that the conditions of subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph have been met;

3. The council of unit owners proves, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that there is an error or omission as provided in subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph;

4. Any mortgagee with an interest in the condominium is
permitted to intervene in the proceedings upon filing a motion to intervene as provided in
the Maryland Rules;

5. The reformation does not substantially impair the
property rights of any unit owner or mortgagee; and

6. The court issues an order of reformation.

(iv) A final order of reformation may be appealed by any party within
30 days of its issuance. An order of reformation may not be recorded until the appeal period
has lapsed or all appeals have been completed.

[(3)] (4) An amendment or order of reformation becomes effective on
recordation in the same manner as the declaration. If the condominium is registered with
the Secretary of State, the council of unit owners shall file a copy of the order of reformation
with the Secretary of State within 15 days of recordation.

(d) (1) (i) A declaration may provide for the suspension of the use of
parking or recreational facility common elements by a unit owner that is more than 60 days
in arrears in the payment of any assessment due to the condominium.

(ii) If a declaration contains a suspension provision authorized
under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the declaration shall state that a suspension of
the use of common elements may not be implemented until the council of unit owners:

1. Mails to the unit owner a demand letter specifying a time
period of at least 10 days within which the unit owner may pay the delinquent assessment
or request a hearing to contest the suspension; and

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 343

2. If a unit owner requests a hearing to contest a suspension,
provides notice and holds a hearing in accordance with § 11–113(b)(2) and (3) of this
subtitle.

(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of the declaration or bylaws, the council
of unit owners may amend the declaration to add or repeal a suspension provision
authorized under paragraph (1)(i) of this subsection by the affirmative vote of at least 60%
of the total eligible voters of the condominium under the voting procedures contained in the
declaration or the bylaws.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5