START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 666 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 666 
(Senator Charles) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Commission on Civil Rights - Monetary Relief 
 
 
This bill alters statutory provisions that authorize the Maryland Commission on Civil 
Rights (MCCR) to seek civil penalties if it finds that a respondent has engaged in a 
discriminatory act in regard to public accommodations or persons licensed or regulated by 
the Maryland Department of Labor (MDL). The bill replaces references to “civil penalties” 
with “monetary relief,” and requires monetary relief be paid directly to the complainant 
(instead of the general fund). Additionally, the bill (1) authorizes MCCR to seek increased 
monetary relief under specified circumstances; (2) prohibits MCCR from seeking an order 
awarding monetary relief under certain conditions; and (3) sets forth factors for 
administrative law judges (ALJ) to consider when determining the amount of monetary 
relief to award. Finally, the bill creates temporary reporting requirements for MCCR. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially impact the workload of MCCR, the 
Office of Administrative Hearings, or the Judiciary. Any decrease in general fund revenues 
from civil penalties is not anticipated to materially affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill establishes certain circumstances under which specified caps on 
relief (those applicable when there has been a prior adjudication, as shown below) do not 
apply. For example, if the discriminatory act is committed by the agent or employee of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 666/ Page 2 
respondent, MCCR may seek an order awarding monetary relief of up to $25,000 if (1) the 
act committed by the agent or employee is determined to be discriminatory and (2) the 
respondent has not reasonably mitigated the harm caused by the discriminatory act. The 
maximum amounts also do not apply if the act is found to be malicious. 
 
MCCR may not, however, seek an order awarding monetary relief to a complainant if 
(1) the discriminatory act was limited to a violation relating to accessibility; (2) the 
respondent, after being served, takes prompt corrective action; and (3) the respondent has 
not previously been the subject of a complaint, as specified. 
 
If MCCR seeks an order awarding monetary relief before an ALJ, in determining the 
amount of relief to be awarded, the bill requires the ALJ to consider (1) the seriousness of 
the discriminatory act; (2) the good faith of the respondent; (3) the harmful effect to the 
public of the discriminatory act; (4) the harmful effect of the respondent’s actions on the 
investigatory process of MCCR; and (5) the respondent’s assets. 
 
On or before July 1, 2025, and by July 1 of each of the immediately following four years, 
MCCR must submit a report to the Governor and the General Assembly on the effect the 
bill has had on persons against whom complaints have been filed, as specified. 
 
Current Law:  A “place of public accommodation” includes (1) an inn, hotel, motel, or 
other lodging establishment; (2) a facility serving food or alcoholic beverages, including 
facilities on the premises of a retail establishment or gasoline station; (3) entertainment, 
sports, or exhibition venues; and (4) a public or privately operated retail establishment 
offering goods, services, entertainment, recreation, or transportation. A separate 
establishment that holds itself out as serving patrons of one of the above establishments is 
also included if (1) it is physically located within the premises of one of the above 
establishments or (2) it is within the premises of which one of the above establishments is 
physically located. 
 
Under State law, an owner or operator of a place of public accommodation (or an agent or 
employee of the owner) may not refuse, withhold from, or deny to any person any of the 
accommodations, advantages, facilities, or privileges of the place of public accommodation 
because of the person’s race, sex, age, color, creed, national origin, marital status, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, or disability. Statute includes similar provisions regarding 
persons licensed or regulated by MDL. Governmental units, officers, and employees are 
prohibited from discrimination in public accommodations. Any structural changes, 
modifications, or special equipment that are necessary to accommodate an individual with 
a disability must be reasonable. A reasonable accommodation is defined as making a place 
of public accommodation suitable for access, use, and patronage by an individual with a 
disability without danger to the individual’s health or safety and undue hardship or expense 
to the person making the accommodation. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 666/ Page 3 
On a finding that a respondent has engaged in a discriminatory act in relation to the 
prohibitions against discrimination in public accommodations/persons licensed or 
regulated by MDL, nonmonetary relief may be granted to the complainant, subject to 
specified statutory provisions regarding transportation services. 
 
MCCR may also seek an order that assesses a civil penalty against a respondent. Generally, 
the maximum amount of the penalty that may be assessed is: 
 
 
if the respondent has not been adjudicated to have committed any prior 
discriminatory act, up to $500; 
 
if the respondent has been adjudicated to have committed one other discriminatory 
act during the five-year period ending on the date of the filing of the current charge, 
up to $1,000; and 
 
if the respondent has been adjudicated to have committed two or more 
discriminatory acts during the seven-year period ending on the date of the filing of 
the current charge, up to $2,500. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 368 (Delegate Cullison, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of Counties; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; Office of Administrative 
Hearings; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3