START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 629

Chapter 629

(Senate Bill 633)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Self–Service Storage Act – Sale of Personal Property in Satisfaction of
Liens – Means of Advertising

FOR the purpose of authorizing an operator or a manager of a self–service storage facility
to advertise in a certain manner the sale of the personal property in a self–service
storage unit to satisfy a certain lien without the occupant’s prior written
authorization in the storage agreement; altering a certain statement that must be
contained in a self–service storage facility rental agreement; and generally relating
to self–service storage units.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 18–503(b)(4) and 18–504(b)(4)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

18–503.

(b) The rental agreement shall contain a statement, in bold type, advising the
occupant:

(4) That a sale of personal property stored in the leased space to satisfy the
lien if the occupant is in default may SHALL be advertised, AT THE SOLE DISCRETION OF
THE OPERATOR:

(i) In a newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction where
the sale is to be held;

(ii) By electronic mail; or

(iii) On an online [Web site] WEBSITE.

18–504.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 629 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (4) [(i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, at] AT least 3
days before conducting a sale under this section, the operator shall advertise the time,
place, and terms of the sale:

[1.] (I) In a newspaper of general circulation in the
jurisdiction where the sale is to be held;

[2.] (II) By electronic mail; or

[3.] (III) On an online [Web site] WEBSITE.

[(ii) The operator may not advertise the sale in the manner provided
under subparagraph (i)2 or 3 of this paragraph unless the occupant provides the occupant’s
initials next to the statement in the rental agreement required under § 18–503(b)(4) of this
subtitle.]

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ June 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2