START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 736

Chapter 736

(Senate Bill 652)

AN ACT concerning

Department of Juvenile Services – Report on Shootings
(Department of Juvenile Services Transparency Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Juvenile Services to report certain
information regarding shootings of and by juveniles under the supervision of the
Department to the Commission on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best
Practices and the Maryland General Assembly; and generally relating to the
Department of Juvenile Services.

BY adding to
Article – Human Services
Section 9–247
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2019 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Human Services

9–247.

(A) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2024, AND EACH DECEMBER 1
THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL REPORT TO THE COMMISSION ON
JUVENILE JUSTICE REFORM AND EMERGING AND BEST PRACTICES AND, IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, TO THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON:

(1) THE NUMBER OF JUVENILES UNDER THE DEPARTMENT’S
SUPERVISION IN THE PRECEDING YEAR WHO:

(I) WERE NONFATALLY SHOT;

(II) SHOT ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL; OR

(III) WERE VICTIMS OF A HOMICIDE;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 736 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE ACTIONS THAT THE DEPARTMENT TOOK AFTER THE
INCIDENTS DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, INCLUDING THE TIMELINE
OF THE ACTIONS;

(3) THE AGE OF EACH JUVENILE DESCRIBED IN ITEM (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION; AND

(4) THE COUNTY OF RESIDENCE OF EACH JUVENILE DESCRIBED IN
ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

(B) THE INITIAL REPORT SUBMITTED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL
INCLUDE A DESCRIPTION OF ANY ESTABLISHED PROCESS THAT THE DEPARTMENT
USES AFTER AN INCIDENT DESCRIBED IN SUBSECTION (A)(1) OF THIS SECTION
OCCURS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2