START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 652 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 652 
(Senator McCray) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Department of Juvenile Services – Report on Shootings (Department of Juvenile 
Services Transparency Act of 2024) 
 
   
This bill requires the Department of Juvenile Services (DJS) to report to the Commission 
on Juvenile Justice Reform and Emerging and Best Practices and the General Assembly by 
December 1 each year on (1) the number of juveniles under DJS’s supervision in the 
preceding year who were nonfatally shot, shot another individual, or were victims of a 
homicide; (2) the actions DJS took in response and a timeline of such actions; (3) the age 
of each juvenile in the report; and (4) the county of residence of each juvenile in the report. 
The initial report submitted must include a description of any established process that DJS 
uses after a shooting involving supervised youth or when a youth under DJS supervision is 
the victim of a homicide.   
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DJS can meet the bill’s requirements with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.   
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis   
 
Current Law:  DJS is the Executive Branch agency responsible for managing, 
supervising, housing, and providing programs to youth who are involved in the youth legal 
system. DJS is responsible for assessing the individual needs of referred youth and 
providing intake, detention, probation, commitment, and after-care services. The 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 652/ Page 2 
department collaborates with youth, families, schools, community partners, law 
enforcement, and other public agencies to coordinate services and resources. DJS annually 
publishes a Data Resource Guide.  
 
Chapter 42 of 2022 required DJS to report to the General Assembly on several topics 
related to its procedures, operations, and programming. Chapter 42 implemented many 
recommendations of the Juvenile Justice Reform Council, which was established in 2019 
to research best practices for the treatment of juveniles who are subject to the criminal and 
juvenile justice systems and make recommendations to limit or otherwise mitigate 
contributing risk factors.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Juvenile Services; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 18, 2024 
 
km/aad 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2