START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 538

Chapter 538

(Senate Bill 659)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority – Modifications

FOR the purpose of requiring the Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority to meet
at least a certain number of times per year; requiring staff of the Prince George’s
County Redevelopment Authority to provide support for the Prince George’s
Gateway Development Authority in consultation with the Department of Housing
and Community Development; and generally relating to the Prince George’s
Gateway Development Authority.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–902 and 12–904
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 12–903
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

12–902.

There is a Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority in Prince George’s
County.

12–903.

(A) The Authority consists of the following members:

(1) the Secretary, or the Secretary’s designee;

(2) the Secretary of Housing and Community Development, or the
Secretary’s designee;

(3) the mayor of the City of Mount Rainier, or the mayor’s designee;
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 538 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) the mayor of the Town of Brentwood, or the mayor’s designee;

(5) the chair of the Cottage City Commission, or the chair’s designee;

(6) the mayor of the City of Bladensburg, or the mayor’s designee;

(7) the mayor of the Town of Colmar Manor, or the mayor’s designee;

(8) the mayor of the Town of North Brentwood, or the mayor’s designee;

(9) the director of the Economic Development Department for the City of
Mount Rainier; and

(10) two members who are residents of communities impacted by the target
area selected by the majority vote of the leadership of the target area municipalities.

(B) THE AUTHORITY SHALL MEET AT LEAST FOUR TIMES PER YEAR.

(C) STAFF OF THE PRINCE GEORGE’S COUNTY REDEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY SHALL PROVIDE SUPPORT FOR THE OPERATION OF THE AUTHORITY IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT.

12–904.

(a) The Authority may manage appropriated funds from municipalities in the
target area, Prince George’s County, and the State.

(b) The Authority may receive donated services from accountants, lawyers, or
other consultants as necessary to carry out this subtitle.

(c) The Authority may supervise, manage, and terminate staff and consultants
as necessary.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2