START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 680 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 680 
(The President)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
State Government - Attorney General - Determinations and Settlements 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes procedural requirements and options for the State in 
obtaining relief in actions involving multiple parties brought or asserted by the State arising 
from or related to alleged or threated injuries to the environment, infrastructure, or the 
natural resources of the State associated with the allision between the vessel known as the 
Dali and the Francis Scott Key Bridge on March 26, 2024. The bill requires a judge or jury 
in an applicable action to make a determination of the total liability and assign comparative 
responsibility to each party joined in the action. If the State does not obtain complete relief 
from a responsible person who has resolved their liability through a settlement with the 
State, the State may continue to pursue actions against other responsible persons in the 
action, as specified. Notwithstanding any other provision of State law, the Maryland 
Uniform Contribution Among Joint Tort-Feasors Act (MUCATA) does not apply to an 
action governed by the bill’s provisions. The bill may not be construed to impair any 
express contractual rights; create new types of actions or claims; alter the burden of proof, 
causation standard, or elements of an action or claim governed by the bill; or grant authority 
to the State or the Office of the Attorney General (OAG) to bring actions or claims not 
otherwise authorized by law. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Potential significant increase in general fund revenues and reduction of 
litigation costs, as discussed below. Although the precise timing of any potential impact is 
unclear, this analysis assumes there is no effect in FY 2024. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances or 
operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 680/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Judicial Determinations and Assignment of Liability 
 
In an applicable action, the judge or jury must (1) make a determination of the total liability, 
including damages, costs, and any other available relief; (2) assign comparative 
responsibility to each party joined in the action, including all defendants, 
third-party defendants, intervenors, and any other named party, based on the party’s 
relative degree of fault or responsibility for the total liability; and (3) if equity requires, 
determine the liability of a group of related persons on a collective basis. 
 
Options for the State in Obtaining Relief in Applicable Actions 
 
If the State has not obtained complete relief from a responsible person who has resolved 
the person’s liability to the State in a settlement of an action governed by the bill, the State 
may (1) continue to pursue an action against any other responsible person who has not 
resolved the person’s liability to the State or (2) bring a new action against any other 
responsible person who has not resolved the person’s liability to the State. 
 
If a responsible person resolves the person’s liability to the State in a settlement of an action 
governed by the bill, the person may not be liable for claims for noncontractual contribution 
or indemnity regarding any action or claim resolved in the settlement. A settlement of an 
action governed by the bill that resolves the liability of a responsible person does not 
release from liability any other responsible person except as specifically provided in the 
terms of the settlement. However, it does reduce the potential liability of all other 
responsible persons liable in whole or in part by the larger of the settling person’s 
proportionate share of liability or the amount the settling person pays to settle the action. 
 
Current Law/Background:  On March 26, 2024, the Dali, a 984-foot cargo ship, struck 
the Francis Scott Key Bridge in Baltimore, causing the collapse of the bridge and the death 
of six construction workers. According to the Maryland Department of Transportation, 
rebuilding the bridge is expected to take over four years; preliminary estimated costs for 
the project are between $1.7 billion and $1.9 billion. 
 
Joint and Several Liability 
 
Under the doctrine of joint and several liability, if two or more defendants are found liable 
for a single and indivisible harm to the plaintiff, each defendant is liable to the plaintiff for 
the entire harm. The plaintiff has the choice of collecting the entire judgment from 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 680/ Page 3 
one defendant or portions of the judgment from various defendants, so long as the plaintiff 
does not recover more than the amount of the judgment. 
 
Maryland Uniform Contribution Among Joint Tort-Feasors Act 
 
Liability among joint tort-feasors is governed by MUCATA, which is contained in Title 3,  
Subtitle 14 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article. “Joint tort-feasors” means 
two or more persons jointly or severally liable in tort for the same injury to person or 
property whether or not judgment has been recovered against all or some of them. Liability 
among joint-tort-feasors under MUCATA is determined on a pro rata basis, which is 
“equal shares that are determined by dividing the common liability by the number of 
joint tort-feasors.” Mercy Med. Ctr. v. Julian, 429 Md. 348, 357 (2012) (internal citations 
omitted). 
 
In general, the right of contribution allows a tort-feasor/defendant who has paid for more 
than its share of the liability to pursue action against the other tort-feasors/defendants for 
their proportionate share of the judgment paid by the paying tort-feasor/defendant. Under 
MUCATA, the right of contribution exists among joint tort-feasors. A joint tort-feasor is 
not entitled to a money judgment for contribution until the joint tort-feasor has by payment 
discharged the common liability or has paid more than its pro rata share of the common 
liability. A joint tort-feasor who enters into a settlement with the injured person is not 
entitled to recover contribution from another joint tort-feasor whose liability to the injured 
person is not extinguished by the settlement. 
 
The recovery of a judgment by the injured person against one joint tort-feasor does not 
discharge the other joint tort-feasor. A release by the injured person of one joint tort-feasor, 
whether before or after judgment, does not discharge the other tort-feasors unless the 
release so provides, but it reduces the claim against the other tort-feasors in the amount of 
the consideration paid for the release or in any amount or proportion by which the release 
provides that the total claim must be reduced, if greater than the consideration paid. A 
release by the injured person of one joint tort-feasor does not relieve the joint tort-feasor 
from liability to make contribution to another joint tort-feasor unless the release (1) is given 
before the right of the other tort-feasor to secure a money judgment for contribution has 
accrued and (2) provides for a reduction, to the extent of the pro rata share of the released 
tort-feasor, of the injured person’s damages recoverable against all other tort-feasors. 
MUCATA does not impair any right of indemnity under existing law. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund revenues increase, potentially significantly, if the bill 
facilitates settlements in applicable actions and allows the State to recover a greater 
percentage of total damages than under current statute. If the bill facilitates settlements 
with defendants, the bill may also reduce some litigation expenses for OAG and impacted 
State agencies. OAG advises that the State has not filed any actions related to the 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 680/ Page 4 
Francis Scott Key Bridge collapse. However, the owner of the vessel has filed a petition in 
federal court to limit its liability to the value of the vessel and the cargo. State agencies 
affiliated with settlements entered into under the bill may also be affected. While the bill’s 
impact is not possible to quantify at this time, based on the potential value of the State’s 
claims involving the Francis Scott Key Bridge collapse, it may be significant. 
 
As noted above, MUCATA liability among joint tort-feasors is determined on a pro rata 
basis, which is based on the total number of defendants in the case, regardless of the 
liability attributable to each individual defendant. According to OAG, the allocation of 
liability under MUCATA makes it difficult for the State to settle with small- and 
medium-sized tort-feasors who in reality have a relatively low share of liability in the 
situation leading to the claim, allows larger-sized or more liable tort-feasors to escape a 
greater share of liability if other tort-feasors settle, and creates a disincentive for larger or 
more liable tort-feasors to settle. 
 
For example, in a case involving five defendants, each defendant is assigned 20% of the 
liability. If the State settles with a small defendant for a 5% share of the total claim (because 
of the small defendant’s actual responsibility), the State must reduce its claim against the 
remaining defendants by 20%, resulting in the State relinquishing 15% of the total recovery 
through the settlement.  
 
According to OAG, provisions included in the bill (e.g., comparative responsibility, 
proportionate share of liability, and protection from contribution claims) allow the State to 
settle with tort-feasors. OAG advises that the bill (1) enables the State to settle with 
small and medium defendants expeditiously; (2) streamlines these cases by reducing the 
number of parties and issues before the court; and (3) allows the State to collect a higher 
percentage of the overall damages. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill is not expected to materially affect local government finances 
or operations. The bill applies to settlements in actions brought by the State. OAG advises 
that it does not anticipate a local government being a defendant in any applicable actions. 
 
Small Business Effect:  It is unclear whether any of the potential defendants in State 
litigation involving the Francis Scott Key Bridge are small businesses. The bill may have 
a meaningful effect on small business defendants in multi-defendant actions to which the 
bill applies. Depending on how the judge or jury determines each defendant’s relative share 
of responsibility, the share a small business may be ordered to pay could be different than 
it would have been responsible for paying in the absence of the bill. However, to the extent 
that the bill facilitates settlements with certain defendants, a small business defendant may 
benefit from the ability to settle its liability and avoid further litigation. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 680/ Page 5 
Additional Comments:  Under the bill, § 3-1401.1 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings 
Article exempts a “public welfare claim brought under § 6-106.2 of the State Government 
Article” from the application of MUCATA. However, § 6-106.2 does not contain language 
regarding a “public welfare claim.” 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years; however, legislation with similar provisions has been proposed. For example, 
see SB 524 and HB 729 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 922 (The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Judiciary (Administrative Office 
of the Courts); Maryland Department of Transportation; Associated Press; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - May 8, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 8, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 8, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amy A. Devadas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5