START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 659 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 659 
(Senator Augustine) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Prince George's Gateway Development Authority - Modifications 
 
    
This bill requires the Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority to meet at least 
four times per year and requires staff of the Prince George’s County Redevelopment 
Authority to provide support for the operation of the authority in consultation with the 
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). The bill takes effect 
July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  DHCD can consult with authority staff as necessary with existing budgeted 
resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Local expenditures for the Prince George’s County Redevelopment 
Authority increase by up to approximately $90,000 annually from FY 2025 through 2028, 
and by up to approximately $22,500 in FY 2029, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
affected. This bill may impose a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority 
 
Chapters 466 and 467 of 2023 established the Prince George’s Gateway Development 
Authority in Prince George’s County to support the development and approval of a 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 659/ Page 2 
comprehensive neighborhood revitalization plan in the “target area” in the county. “Target 
area” means the City of Mount Rainier, the Town of Brentwood, the Town of Cottage City, 
the City of Bladensburg, the Town of Colmar Manor, and the Town of North Brentwood 
in Prince George’s County. The authority consists primarily of State and local government 
officials, or their designees. Authority members may not receive compensation but are 
entitled to reimbursement for expenses. 
 
The authority may manage appropriated funds from municipalities in the target area, 
Prince George’s County, and the State. The authority may receive donated services from 
accountants, lawyers, or other consultants as necessary to carry out the Acts and may 
supervise, manage, and terminate staff and consultants as necessary. 
 
The authority must support the development and approval of a comprehensive 
neighborhood revitalization plan in the target area to benefit (1) the residents; (2) housing; 
(3) neighborhoods; (4) economic development; and (5) transportation, including motor 
vehicles and pedestrians. 
 
By October 31, 2025, the authority must report its comprehensive neighborhood 
revitalization strategy to the Governor, the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, and 
the House Appropriations Committee. 
 
Provisions related to the authority terminate September 30, 2028. 
 
The Prince George’s County Redevelopment Authority 
 
The Prince George’s County Redevelopment Authority was established by local legislation 
in 1997 as a body corporate and politic and an instrumentality of Prince George’s County. 
The authority may appoint certain core staff, such as an executive director, with the consent 
of the county executive and may also appoint and remove other employees or agents as the 
authority deems necessary or desirable. 
 
Among other express powers related to economic development, the authority may 
(1) acquire, purchase, or otherwise obtain, hold, and use any property, or any interest 
therein; (2) accept grants from, make loans to, and enter into contracts with any federal, 
State, or local agency, or any private entity or party; (3) establish, impose, and collect tolls, 
rates, rentals, fees, and charges relating to its undertakings and property; and (4) subject to 
specified requirements, issue bonds. 
 
Local Expenditures:  Prince George’s County advises that the Prince George’s County 
Redevelopment Authority requires one contractual staff to provide support for the 
Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority for a period of three years (fiscal 2025 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 659/ Page 3 
through 2027) at a cost of approximately $90,000 annually, plus additional, unknown, costs 
for a consultant to develop the comprehensive plan in fiscal 2025 and 2026. 
 
While the Department of Legislative Services cannot independently verify the need for 
staff and/or a consultant, the redevelopment authority is a local economic development 
entity and may appoint and remove employees and enter into contracts as it deems 
necessary. Additionally, the bill does not require the Prince George’s County 
Redevelopment Authority to support the development and approval of a comprehensive 
neighborhood revitalization plan in the “target area” in the county. That responsibility 
remains with the Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority and is not altered by 
the bill. For purposes of this estimate, it is assumed that contractual staff are potentially 
needed for a longer period – until the gateway development authority terminates 
September 30, 2028, but that consultants are not. 
 
Accordingly, local expenditures for Prince George’s County – more specifically, for the 
Prince George’s County Redevelopment Authority – increase by up to approximately 
$90,000 annually from fiscal 2025 through 2028 and by up to approximately $22,500 in 
fiscal 2029 for a full-time contractual staff to support the operations the 
Prince George’s Gateway Development Authority. To the extent that the redevelopment 
authority chooses to instead use existing or part-time staff, the effect on local expenditures 
is less. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Housing and Community Development; 
Department of Commerce; Prince George’s County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3