START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 745

Chapter 745

(Senate Bill 697)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland National Guard – Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program
– Alterations

FOR the purpose of altering the reimbursement limit, subject to a certain limitation, on
certain grant awards to certain members of the National Guard for the cost of certain
health care and dental care premiums; and generally relating to the Tricare
Premium Reimbursement Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Public Safety
Section 13–411
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Public Safety

13–411.

(a) In this section, “eligible recipient” means an individual who is:

(1) eligible for Tricare Reserve Select coverage; and

(2) a member of the National Guard.

(b) There is a Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program in the Department.

(c) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, the Department may award grants to
an eligible recipient who meets the reimbursement application requirements for any of the
following:

(1) a premium paid for individual coverage through the Tricare Reserve
Select Program;

(2) a premium paid for any member of the immediate family of an eligible
recipient covered under the Tricare Reserve Select Program;

(3) a premium paid for individual coverage under the Tricare Dental
Program; or
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 745 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) a premium paid for any member of the immediate family of an eligible
recipient receiving dental benefits under the Tricare Dental Program.

(d) (1) A SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, A grant
award to an eligible recipient may reimburse the eligible recipient for up to [$60 of] the
total amount of premiums paid each month by the eligible recipient for the coverages listed
under subsection (c) of this section.

(2) THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF GRANTS AWARDED TO ELIGIBLE
RECIPIENTS IN A FISCAL YEAR UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY
NOT EXCEED THE ANNUAL APPROPRIATION IN THE STATE BUDGET FOR THE
TRICARE PREMIUM REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM.

(e) The Department shall adopt regulations to implement and administer the
Tricare Premium Reimbursement Program established under this section.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2