START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 708 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 708 
(Chair, Judicial Proceedings Committee)(By Request - 
Departmental) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Family Law - Kinship Care 
 
 
This departmental bill generally alters statutory provisions relating to the kinship care 
program within the Department of Human Services (DHS) to further prioritize placing 
children in need of out-of-home placement with kinships caregivers. Notably, among other 
provisions, the bill (1) expands the definition of a “kinship caregiver” by including a 
kinship parent and other individuals (related or unrelated) who have specified bonds or 
connections with the child or have otherwise been identified by the child’s parent; 
(2) requires the placement of a child with a kinship caregiver if a kinship caregiver is 
located subsequent to the child’s placement in a foster care setting; and (3) specifies, if a 
kinship caregiver cannot be located, considerations that must be taken into account when 
placing a child in out-of-home care. The bill also alters the definition of “relative” in 
Title 3, Subtitle 8 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article (generally pertaining to 
child in need of assistance proceedings) to mean a “kinship caregiver,” as defined in the 
bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect the operations or finances of the Judiciary 
or DHS. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government operations or finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DHS has determined that this bill has minimal or no impact on 
small business (attached). The Department of Legislative Services concurs with this 
assessment. (The attached assessment does not reflect amendments to the bill.) 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 708/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “kinship caregiver” includes (1) a kinship parent; (2) an individual who 
is related to the child through blood or marriage, adoption, tribal law or custom, or cultural 
custom or practice; and (3) an individual who is unrelated to the child but has a strong 
familial or other significant bond with the child, or is a person identified by the child’s 
parent. 
 
A local department of social services, in selecting a placement that is in the best interests 
of a child in need of out-of-home placement, must give preference to placement with a 
kinship caregiver, unless there is good cause to the contrary. The bill specifies that a local 
department must exhaust all reasonable resources to make proactive, thorough, and timely 
efforts to locate a kinship caregiver for initial placement of the child. If the local department 
cannot locate a kinship caregiver at the time of initial placement, preference must be given 
to a placement that most approximates a family in which the child’s special needs, if any, 
may be met, taking into account (1) the proximity of the placement to the child’s home, 
extended family, or siblings; (2) the child’s culture or language continuity; (3) the child’s 
age; and (4) the child’s developmental and educational needs. 
 
If a kinship caregiver is located after the placement of a child in a foster care setting, the 
local department must, in the best interest of the child, place the child with the kinship 
caregiver. A kinship caregiver may not be younger than age 18. The local department must 
approve an individual as a kinship caregiver if (1) the individual is related to the child 
through blood or marriage, adoption, tribal law or custom, or cultural custom or practice; 
(2) the individual has a strong familial or other significant bond to the child or the child’s 
family, or is a person identified by the child’s parent; and (3) placement with the individual 
is in the child’s best interest. 
 
A prospective kinship caregiver must provide to the local department any information the 
local department requests to enable the local department’s determination whether the 
individual meets the specified criteria. 
 
The Social Services Administration (SSA) within DHS must adopt appropriate regulations 
and policies. 
 
Current Law:  SSA within DHS is required to establish a program for kinship care, which 
is continuous 24-hour care and supportive services provided for a minor child placed by a 
child placement agency in the home of a relative by blood or marriage. A “kinship parent” 
is an individual who is related by blood or marriage within five degrees of consanguinity 
or affinity to a child who is in the care, custody, or guardianship of a local department and 
with whom the child may be placed for temporary or long-term care other than adoption. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 708/ Page 3 
When selecting a placement that is in the best interests of a child in need of out-of-home 
placement, the local department, as a first priority, must attempt to place the child with a 
kinship parent. The local department must exhaust all reasonable resources to locate a 
kinship parent for initial placement of a child. If no kinship parent is located at the time of 
the initial placement, the child must be placed in a foster care setting or, as an alternative, 
may be placed with a kinship caregiver. If a kinship parent or caregiver is located 
subsequent to the placement of a child in a foster care setting and it is in the best interest 
of the child, the local department may place the child with the kinship parent or caregiver. 
A kinship parent may not be younger than age 18, and a kinship caregiver may not be 
younger than age 21. 
 
The local department may approve an individual as a kinship caregiver only if (1) the 
individual is related to the child by blood or marriage beyond five degrees of consanguinity 
or affinity under the civil law or rule, or is a close family friend of the child or the child’s 
family; (2) the individual has a strong familial or other significant bond to the child or the 
child’s family; (3) the individual has maintained regular contact with the child or the child’s 
family sufficient to demonstrate strong familiarity with the child’s activities and daily 
needs; and (4) placement with the individual is in the child’s best interest. A prospective 
kinship caregiver must submit to the local department an affidavit that includes specific 
facts to enable the local department to determine whether the individual meets the criteria 
specified. 
 
Under Title 3, Subtitle 8 of the Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article, “relative” means 
an individual who is (1) related to the child by blood or marriage within five degrees of 
consanguinity or affinity under the civil law and (2) is at least age 21 or is at least age 18 
and lives with a spouse who is at least age 21. 
 
Background:  DHS reports that the kinship care program promotes lifelong well-being 
and connection for children and youth in out-of-home placements, including foster care. 
According to DHS, a “kin-first approach” to out-of-home placements generally reduces 
delays in placement, as well as frequent and disruptive placement changes. By updating 
the definition of “kinship caregiver,” DHS intends to help ensure that children are being 
placed, when necessary, with prioritized individuals who are uniquely able to support their 
specific needs. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1499 (Delegate Clippinger) - Judiciary. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 708/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Montgomery County; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the 
Courts); Department of Human Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - March 22, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 708/ Page 5 
ANALYSIS OF ECONOMIC IMPACT ON SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
TITLE OF BILL:  Family Law – Kinship Care 
 
BILL NUMBER:  SB0708 
 
PREPARED BY:  Vincent Pacheco 
 
 
 
PART A.  ECONOMIC IMPACT RATING 
 
This agency estimates that the proposed bill: 
 
  X   WILL HAVE MINIMAL OR NO ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESS 
 
OR 
 
 
        WILL HAVE MEANINGFUL ECONOMIC IMPACT ON MARYLAND 
SMALL BUSINESSES 
 
 
 
PART B.  ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

END OF PAGE 5