START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 737 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 737 
(Harford County Senators) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Higher Education - Harford Community College Board of Trustees - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters the residency requirements for members of the Harford Community College 
Board of Trustees. Specifically, all members must be a resident of Harford County for the 
duration of the member’s term. The bill further requires that all members of the 
Harford Community College Board of Trustees be appointed from the county at large; thus, 
it repeals existing councilmanic distribution requirements. Under the bill, the Governor 
must, to the extent practicable when appointing members to the board, take into 
consideration the geographic and ethnic representation of Harford County so that all 
segments of the population of the county are represented on the board. The bill also 
specifies that only the President of Harford Community College and the Superintendent of 
Harford County Public Schools must meet at least twice annually to discuss issues of 
mutual concern, repealing the requirement to include the Harford Community College 
Board of Trustees and the Harford County Board of Education in those meetings. Finally, 
the bill makes a technical change to alter the name of the board to be the  
Harford Community College Board of Trustees in statute. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill is directed at the Harford Community College Board of 
Trustees. 
  
Local Effect:  None. The bill is procedural in nature and generally affords greater 
flexibility in representation on the board. The bill does not affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 737/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  The Board of Trustees for Harford Community College has nine members. 
Each member must be a resident of Harford County and is appointed by the Governor for 
terms of five years (and may not serve more than two consecutive terms). Six members 
must be appointed so that there is one member from each councilmanic district, and the 
remaining three must be appointed from the county at large. No member may be a member 
of the Harford County Board of Education while serving on the board of trustees. 
 
At least twice annually, the Board of Community College Trustees, the College President, 
the Harford County Board of Education, and the Superintendent of the Harford County 
Public Schools must meet to discuss issues of mutual concern. 
 
State law generally establishes that community college boards have seven members serving 
staggered six-year terms, with several specified exceptions. Therefore, there are variations 
in the number and terms of board members. Appendix 1 – Selected Requirements for 
Board Members of Community Colleges shows characteristics of the various boards. 
With one exception, the boards are appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent 
of the Maryland Senate. For Chesapeake College, the board is appointed by the Governor 
with the advice and consent of the Maryland House of Delegates. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1345 (Harford County Delegation) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Harford County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 12, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 737/ Page 3 
Appendix 1 – Selected Requirements for Board Members of 
Community Colleges 
 
 
Community College Number of Members 
Term Length 
(in Years) 
Term Limits 
Residency 
Requirements 
Allegany 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Anne Arundel 
  81 
4 
32 
Yes3 
Baltimore City 
  91 
6 
24 
Some5 
Baltimore 
15 
5 
24 
See Note6 
Carroll 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Cecil 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Chesapeake 
10 
5 
3 
Yes7 
Frederick 
  7 
5 
3 
Yes8 
Garrett 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
Hagerstown 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
Yes9 
Harford 
  9 
5 
24 
Yes10 
Howard 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
Some11 
Montgomery 
101,12 
6 
No Limit 
Some13 
Prince George’s 
  91 
5 
24 
Yes14 
Southern Maryland 
  9 
5 
24 
Yes15 
Wor-Wic 
  7 
6 
No Limit 
None 
 
1 The board includes a student member serving a one-year term. The student body elects the student board 
member in Prince George’s County. 
2 Consecutive full terms. 
3 All members must be a resident of Anne Arundel County. 
4 Consecutive terms. 
5 All members must be a resident of the State. The majority must be residents of Baltimore City. 
6 Of the members, one serves at large and the other 14 serve from the seven councilmanic districts in 
Baltimore County, two from each district. 
7 Two members from each county that supports Chesapeake College (Caroline, Dorchester, Kent, 
Queen Anne’s, and Talbot). 
8 All seven members must be a resident of Frederick County. 
9 All members must be a resident of Washington County at the time of appointment and maintain residency 
in Washington County throughout their term of appointment. 
10 All members must be a resident of Harford County. The Harford County board includes three at-large 
members and one from each of the six council districts. 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 737/ Page 4 
11 Of the seven members, at least six must be residents of Howard County at the time of appointment and 
maintain residency in Howard County throughout the term of appointment. 
12 A local nominating committee must submit to the Governor the names of two to four candidates per 
vacancy, from which the Governor must appoint a new member. 
13 The student member must be a resident of the county. 
14 All members must be a resident of Prince George’s County. 
15 Members must be a resident of the State. Each of the southern Maryland counties must be represented by 
at least three members who are residents of the county. 
 
Source:  Annotated Code of Maryland 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4