START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

Chapter 463

(Senate Bill 760)

AN ACT concerning

Consumer Protection – Retail Sales of Gift Cards
(Gift Card Scams Prevention Act of 2024)

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~merchant~~ ~~that~~ ~~conducts~~ ~~an~~ ~~online~~ ~~sale~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~gift~~ ~~card~~
~~to~~ ~~register~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~Division~~ ~~of~~ ~~Consumer~~ ~~Protection~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Attorney~~
~~General~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~manner;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~the~~ ~~Division~~ ~~to~~ ~~charge~~ ~~a~~ ~~fee~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~
~~registration;~~ prohibiting a merchant from selling a certain open– or closed–loop gift
card to a consumer unless the merchant meets certain requirements; requiring a
merchant that displays a gift card for sale at a retail establishment to provide certain
training to the employees of the merchant regarding gift card fraud; requiring the
Division to create a certain model notice and issue certain guidelines regarding gift
card fraud; requiring a certain third–party gift card reseller to record and maintain
a copy of certain information for a certain period of time; authorizing a law
enforcement agency to request an issuer of gift cards or an issuer’s agent to provide
to the law enforcement agency certain evidence reasonably foreseeable to assist in
future criminal actions under certain circumstances; making a violation of this Act
an unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practice that is subject to enforcement and
penalties under the Maryland Consumer Protection Act; and generally relating to
the sale of gift cards and preventing gift card fraud.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xl)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xli)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Commercial Law
Section 13–301(14)(xlii); and 14–4601 through 14–4606 to be under the new subtitle
“Subtitle 46. Gift Card Fraud”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Commercial Law
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

Section 14–4601 through 14–4605
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2013 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 1 of this Act)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

13–301.

Unfair, abusive, or deceptive trade practices include any:

(14) Violation of a provision of:

(xl) Title 14, Subtitle 13 of the Public Safety Article; [or]

(xli) Title 14, Subtitle 45 of this article; or

(XLII)TITLE 14, SUBTITLE 46 OF THIS ARTICLE; OR

SUBTITLE 46. GIFT CARD FRAUD.

14–4601.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “DIVISION” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 13–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(C) “GIFT CARD” MEANS A CARD, CODE, OR DEVICE THAT IS:

(1) ISSUED TO A CONSUMER ON A PREPAID BASIS PRIMARILY FOR
PERSONAL, FAMILY, OR HOUSEHOLD PURPOSES IN A SPECIFIED AMOUNT,
~~REGARDLESS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~WHETHER~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~AMOUNT~~ ~~MAY~~ ~~BE~~ ~~INCREASED~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RELOADED~~ ~~IN~~
EXCHANGE FOR PAYMENT; AND

(2) REDEEMABLE ON PRESENTATION BY A CONSUMER AT A SINGLE
MERCHANT OR A GROUP OF AFFILIATED MERCHANTS.

(D) (C) “MERCHANT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 13–101 OF THIS
ARTICLE.

(D) “OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD” MEANS A CARD, CODE, OR DEVICE THAT IS:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

(1) IS ISSUED ISSUED TO A CONSUMER ON A PREPAID BASIS
PRIMARILY FOR PERSONAL, FAMILY, OR HOUSEHOLD PURPOSES IN A SPECIFIED
AMOUNT, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THAT AMOUNT MAY BE INCREASED OR
RELOADED IN EXCHANGE FOR PAYMENT;

(2) IS PAYMENT PAYMENT CARD NETWORK BRANDED; AND

(3) (I) IS REDEEMABLE REDEEMABLE ON PRESENTATION AT
MULTIPLE UNAFFILIATED MERCHANTS FOR GOODS OR SERVICES WITHIN THE
PAYMENT CARD NETWORK; OR

(II) IS USABLE USABLE AT AN AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE.

(E) “THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLER” MEANS A MERCHANT WHO,
WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION FROM OR AFFILIATION WITH THE BUSINESS ENTITY
ISSUING AN OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD, IS ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS OF:

(1) BUYING OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARDS ON BEHALF OF CONSUMERS; OR

(2) RESELLING OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARDS TO CONSUMERS.

14–4602.

(A) A MERCHANT THAT CONDUCTS ONLINE SALES OF GIFT CARDS TO
CONSUMERS SHALL REGISTER WITH THE DIVISION AS AN ONLINE SELLER OF GIFT
~~CARDS.~~

(B) TO ENFORCE THE PROVISIONS OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE DIVISION MAY
~~CHARGE~~ ~~A~~ ~~MERCHANT~~ ~~AN~~ ~~ANNUAL~~ ~~FEE~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~REGISTERED~~ ~~AS~~ ~~REQUIRED~~ ~~UNDER~~
THIS SECTION.

(C) THE DIVISION SHALL ESTABLISH A REGISTRATION PROCESS TO CARRY
OUT THIS SECTION.

~~14–4603.~~

(A) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A
MERCHANT MAY NOT KNOWINGLY SELL A AN OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD TO A
CONSUMER UNLESS:

(1) FOR AN ONLINE SALE, THE MERCHANT IS REGISTERED AS
REQUIRED UNDER § 14–4602 OF THIS SUBTITLE;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE MERCHANT CONSPICUOUSLY DISPLAYS A NOTICE IN
SUBSTANTIALLY THE SAME FORM AS THE MODEL NOTICE CREATED UNDER §
14–4605(1) § 14–4604(1) OF THIS SUBTITLE:

(I) FOR AN IN–PERSON SALE:

1. AT, AT OR NEAR THE PHYSICAL LOCATION WHERE
~~THE:~~

1. THE GIFT CARD IS DISPLAYED FOR SALE; OR

2. AT OR NEAR THE PHYSICAL LOCATION WHERE THE
THE SALE OCCURS; OR

(II) FOR AN ONLINE SALE, ON THE WEBPAGE THAT DISPLAYS:

1. WHERE THE GIFT CARD IS OFFERED FOR SALE; OR

2. THAT IS DISPLAYED IMMEDIATELY BEFORE THE SALE
IS FINALIZED; AND

(3) (2) FOR AN IN–PERSON SALE OF AN OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD,
THE GIFT CARD IS ENCLOSED IN SECURE PACKAGING THAT:

(I) IS SEALED IN A MANNER THAT IS NOT EASILY OPENED
WITHOUT SIGNS OF TAMPERING AND;

(II) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN ITEM (III) OF THIS ITEM,
CONCEALS ALL NUMERIC CODES SPECIFIC TO THE ACTIVATION OR THE
REDEMPTION OF THE GIFT CARD, INCLUDING ANY BAR CODE, CVV NUMBER, PIN
NUMBER, OR ACTIVATION CODE;

(III) DISPLAYS AN ACTIVATION CODE, BAR CODE, OR OTHER
ACTIVATION DATA ONLY IF THE PACKAGING USED IS MORE SECURE THAN IT
OTHERWISE WOULD BE IF THE DATA WERE FULLY CONCEALED; AND

(II) (IV) INCLUDES A WARNING THAT STATES THE FOLLOWING
OR USES LANGUAGE SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO THE FOLLOWING:

“DO NOT SELL OR PURCHASE IF PACKAGING HAS BEEN BROKEN OR INDICATES
TAMPERING”.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

(B) A MERCHANT MAY SELL A AN OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD THAT IS NOT
ENCLOSED IN SECURE PACKAGING AS REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (A)(3) (A)(2)
OF THIS SECTION IF:

(1) THE GIFT CARD IS A CHIP–ENABLED, NUMBERLESS CARD THAT IS
ACTIVATED BY A CONSUMER AFTER REGISTERING THE CARD ON THE CARD ISSUER’S
WEBSITE; OR

(2) THE GIFT CARD:

(I) IS SOLD EXCLUSIVELY BY:

1. A MERCHANT FOR USE ONLY AT THE RETAIL
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MERCHANT; OR

2. A GROUP OF AFFILIATED MERCHANTS FOR USE ONLY
AT THE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS OF THE AFFILIATED MERCHANTS; AND

(II) IS SECURED IN A PHYSICAL LOCATION WITHIN THE
MERCHANT’S RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT THAT IS ACCESSIBLE ONLY BY AN EMPLOYEE
OF THE MERCHANT.

~~14–4604.~~ 14–4603.

A MERCHANT THAT DISPLAYS A AN OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD FOR SALE AT A
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT SHALL PROVIDE TRAINING TO ~~THE~~ ALL EMPLOYEES OF
THE MERCHANT WHOSE DUTIES REGULARLY INCLUDE THE SALE OF OPEN–LOOP
GIFT CARDS TO CONSUMERS ON HOW TO IDENTIFY AND RESPOND TO GIFT CARD
FRAUD IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE GUIDELINES ESTABLISHED UNDER § 14–4605(2)
§ 14–4604(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

~~14–4605.~~ 14–4604.

THE DIVISION SHALL:

(1) CREATE A MODEL NOTICE REGARDING OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARDS
FOR USE BY MERCHANTS THAT:

(I) CAUTIONS A CONSUMER ABOUT GIFT CARD SCAMS;

(II) INSTRUCTS A CONSUMER ON WHAT TO DO IF THE
CONSUMER SUSPECTS THE CONSUMER MAY BE A VICTIM OF A GIFT CARD SCAM; AND

(III) INDICATES A GIFT CARD MAY NOT BE USED TO PAY DEBT;

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) ISSUE GUIDELINES REGARDING THE DETECTION AND
PREVENTION OF OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD FRAUD THAT INCLUDE:

(I) INFORMATION THAT RAISES PUBLIC AWARENESS ABOUT
GIFT CARD FRAUD;

(II) INFORMATION ABOUT HOW COMMON GIFT CARD FRAUD
SCHEMES WORK; AND

(III) BEST PRACTICES FOR A MERCHANT TO PREVENT GIFT CARD
FRAUD; AND

(3) MAKE AVAILABLE ONLINE AND PERIODICALLY UPDATE THE
MODEL NOTICE AND GUIDELINES REQUIRED UNDER THIS SECTION.

14–4605.

(A) THIS SECTION APPLIES ONLY TO THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLERS.

(B) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (C) OF THIS SECTION, WHEN A THIRD–PARTY
GIFT CARD RESELLER BUYS OR SELLS AN OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD AS PART OF A
TRANSACTION OCCURRING IN THE STATE, THE THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLER
SHALL RECORD AND FOR AT LEAST 3 YEARS MAINTAIN A COPY OF THE FOLLOWING
INFORMATION, AS APPLICABLE:

(1) THE DATE OF THE TRANSACTION;

(2) THE NAME OF THE PERSON WHO CONDUCTED THE TRANSACTION;

(3) THE NAME, AGE, AND ADDRESS OF THE SELLER OF THE GIFT
CARD;

(4) THE SELLER’S AND CONSUMER’S DRIVER’S LICENSE NUMBER OR
IDENTIFICATION CARD NUMBER;

(5) A DESCRIPTION OF THE PURCHASED GIFT CARD, INCLUDING:

(I) THE RETAILER FOR WHICH THE GIFT CARD IS INTENDED
FOR USE; AND

(II) THE GIFT CARD NUMBER;

(6) THE SPECIFIC AMOUNT ISSUED ON THE GIFT CARD;

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

(7) THE PRICES PAID TO CONDUCT THE TRANSACTION; AND

(8) THE SIGNATURE OF THE CONSUMER.

(C) (1) THE INFORMATION RECORDED AND MAINTAINED UNDER
SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION SHALL CHRONOLOGICALLY BE WRITTEN IN INK
OR LOGGED INTO A SECURE DATABASE, SOFTWARE SYSTEM, OR OTHER SIMILAR
TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM.

(2) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (3) OF THIS SUBSECTION,
RECORDED INFORMATION MAY NOT BE DESTROYED, ALTERED, OR ERASED.

(3) A HANDWRITTEN CORRECTION MAY BE MADE TO AN ENTRY OF
INFORMATION BY DRAWING A LINE OF INK THROUGH THE ENTRY IN A MANNER THAT
RETAINS LEGIBILITY.

(4) INFORMATION RECORDED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL BE OPEN
TO INSPECTION BY ANY DULY AUTHORIZED LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:

(I) DURING THE ORDINARY BUSINESS HOURS OF THE
THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLER; OR

(II) AT ANY REASONABLE TIME.

(D) A THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLER, INCLUDING AN AGENT OR
EMPLOYEE OF THE THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLER, MAY NOT:

(1) FAIL TO MAKE AN ENTRY OF OR FALSIFY, DESTROY, OR REMOVE
ANY INFORMATION REQUIRED TO BE RECORDED AND MAINTAINED UNDER THIS
SECTION;

(2) REFUSE TO ALLOW ANY DULY AUTHORIZED LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICER TO INSPECT A RECORD OF INFORMATION OR OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARDS IN
THE THIRD–PARTY GIFT CARD RESELLER’S POSSESSION DURING THE ORDINARY
BUSINESS HOURS OF THE RESELLER OR AT ANY REASONABLE TIME; OR

(3) FAIL TO MAINTAIN A RECORD OF EACH OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARD
TRANSACTION FOR AT LEAST 3 YEARS.

(E) ON THE FILING OF AN OFFICIAL REPORT WITH A LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY BY ANY PERSON ALLEGING TO BE A VICTIM OF THEFT OF ONE OR MORE
OPEN–LOOP GIFT CARDS WITH AN AGGREGATE VALUE EXCEEDING $500, THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY MAY REQUEST THAT THE ISSUER OF THE GIFT CARDS OR
– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

THE ISSUER’S AGENTS PRESERVE AND PROVIDE TO THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCY ALL RELEVANT EVIDENCE REASONABLY FORESEEABLE AS OF ASSISTANCE
TO FUTURE CRIMINAL ACTIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.

14–4606.

(A) A EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (B) OF THIS SECTION, A A
VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE IS:

(1) AN UNFAIR, ABUSIVE, OR DECEPTIVE TRADE PRACTICE WITHIN
THE MEANING OF TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE; AND

(2) SUBJECT TO THE PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
CONTAINED IN TITLE 13 OF THIS ARTICLE, EXCEPT FOR § 13–408 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) (1) BEFORE INITIATING AN ENFORCEMENT ACTION FOR A VIOLATION
OF THIS SUBTITLE, THE DIVISION MAY ISSUE A NOTICE OF VIOLATION TO THE
ALLEGED VIOLATOR IF:

(I) THE DIVISION DETERMINES THAT IT IS POSSIBLE TO CURE
THE VIOLATION;

(II) NO CONSUMER WAS HARMED AS A RESULT OF THE
VIOLATION; AND

(III) THE ALLEGED VIOLATOR HAS NOT PREVIOUSLY VIOLATED
THIS SUBTITLE.

(2) IF THE DIVISION ISSUES A NOTICE OF VIOLATION UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION, THE DIVISION SHALL PROVIDE THE ALLEGED
VIOLATOR NOT LESS THAN 10 DAYS AFTER THE NOTICE OF VIOLATION IS ISSUED TO
CURE THE VIOLATION.

(3) IF THE ALLEGED VIOLATOR FAILS TO CURE THE VIOLATION
WITHIN THE TIME PERIOD SPECIFIED BY THE DIVISION, THE DIVISION MAY INITIATE
AN ENFORCEMENT ACTION FOR A VIOLATION OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(B) A PERSON WHO VIOLATES THIS SUBTITLE IS SUBJECT TO A WARNING
FOR A FIRST VIOLATION.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Commercial Law

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

14–4601.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(B) “CLOSED–LOOP GIFT CARD” MEANS A CARD, CODE, OR DEVICE THAT IS:

(1) ISSUED TO A CONSUMER ON A PREPAID BASIS PRIMARILY FOR
PERSONAL, FAMILY, OR HOUSEHOLD PURPOSES IN A SPECIFIED AMOUNT,
REGARDLESS OF WHETHER THAT AMOUNT MAY BE INCREASED OR RELOADED IN
EXCHANGE FOR PAYMENT; AND

(2) REDEEMABLE ON PRESENTATION BY A CONSUMER AT A SINGLE
MERCHANT OR A GROUP OF AFFILIATED MERCHANTS.

[(b)] (C) “Division” has the meaning stated in § 13–101 of this article.

[(c)] (D) “Merchant” has the meaning stated in § 13–101 of this article.

[(d)] (E) “Open–loop gift card” means a card, code, or device that is:

(1) ~~Is~~ ~~issued~~ Issued to a consumer on a prepaid basis primarily for personal,
family, or household purposes in a specified amount, regardless of whether that amount
may be increased or reloaded in exchange for payment;

(2) ~~Is~~ ~~payment~~ Payment card network branded; and

(3) (i) ~~Is~~ ~~redeemable~~ Redeemable on presentation at multiple
unaffiliated merchants for goods or services within the payment card network; or

(ii) ~~Is~~ ~~usable~~ Usable at an automated teller machine.

[(e)] (F) “Third–party gift card reseller” means a merchant who, without
authorization from or affiliation with the business entity issuing an [open–loop] OPEN– OR
A CLOSED–LOOP gift card, is engaged in the business of:

(1) Buying [open–loop] OPEN– OR CLOSED–LOOP gift cards on behalf of
consumers; or

(2) Reselling [open–loop] OPEN– OR CLOSED–LOOP gift cards to
consumers.

14–4602.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, a merchant may not
knowingly sell an [open–loop] OPEN– OR A CLOSED–LOOP gift card to a consumer unless:

(1) The merchant conspicuously displays a notice in substantially the same
form as the model notice created under § 14–4604(1) of this subtitle:

(i) For an in–person sale, at or near the physical location where:

1. The gift card is displayed for sale; or

2. The sale occurs; or

(ii) For an online sale, on the webpage:

1. Where the gift card is offered for sale; or

2. That is displayed before the sale is finalized; [and]

(2) For an in–person sale of an open–loop gift card, the gift card is enclosed
in secure packaging that:

(i) Is sealed in a manner that is not easily opened without signs of
tampering ~~and;~~

(ii) Except as provided in item (iii) of this item, conceals all numeric
codes specific to the activation or redemption of the gift card, including any bar code, CVV
number, PIN number, or activation code;

(iii) Displays an activation code, bar code, or other activation data
only if the packing used is more secure than it otherwise would be if the data were fully
concealed; and

~~(ii)~~ (iv) Includes a warning that states the following or uses
language substantially similar to the following:

“Do not sell or purchase if packaging has been broken or indicates tampering”; AND

(3) FOR AN IN–PERSON SALE OF A CLOSED–LOOP GIFT CARD, THE
GIFT CARD IS PRESENTED IN PACKAGING THAT:

(I) 1. IN A MANNER THAT IS NOT EASILY REMOVED OR
REPLACED WITHOUT SIGNS OF TAMPERING, CONCEALS CONCEALS OR COVERS, IN A
MANNER THAT IS NOT EASILY REMOVED OR REPLACED WITHOUT SIGNS OF
TAMPERING, ALL NUMERIC CODES SPECIFIC TO THE REDEMPTION OF THE GIFT
CARD; OR

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

2. IF MADE MORE SECURE THROUGH PARTIAL
CONCEALMENT OR COVERING THAN FULL CONCEALMENT OR COVERING UNDER ITEM
1 OF THIS ITEM, PARTIALLY CONCEALS OR COVERS, IN A MANNER THAT IS NOT
EASILY REMOVED OR REPLACED WITHOUT SIGNS OF TAMPERING, ALL NUMERIC
CODES SPECIFIC TO REDEMPTION OF THE GIFT CARD; AND

(II) INCLUDES A WARNING THAT STATES THE FOLLOWING OR
USES LANGUAGE SUBSTANTIALLY SIMILAR TO THE FOLLOWING:

“DO NOT SELL OR PURCHASE IF PACKAGING HAS BEEN BROKEN OR INDICATES
TAMPERING.”.

(b) A merchant may sell an [open–loop] OPEN– OR A CLOSED–LOOP gift card
that is not enclosed in secure packaging as required under subsection (a)(2) of this section
if:

(1) The gift card is a chip–enabled, numberless card that is activated by a
consumer after registering the card on the card issuer’s website; or

(2) The gift card:

(i) Is sold exclusively by:

1. A merchant for use only at the retail establishment of the
merchant; or

2. A group of affiliated merchants for use only at the retail
establishments of the affiliated merchants; and

(ii) Is secured in a physical location within the merchant’s retail
establishment that is accessible only by an employee of the merchant.

14–4603.

A merchant that displays an [open–loop] OPEN– OR A CLOSED–LOOP gift card for
sale at a retail establishment shall provide training to all employees of the merchant whose
duties regularly include the sale of [open–loop] OPEN– OR CLOSED–LOOP gift cards to
consumers on how to identify and respond to gift card fraud in accordance with the
guidelines established under § 14–4604(2) of this subtitle.

14–4604.

The Division shall:

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) Create a model notice regarding [open–loop] OPEN– AND
CLOSED–LOOP gift cards for use by merchants that:

(i) Cautions a consumer about gift card scams;

(ii) Instructs a consumer on what to do if the consumer suspects the
consumer may be a victim of a gift card scam; and

(iii) Indicates a gift card may not be used to pay debt;

(2) Issue guidelines regarding the detection and prevention of [open–loop]
OPEN– AND CLOSED–LOOP gift card fraud that include:

(i) Information that raises public awareness about gift card fraud;

(ii) Information about how common gift card fraud schemes work;
and

(iii) Best practices for a merchant to prevent gift card fraud; and

(3) Make available online and periodically update the model notice and
guidelines required under this section.

14–4605.

(a) This section applies only to third–party gift card resellers.

(b) Subject to subsection (c) of this section, when a third–party gift card reseller
buys or sells an [open–loop] OPEN– OR A CLOSED–LOOP gift card as part of a transaction
occurring in the State, the third–party gift card reseller shall record and for at least 3 years
maintain a copy of the following information, as applicable:

(1) The date of the transaction;

(2) The name of the person who conducted the transaction;

(3) The name, age, and address of the seller of the gift card;

(4) The seller’s and consumer’s driver’s license number or identification
card number;

(5) A description of the purchased gift card, including:

(i) The retailer for which the gift card is intended for use; and

(ii) The gift card number;

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 463

(6) The specific amount issued on the gift card;

(7) The prices paid to conduct the transaction; and

(8) The signature of the consumer.

(c) (1) The information recorded and maintained under subsection (b) of this
section shall chronologically be written in ink or logged into a secure database, software
system, or other similar technology platform.

(2) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, recorded
information may not be destroyed, altered, or erased.

(3) A handwritten correction may be made to an entry of information by
drawing a line of ink through the entry in a manner that retains legibility.

(4) Information recorded under this section shall be open to inspection by
any duly authorized law enforcement officer:

(i) During the ordinary business hours of the third–party gift card
reseller; or

(ii) At any reasonable time.

(d) A third–party gift card reseller, including an agent or employee of the
third–party gift card reseller, may not:

(1) Fail to make an entry of or falsify, destroy, or remove any information
required to be recorded and maintained under this section;

(2) Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect
a record of information or [open–loop] OPEN– OR CLOSED–LOOP gift cards in the
third–party gift card reseller’s possession during the ordinary business hours of the reseller
or at any reasonable time; or

(3) Fail to maintain a record of each [open–loop] OPEN– OR
CLOSED–LOOP gift card transaction for at least 3 years.

(e) On the filing of an official report to a law enforcement agency by any person
alleging to be a victim of theft of one or more [open–loop] OPEN– OR CLOSED–LOOP gift
cards with an aggregate value exceeding $500, the law enforcement agency may request
that the issuer of the gift cards or the issuer’s agents preserve and provide to the law
enforcement agency all relevant evidence reasonably foreseeable as of assistance to future
criminal actions in accordance with State law.

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 463 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall
take effect October 1, ~~2024~~ 2025.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, except as provided in Section
3 of this Act, this Act shall take effect June 1, 2025.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14