START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 276

Chapter 276

(Senate Bill 737)

AN ACT concerning

Higher Education – Harford Community College Board of Trustees – Alterations

FOR the purpose of requiring that a member of the Harford Community College Board of
Trustees be a resident of Harford County for the duration of the member’s term;
altering, ~~beginning~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~date,~~ ~~the~~ ~~residency~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~appointed~~
~~members~~ ~~from~~ ~~Harford~~ ~~County~~ ~~councilmanic~~ ~~districts~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~manner;~~ the
membership of the Harford Community College Board of Trustees; requiring the
Governor to consider certain factors when appointing members to the Board; altering
meeting requirements so that the Harford Community College Board of Trustees and
the Harford County Board of Education are no longer required to attend certain
meetings; and generally relating to the Harford Community College Board of
Trustees.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Education
Section 16–408
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Education
Section 16–408.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Education

16–408.

(a) (1) The HARFORD COMMUNITY COLLEGE Board of [Community
College] Trustees [for Harford County] consists of nine members APPOINTED FROM THE
COUNTY AT LARGE.

(2) Subject to paragraph (4) (3) of this subsection, each of the members
shall be:

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 276 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) A resident of Harford County FOR THE DURATION OF THE
MEMBER’S TERM; and

(ii) Appointed by the Governor for terms of 5 years.

(3) ~~Of~~ ~~the~~ ~~nine~~ ~~members:~~

(i) [Six] BEGINNING JULY 1, 2024, SIX shall be appointed [with
one from each of the six councilmanic districts] ACCORDING TO THE FOLLOWING:

1. THREE MEMBERS RESIDING IN COUNCILMANIC
DISTRICTS A, B, OR F; and

2. THREE MEMBERS RESIDING IN COUNCILMANIC
DISTRICTS C, D, OR E; AND

~~(ii)~~ ~~Three~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~appointed~~ ~~from~~ ~~the~~ ~~county~~ ~~at~~ ~~large.~~

~~(4)~~ No member may be a member of the Harford County Board of
Education while serving as a member of the Board.

(b) A member of the Board may not serve for more than two consecutive 5–year
terms.

[(c) At least twice annually, the Board of Community College Trustees, the College
~~President,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Harford~~ ~~County~~ ~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Education,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~Superintendent~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Harford~~
County public schools shall meet to discuss issues of mutual concern.] TO THE EXTENT
PRACTICABLE, WHEN APPOINTING MEMBERS TO THE BOARD, THE GOVERNOR
SHALL TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION THE GEOGRAPHIC AND ETHNIC
REPRESENTATION OF HARFORD COUNTY SO THAT ALL SEGMENTS OF THE
POPULATION OF THE COUNTY ARE REPRESENTED ON THE BOARD.

16–408.1.

AT LEAST TWICE ANNUALLY, THE PRESIDENT OF HARFORD COMMUNITY
COLLEGE AND THE SUPERINTENDENT OF HARFORD COUNTY PUBLIC SCHOOLS
SHALL MEET TO DISCUSS ISSUES OF MUTUAL CONCERN.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2