START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 866

Chapter 866

(Senate Bill 718)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Pathway to Nursing Pilot Program and Advisory Committee
– Establishment

FOR the purpose of establishing the Maryland Pathway to Nursing Pilot Program in the
Maryland ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Health~~ Higher Education Commission; establishing the
Maryland Pathway to Nursing Advisory Committee to assist the Secretary of Higher
Education in the development and implementation of the Program; and generally
relating to the Maryland Pathway to Nursing Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ Education
Section ~~13–5201~~ ~~through~~ ~~13–5203~~ 11–1801 through 11–1803 to be under the new
subtitle “Subtitle ~~52.~~ 18. Maryland Pathway to Nursing Pilot Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
~~(2023~~ (2022 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – ~~Health~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ Education

SUBTITLE 52. 18. MARYLAND PATHWAY TO NURSING PILOT PROGRAM.

~~13–5201.~~ 11–1801.

(A) IN THIS SUBTITLE THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMITTEE” MEANS THE MARYLAND PATHWAY TO NURSING
ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(C) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE MARYLAND PATHWAY TO NURSING PILOT
PROGRAM.

~~13–5202.~~ 11–1802.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND PATHWAY TO NURSING PILOT PROGRAM IN
THE DEPARTMENT COMMISSION.

(B) THE GOALS OF THE PROGRAM ARE TO:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 866 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) SUPPORT STUDENTS IN LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSING
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS WHO INTEND TO PRACTICE LICENSED PRACTICAL
NURSING AS A CAREER IN THE STATE OR CONTINUE ON THE NURSING EDUCATIONAL
PATHWAY TO BECOME A REGISTERED NURSE IN THE STATE;

(2) ALLEVIATE THE SHORTAGE OF NURSING PROFESSIONALS BY
INCREASING THE GRADUATION AND LICENSURE RATES OF LICENSED PRACTICAL
NURSING AND REGISTERED NURSING STUDENTS IN THE STATE;

(3) INCREASE THE NUMBER OF LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSES AND
REGISTERED NURSES WHO REFLECT THE DIVERSITY OF THE COMMUNITIES THEY
SERVE;

(4) FACILITATE STUDENT APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL
RESOURCES THAT PROVIDE TUITION ASSISTANCE, LOAN REPAYMENT, AND SUPPORT
FOR OTHER EDUCATIONAL COSTS; AND

(5) PROVIDE PROGRAM PARTICIPANTS WITH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
TO COVER THE COST OF:

(I) COMPUTERS, TEXTBOOKS, AND OTHER SUPPLIES AND
ADDITIONAL EDUCATION SUPPORT SERVICES; AND

(II) WRAPAROUND SUPPORT SERVICES THAT PROVIDE
ASSISTANCE WITH TRANSPORTATION, CHILD CARE, ELDER CARE, AND OTHER
LIVING EXPENSES THAT POSE A BARRIER TO STUDENTS SUCCESSFULLY
COMPLETING THE STUDENT’S EDUCATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.

(C) THE SECRETARY, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE,
SHALL DETERMINE THE FOLLOWING FOR THE PROGRAM:

(1) THE TIME FRAME AND STEPS NECESSARY TO ESTABLISH THE
PROGRAM;

(2) THE AREAS OF THE STATE IN WHICH THE PROGRAM WILL
OPERATE;

(3) FUNDING TO SUPPORT THE PROGRAM, INCLUDING A STRATEGY
FOR SUSTAINABILITY THROUGH BRAIDED FUNDING FROM LOCAL WORKFORCE
DEVELOPMENT BOARDS, LOCAL HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS, AND FEDERAL GRANTS;

(4) THE RESOURCES NECESSARY TO SUPPORT THE PROGRAM; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 866

(5) THE TYPES OF EVALUATIONS, INCLUDING OBTAINING FEEDBACK
FROM STUDENTS AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS, NEEDED TO MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT THE PROGRAM’S DESIGN AND EXPANSION STATEWIDE.

(D) ON OR BEFORE JULY 1, 2025, THE SECRETARY SHALL ISSUE GRANTS TO
AT LEAST TWO PILOT SITES, LOCATED IN DIVERSE AREAS, THAT MEET THE
DEPARTMENT’S COMMISSION’S REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE
PROGRAM.

(E) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 15, 2024, AND EACH DECEMBER 15
THEREAFTER THROUGH 2029, THE SECRETARY SHALL REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR
AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM.

~~13–5203.~~ 11–1803.

(A) THERE IS A MARYLAND PATHWAY TO NURSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(B) THE COMMITTEE SHALL ASSIST THE SECRETARY IN THE DEVELOPMENT
AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM.

(C) THE COMMITTEE CONSISTS OF THE FOLLOWING MEMBERS, APPOINTED
BY THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH:

(1) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS
AFFAIRS;

(2) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND HIGHER EDUCATION
COMMISSION DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH;

(3) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE STATE BOARD OF NURSING;

(4) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND DEPARTMENT OF
LABOR;

(4) (5) FOUR REPRESENTATIVES FROM COMMUNITY COLLEGES IN
THE STATE THAT OFFER LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSING PROGRAMS;

(5) (6) TWO REPRESENTATIVES FROM PUBLIC HIGHER EDUCATION
INSTITUTIONS WITH A 4–YEAR DEGREE NURSING PROGRAM, ONE OF WHOM SHALL
BE FROM A HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 866 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(6) (7) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A PRIVATE HIGHER
EDUCATION INSTITUTION THAT PRIMARILY OFFERS 4–YEAR DEGREE PROGRAMS;

(7) (8) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND NURSES
ASSOCIATION;

(8) (9) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND ASSOCIATION
OF COMMUNITY COLLEGES;

(9) (10) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND INDEPENDENT
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY ASSOCIATION;

(10) (11) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL
ASSOCIATION;

(11) (12) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LIFESPAN NETWORK;

(12) (13) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE BALTIMORE COUNTY
PUBLIC HEALTH PATHWAYS PROGRAM;

(13) (14) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A LABOR ORGANIZATION
THAT REPRESENTS CERTIFIED NURSING ASSISTANTS, LICENSED PRACTICAL
NURSES, AND REGISTERED NURSES;

(14) (15) ONE REPRESENTATIVE FROM A LOCAL WORKFORCE
INVESTMENT BOARD;

(15) (16) ONE PRACTICAL NURSING STUDENT IN THE STATE;

(16) (17) ONE LICENSED PRACTICAL NURSE LICENSED IN THE STATE;
~~AND~~

(17) (18) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF LEADINGAGE MARYLAND;

(18) (19) ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE HEALTH FACILITIES
ASSOCIATION OF MARYLAND; AND

(17) (19) (20) ANY OTHER INDIVIDUAL WITH EXPERTISE OR
EXPERIENCE THAT THE SECRETARY DETERMINES IS RELEVANT TO THE
COMMITTEE.

(D) THE SECRETARY SHALL DESIGNATE THE CHAIR OF THE COMMITTEE.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 866

(E) THE DEPARTMENT COMMISSION SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE
COMMITTEE.

(F) A MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE:

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMITTEE; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect June
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5