START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 783 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 783 
(Senator Elfreth, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment and 
Budget and Taxation 
Economic Matters 
 
Public Utilities - Solar Energy Systems and Programs, Maryland Strategic 
Energy Investment Fund, and Prevailing Wage (Brighter Tomorrow Act) 
 
 
This bill requires the Public Service Commission (PSC) to establish the Small Solar Energy 
Generating System Incentive Program, establishes the Customer-Sited Solar Program in 
the Maryland Energy Administration (MEA), modifies solar property tax incentives, and 
makes other related changes. The bill generally takes effect June 1, 2024. Customer-
Sited Solar Program provisions take effect July 1, 2024, and terminate June 30, 2027. 
Net metering provisions take effect January 1, 2025. Property tax provisions apply to 
taxable years beginning after June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. Special fund expenditures for PSC increase by 
$515,900 in FY 2025 and by at least $256,600 annually thereafter; special fund revenues 
for PSC increase correspondingly. Special fund revenues and expenditures for the Strategic 
Energy Investment Fund (SEIF) may decrease beginning in FY 2025 but are not otherwise 
materially affected, as discussed below. Annuity Bond Fund (ABF) revenues may decrease 
beginning in FY 2025. Any decrease may require either (1) an increase in the State property 
tax rate or (2) a general fund appropriation to cover debt service on the State’s general 
obligation (GO) bonds. The effect on electricity prices is discussed in the Additional 
Comments section below. This bill establishes a mandated appropriation (of existing, 
reallocated funds) in FY 2026 and 2027.  
  
Local Effect:  Local property tax revenues decrease, potentially significantly, beginning 
in FY 2025. Local finances may be affected by a reallocation of SEIF funds from FY 2025 
through 2027. Local finances and operations are not otherwise materially affected. This 
bill imposes a mandate on a unit of local government. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 783/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Generally, the bill (1) requires PSC to establish the Small Solar Energy 
Generating System Incentive Program, under which eligible solar systems may generate 
certified solar renewable energy credits (SRECs) that have a compliance value of 150% of 
noncertified SRECs; (2) extends the duration of all renewable energy credits (RECs) for 
purposes of the State Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) to five years; 
(3) increases the maximum generating capacity for specified net-metered facilities and 
allows an eligible customer-generator participating in meter aggregation to receive excess 
generation from more than one generating system; (4) authorizes MEA to use up to 10% 
of solar alternative compliance payments (ACPs) for administration of SEIF; 
(5) establishes the Customer-Sited Solar Program in MEA; (6) generally requires each 
county and municipality to implement specified solar permitting software; (7) establishes 
prevailing wage requirements for specified solar systems; (8) establishes requirements for 
home improvement contracts for rooftop solar installations; and (9) establishes and 
modifies solar property tax incentives.  
 
Where not otherwise specified, provisions take effect June 1, 2024, and are permanent. 
 
Public Service Commission-related Provisions 
 
 
Small Solar Energy Generating System Incentive Program 
 
PSC must establish a Small Solar Energy Generating System Incentive Program. Under 
the program, a solar energy generating system that meets specified requirements and is 
certified by PSC generates “certified SRECs,” which have a compliance value of 150% for 
electricity suppliers to put toward meeting the solar carve-out for the State RPS. The total 
amount of in-State generating capacity for certified systems under the program may not 
exceed (1) 300 megawatts for systems with a generating capacity of less than 20 kilowatts 
and (2) 270 megawatts for systems with a generating capacity between 20 kilowatts and 
5 megawatts. 
 
To be eligible for certification, a solar energy generating system must:   
 
 
be located in the State; 
 
be eligible for inclusion in meeting the State RPS; 
 
have a generating capacity of no more than 5 megawatts; 
 
be placed in service between July 1, 2024, and January 1, 2028, inclusive; and 
 
be a system with a generating capacity of (1) no more than 20 kilowatts; (2) no more 
than 2 megawatts, if the system is used for aggregate net metering; or (3) between 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 783/ Page 3 
20 kilowatts and 5 megawatts, if the system is located on a rooftop, a parking 
canopy, or a brownfield. 
 
The bill specifies the process for the owner of a solar energy generating system to apply to 
PSC for certification under the program. At the time of certification, the owner must pay 
PSC a one-time per-system fee of up to $50, or up to $200, depending on the system size. 
PSC must use the fees to pay for costs associated with administering the program. 
 
A certified system must continue to be eligible to generate certified SRECs for 15 years 
after the date of certification by PSC, or January 1, 2025, whichever is later, after which 
the system is eligible to generate noncertified SRECs as long as the system meets the 
requirements as a Tier 1 renewable resource. 
 
By January 1, 2025, PSC must begin determining the eligibility of solar energy generating 
systems to be certified under the program. By July 1, 2026, PSC must implement a revised 
system to review and ensure RPS compliance. 
 
An electricity supplier may apply certified SRECs toward RPS compliance starting with 
the 2025 compliance year. Notwithstanding any other law, PSC must allow electricity 
suppliers to demonstrate compliance with the 2025 RPS compliance year by submitting 
information between July 1, 2026, and December 31, 2026, using the revised system 
developed above. Under PSC regulations, compliance reports are due by April 1 of the year 
following the RPS compliance year, so the bill provides a one-time delay of three to 
nine months. 
 
PSC must include information regarding the status of the program in its annual RPS report 
to the General Assembly. 
 
 
Renewable Energy Credit Duration Extended 
 
The maximum duration of a REC for purposes of the State RPS is extended from 
three years to five years. Other general requirements related to RECs remain unchanged. 
 
 
Net Metering Capacity Increases 
 
The generating capacity of a net-metered facility that is meter aggregated under § 7-306.3 
of the Public Utilities Article, which only applies to certain customer-generators, may not 
exceed 5 megawatts. 
 
Notwithstanding the generating capacity limits established for the State’s net metering law, 
an 
eligible 
customer-generator 
participating 
in 
meter 
aggregation 
under 
§ 7-306.2 (community solar) or § 7-306.3 (certain customer-generators) of the Public 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 783/ Page 4 
Utilities Article may receive excess generation from more than one generating system, 
including if the combined generating capacity of all net-metered facilities that are meter 
aggregated exceeds 5 megawatts. 
 
These provisions take effect January 1, 2025. 
 
Maryland Energy Administration-related Provisions 
 
Authorization to Use Solar Alternative Compliance Fees for Administrative Costs 
 
Up to 10% of the proceeds received by SEIF from compliance fees paid by electricity 
suppliers for failure to meet the solar RPS requirement must be credited to an 
administrative expense account for costs related to the administration of the fund. 
 
 
Customer-Sited Solar Program 
 
The Customer-Sited Solar Program is established in MEA to (1) increase deployment of 
customer-sited solar energy generating systems and (2) provide grants to eligible 
customer-generators that have installed solar energy generating systems with or without 
energy storage.  
 
By January 1, 2025, MEA must establish application and income verification procedures 
for the program and award grants from the program. Subject to specified application 
requirements, the program may provide a grant to an income-verified eligible 
customer-generator (as defined under current law) with a low- to moderate-income, in an 
amount equal to $750 per kilowatt of nameplate capacity for a solar energy generating 
system, up to a maximum of $7,500 per system. “Low- to moderate-income” means a 
household with an annual household income at or below 150% of the average median 
income for the State.   
 
A third party may apply for a grant on behalf of an eligible customer-generator with proof 
of consent from the eligible customer-generator and be assigned a grant by the eligible 
customer-generator to act on behalf of the eligible customer-generator. A solar energy 
generating system must be installed within 180 days after a grant is reserved by MEA for 
an eligible customer-generator. 
 
MEA must develop a consumer protection policy, as specified, in consultation with 
representatives of the customer-sited solar industry. The policy must be easily accessible 
on MEA’s website and social media platforms. 
 
Beginning in fiscal 2025, at least 20% of solar ACP revenues received by SEIF must be 
used to provide grants to support the installation of new solar energy generating systems 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 783/ Page 5 
under the program. Solar ACP revenues collected but unused from a previous year must be 
used before revenues allocated for the current year. MEA must reallocate to other 
authorized uses any revenues that are not used within three fiscal years after collection. A 
conforming change is made to the authorized uses of solar ACP revenues received by SEIF. 
 
These provisions take effect July 1, 2024, and terminate June 30, 2027. 
 
 
Solar Permitting Software for Local Governments 
 
Generally, by August 1, 2025, each county and municipality must implement “solar 
permitting software” for features supporting the tracking and approval of residential 
building permits for solar energy systems, energy storage systems, main electric panel 
upgrades, and main electric panel derates.  
 
“Solar permitting software” means (1) the most recent version of a web-based platform, 
developed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, that provides a standard portal 
for receiving and processing residential solar energy system and residential energy storage 
system permit information or (2) automated software that functions to support the tracking 
and approval of residential building permits for the purposes described above. 
 
A county or municipality may not be required to comply with the requirement to implement 
solar permitting software if (1) it does not require a permit for residential solar energy 
systems or residential solar energy systems paired with a residential solar energy storage 
system or (2) as determined by MEA, the automated software is no longer updated or 
maintained. 
 
MEA must delay the initial implementation or suspend the requirements for implementing 
solar permitting software if there are insufficient State or federal funds available to MEA 
to provide financial or technical support to local governments implementing the software.  
 
Maryland Department of Labor-related Provisions  
 
 
Prevailing Wage Requirements for Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
The developer of a solar energy generating system with a generating capacity of more than 
1 megawatt must ensure workers are paid at least the State prevailing wage rate. This 
requirement must be construed to apply only prospectively and may not be interpreted to 
have any effect on or application to the development of a solar energy generating system. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 783/ Page 6 
 
Home Improvement Contracts for Solar Energy Generating System Installations 
 
Unless a customer has waived the requirement after being informed of the costs and risks, 
a home improvement contract for the installation of a solar energy generating system on 
the roof of a building must include the installation of a barrier that meets industry standards 
to prevent wildlife intrusion and damage to the system or the underlying roof.  
 
Tax Incentives for Solar Energy Generating Systems 
 
Community Solar – Extended Eligibility Period and Larger Project Size for Existing 
Personal Property Tax Exemption 
 
The date by which a community solar generating system must be approved by PSC under 
the Community Solar Energy Generating Systems Program in order to be eligible for a 
personal property tax exemption is extended from December 31, 2025, to 
December 31, 2030. The maximum eligible system size is increased from 2 megawatts to 
5 megawatts. Otherwise, the system must still meet other existing requirements in current 
law. 
 
Specified Nonresidential Solar on Rooftops or Parking Facility Canopies – New 
Exemption from Valuation or State or Local Property Taxes 
 
Specified nonresidential solar energy generating systems that are constructed on the 
rooftops of buildings or on parking facility canopies are not subject to valuation or to State 
or local property taxes. 
 
This provision applies only to a system approved by PSC under § 7-207 (Certificate of 
Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCN)) or § 7-207.1 (CPCN exemption) of the Public 
Utilities Article on or after July 1, 2024. 
 
Specified Parking Facility Canopies – New Optional Reduced Local Real Property 
Assessment 
 
The governing body of a county or municipality may reduce or eliminate, by law, the 
percentage of the assessment of any real property that is subject to the county or municipal 
property tax if the real property includes a parking facility on which a solar energy 
generating system has been constructed on its canopy. 
 
The local government must submit a copy of the law to the State Department of 
Assessments and Taxation (SDAT); if the copy is received by May 1, the change becomes 
effective for the following taxable year. SDAT may adopt implementing regulations for 
these provisions. 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 783/ Page 7 
These provisions apply only to real property that includes a parking facility on which a 
system has been approved by PSC under § 7-207 (CPCN) or § 7-207.1 (CPCN exemption) 
of the Public Utilities Article on or after July 1, 2024. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard and Solar Energy Shortfall 
 
Unlike most other sources of renewable energy, solar is eligible for inclusion in meeting 
the State RPS only if the source is connected with the electric distribution grid serving 
Maryland. Information on the ongoing solar shortfall can be found in the fiscal 2025 
operating budget analysis for MEA prepared by the Department of Legislative Services 
(DLS). 
 
For information on the State RPS, see the Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
 
 
In General 
 
Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program 
and the implementing SEIF to decrease energy demand and increase energy supply to 
promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. SEIF is funded through the proceeds from 
the auction of carbon allowances under the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, and the 
fund also receives ACP revenues generated under Maryland’s RPS. 
 
 
Alternative Compliance Payment Revenues 
 
The State RPS requires that renewable sources generate specified percentages of 
Maryland’s electricity supply each year (including specified percentages that must be 
derived from solar energy). Utilities and other electricity suppliers must submit RECs equal 
to these percentages in each year or else pay an ACP equivalent to the shortfall, including 
an ACP associated with any shortfall from the percentages that must be derived from solar 
energy (a “solar ACP”). ACP revenues are deposited into SEIF and, aside from ACPs 
related to post-2022 geothermal sources, may be used only to make loans and grants to 
support the creation of specified new renewable energy sources (and specifically new solar 
energy sources, in the case of solar ACPs) in the State that are owned by or directly benefit 
specified communities. Statute does not provide for an allocation of ACP revenue for 
administrative expenses. 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 783/ Page 8 
Building Permits  
 
Every county in Maryland has a building permit office, the primary function of which is to 
issue a permit that gives the right to perform specific work on a designated site or project. 
The permit office sends an inspector to each ongoing project to ensure that work on the 
project complies with applicable codes. Noncompliance with established standards is 
normally addressed between the inspector and the licensed individual, who is expected to 
bring the project up to code. If the individual does not remedy the problem, the inspector 
may report the violation to the applicable licensing board. 
 
Home Improvement Contracts 
 
The Maryland Home Improvement Commission (MHIC) in the Maryland Department of 
Labor licenses and regulates home improvement contractors and salespersons, subject to 
specified requirements for licensure and ongoing licensee behavior. MHIC also 
administers a guaranty fund for the purpose of reimbursing homeowners for actual losses 
due to the errors and omissions of licensed contractors and their subcontractors, 
salespersons, and employees. 
 
Each home improvement contract must meet specified requirements, such as including 
information on the scope of the home improvement to be performed and the agreed-upon 
price. A signed copy of the contract must be provided to the homeowner prior to work 
beginning. Statute does not specify any contract requirement that is similar to the provision 
in the bill related to the installation of a barrier for rooftop solar. 
 
A home improvement contractor may not (1) abandon or fail to perform, without 
justification, a home improvement contract or (2) deviate materially from plans or 
specifications without the consent of the owner. 
 
Solar Property Tax Incentives 
 
 
Community Solar 
 
A community solar energy generating system that is placed in service after June 30, 2022, 
and has been approved by PSC on or before December 31, 2025, is exempt from the county 
and municipal personal property tax through the life cycle of the system if the system 
(1) provides at least 50% of the energy it produces to low- to moderate-income customers 
at a cost that is at least 20% less than the amount charged by the electric company that 
serves the area where the community solar energy generating system is located and (2) is 
used for agrivoltaics or is installed on a rooftop, brownfield, parking facility canopy, 
landfill, or clean fill. 
 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 783/ Page 9 
State and local governments must grant a 50% property tax credit for a brownfield, landfill, 
or clean fill on which a specified community solar energy generating system is installed. 
 
Certain Solar Energy Property Generally Not Subject to State or Local Real Property Tax 
 
Solar energy and geothermal heating and cooling systems installed in a building without a 
conventional heating and cooling system may not be assessed for property tax purposes at 
more than the value of a conventional heating and cooling system. If a solar energy or 
geothermal heating and cooling system is installed in addition to a conventional system in 
a building, the combined system may not be assessed at more than the value of a 
conventional system. With the exception of those provisions, solar energy property is not 
subject to State or local real property tax. 
 
“Solar energy property” means equipment that is installed to use solar energy or solar 
thermal electric energy to generate electricity to be used in a structure or supplied to the 
electric grid, or provide hot water for use in a structure. 
 
Optional Local Property Tax Credit for Solar Energy Devices 
 
Counties and municipalities are authorized to grant tax credits against county or municipal 
property taxes for the use of a solar energy, geothermal energy, or qualifying energy 
conservation device in a structure for the purposes of heating and cooling, electricity 
generation, or the provision of hot water. The law allows local governments to establish 
definitions of solar energy devices, geothermal energy devices, and qualifying energy 
conservation devices in determining eligibility for the credit. 
 
Net Metering 
 
Net energy metering is the measurement of the difference between the electricity that is 
supplied by an electric company and the electricity that is generated by an eligible 
customer-generator and fed back to the electric company over the eligible 
customer-generator’s billing period. PSC must require electric utilities to develop and 
make net metering tariffs available to eligible customer-generators. Generally, the 
generating capacity of an eligible customer-generator for net metering may be up to 
2 megawatts, or up to 5 megawatts for a community solar energy generating system. 
Eligible energy sources are solar, wind, biomass, micro combined heat and power, fuel 
cell, and certain types of hydroelectric. There is a statewide net-metered capacity limit of 
3,000 megawatts. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  Significant individual effects of the bill are discussed separately 
below. Any effects not discussed are assumed to be generally minimal and absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 783/ Page 10 
Public Service Commission 
 
PSC advises that it requires one program manager to handle the incremental workload 
associated with the Small Solar Energy Generating System Incentive Program. PSC also 
advises that it requires contractual services of approximately $400,000 in fiscal 2025 and 
$150,000 annually thereafter for information technology development and subsequent 
program maintenance. While a system must be placed in service between July 1, 2024, and 
January 1, 2028, inclusive, in order to be eligible for certification, the information 
technology must still be maintained and the program itself is permanent. Therefore, this 
estimate assumes costs are ongoing. 
 
Accordingly, special fund expenditures for PSC increase by $515,894 in fiscal 2025, which 
accounts for a 30-day startup delay. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one program 
manager to oversee the incentive program. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, ongoing operating expenses, and an initial programming expense. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$105,368 
Programming Costs 
400,000 
Other Operating Expenses 
10,526 
Total FY 2025 PSC Expenditures 
$515,894 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a salary with annual increases and employee turnover as 
well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and ongoing contractual costs of 
$150,000 annually. 
 
Generally, PSC is funded through an assessment each fiscal year on the public service 
companies that it regulates. Under the bill, PSC also is expected to collect certification fees 
from solar energy generating systems. Whether the revenue from such fees is sufficient to 
cover PSC’s administrative costs in a particular fiscal year is unknown and largely depends 
on the number and timing of small systems that are certified, and the associated fee, which 
may be up to $50. Nevertheless, this estimate assumes that certification fees offset revenues 
generated from the standard assessment. 
 
Accordingly, special fund revenues for PSC increase correspondingly from certification 
fee revenue and assessments imposed on public service companies. To the extent that PSC 
collects certification fees in excess of its administrative costs, the amount otherwise 
assessed on public service companies decreases. 
 

END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
    
SB 783/ Page 11 
Maryland Energy Administration 
 
 
Solar Alternative Compliance Fee Revenues 
 
As discussed above, there is an ongoing solar shortfall for purposes of the State RPS, which 
has led to historically high ACPs in calendar 2021 and 2022. The vast majority of ACPs in 
those years were due to a shortfall of SRECs. ACP revenue accrues to SEIF and must be 
used by MEA for specified purposes. The bill creates a process that will generate additional 
SRECs for up to 570 additional megawatts of solar capacity built in the State over the next 
several years. Those additional SRECs will reduce solar ACPs beginning as early as 
fiscal 2025, although the overall effect is unknown. 
 
Authorizing up to 10% of solar ACP revenue to be credited to an administrative expense 
account for costs related to the administration of SEIF does not, by itself, affect overall 
SEIF finances. The one-time delay in RPS compliance reporting is not anticipated, by 
itself, to materially affect SEIF finances. 
 
Accordingly, special fund revenues and expenditures for SEIF decrease beginning in 
fiscal 2025 to the extent that solar ACPs are reduced under the bill. 
 
 
Customer-Sited Solar Program 
 
The Customer-Sited Solar Program is not expected to have a material net effect on overall 
State finances since the bill expressly reallocates portions of SEIF’s solar ACP funding to 
fund grants under the program and does not increase SEIF’s overall funding obligations. 
The reallocation is discretionary in fiscal 2025 and mandated in fiscal 2026 and 2027 (a 
mandated appropriation must be enacted prior to July 1 of the year before the fiscal year to 
which the mandate first applies). 
 
This analysis assumes that personnel and other administrative costs associated with the 
program can be covered by the authorized reallocation of solar ACP funding to an 
administrative expense account for costs related to the administration of SEIF (since grants 
under the program are funded by SEIF). The reallocation of solar ACP funding, however, 
may substantially impact existing and/or planned programs. 
 
MEA expects to need additional personnel to administer the program, based on the capacity 
of existing staff and the scope of the program. MEA expects to need one program manager, 
one financial specialist, and four contractual energy specialists, at a cost of $482,064 in 
fiscal 2025. As mentioned above, these costs along with any other administrative costs of 
the program are assumed to be covered by the funding authorized under the bill to be 
reallocated to an administrative expense account for costs related to the administration of 
SEIF. The personnel costs shown below account for the provision’s July 1, 2024, effective 

END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
    
SB 783/ Page 12 
date and include salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses. 
 
Regular Positions 
2.0 
Contractual Positions  
4.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$436,908 
Other Operating Expenses 
45,156 
Total FY 2025 New MEA Personnel Costs 
(Supported by Existing, Reallocated Funds) 
$482,064 
 
Future year costs (supported by existing, reallocated funds), which total $425,632 in 
fiscal 2026 and $444,298 in fiscal 2027, reflect (1) salaries with annual increases and 
employee turnover; (2) annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; and 
(3) termination of the positions on June 30, 2027, consistent with the program’s termination 
date. While this analysis assumes the positions terminate with the program, presumably 
one or more of the positions may continue, since the need to administer the solar ACP 
funding, and the authorization to use up to 10% of solar ACP revenue for administrative 
expenses, continue after the program terminates.  
 
The personnel costs do not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Annuity Bond Fund 
 
ABF revenues may decrease beginning in fiscal 2025 as a result of the bill’s property tax 
exemption on specified nonresidential solar on rooftops or parking facility canopies. DLS 
does not have additional information on the magnitude of the potential decrease at this 
time, although generally, CPCNs and CPCN exemptions apply to facilities that are larger 
than 2 megawatts. Solar facilities of that capacity are multiple acres in size. 
 
Debt service payments on the State’s GO bonds are paid from the ABF. Revenue sources 
for the fund include State property taxes; premium from bond sales; and repayments from 
certain State agencies, subdivisions, and private organizations. General funds may be 
appropriated directly to the ABF to make up any differences between the debt service 
payments and funds available from property taxes and other sources. To offset the 
reduction in State property tax revenues, general fund expenditures could increase in an 
amount equal to the decrease in ABF revenues, or the State property tax rate would have 
to be increased in order to meet debt service payments. This assumes that the ABF does 
not have an adequate fund balance to cover the reduction in State property tax revenues. 
 

END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
    
SB 783/ Page 13 
Local Fiscal Effect:  The bill establishes three provisions that affect, or potentially affect, 
local property tax revenues:   
 
 
extending the eligibility period for certain community solar projects to receive a 
personal property tax exemption through 2030 and increasing the maximum eligible 
project size; 
 
excluding specified nonresidential solar on rooftops or parking facility canopies 
from State or local property taxes; and 
 
establishing an optional authority to reduce the assessed value of real property for a 
parking structure that has specified types of rooftop solar. 
 
Accordingly, local revenues decrease, potentially significantly, beginning in fiscal 2025 
from reduced real and personal property tax revenues. The amount of revenue loss for a 
particular local government is unknown, but depends on several factors, including the 
number of eligible properties, individual property tax rates, and whether the local 
government chooses to implement the optional authority to reduce the assessed value of 
certain real property. For context, SDAT has advises that there are 3 community solar 
projects in Prince George’s County under construction that potentially qualify for the 
personal property tax exemption with the bill’s extension of the eligibility period. 
Combined, the projects are estimated to represent about $87,500 in annual personal 
property tax revenue for the county. 
 
DLS notes that as additional solar energy generation continues to be built to meet the State 
RPS and other climate goals, potential revenue losses due to the tax incentives increase. 
 
Local finances may also be affected from fiscal 2025 through 2027 to the extent the bill’s 
reallocation of SEIF solar ACP revenues reduces the amount of funding available to local 
governments in the form of loans and grants to support the creation of new solar energy 
sources in the State.  
 
The requirement for local governments to adopt solar permitting software is not anticipated 
to materially affect local government finances or operations.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small solar developers benefit significantly from the net metering 
changes, additional SREC credits, and solar property tax incentives in the bill, offset at 
least in part by additional prevailing wage and home improvement contract requirements 
for some solar systems. Reallocating solar ACPs may also affect particular small solar 
developers. The effect on any particular small business is unknown but could be 
meaningful. 
 
Additional Comments:  DLS cannot advise on the bill’s effect on electricity prices paid 
by the State, local governments, and small businesses. The net metering changes may 

END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
    
SB 783/ Page 14 
broadly raise distribution costs due to additional net metering payments being made to 
eligible customer-generators. The certified SRECs and solar property tax incentives may 
reduce RPS compliance costs and project costs for some solar systems; however, the 
prevailing wage and home improvement contract requirements may increase project costs 
for some solar systems. These changes may be reflected in energy commodity prices over 
time.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1435 (Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo, et al.) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Public Service Commission; State Department of Assessments 
and Taxation; Maryland Energy Administration; Maryland Department of Labor; Office of 
People’s Counsel; Anne Arundel, Harford, Prince George’s, and Wicomico counties; 
city of College Park; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland Municipal League; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 28, 2024 
Third Reader - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 5, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - April 5, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - May 14, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
    
SB 783/ Page 15 
Appendix – Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
 
General Overview 
 
Maryland’s Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard (RPS) was enacted in 2004 to facilitate 
a gradual transition to renewable sources of energy. There are specified eligible (“Tier 1” 
or “Tier 2”) sources as well as carve-outs for solar, offshore wind, and geothermal. Electric 
companies (utilities) and other electricity suppliers must submit renewable energy credits 
(RECs) equal to a percentage of their retail electricity sales specified in statute each year 
or else pay an alternative compliance payment (ACP) equivalent to their shortfall. 
Historically, RPS requirements have been met almost entirely through RECs, with 
negligible reliance on ACPs; however, as discussed further below, that has not been the 
case recently. The Maryland Energy Administration must use ACPs for purposes related 
to renewable energy, as specified. 
 
In 2024, the requirements are 33.7% from Tier 1 sources, including at least 6.5% from solar 
and 0.15% from post-2022 geothermal systems, plus 2.5% from Tier 2 sources. 
 
Recent Significant Changes to Overall Percentage Requirements 
 
 
Chapter 757 of 2019 significantly increased the percentage requirements, which 
now escalate over time to a minimum of 50% from Tier 1 sources, including 14.5% 
from solar, by 2030. 
 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 reduced the amount of solar energy required under the RPS 
each year from 2022 through 2029, while leaving the nonsolar requirement 
generally unchanged, before realigning with the previous requirements beginning in 
2030. The Act also extended Tier 2 in perpetuity at 2.5%. 
 
 
Chapter 164 of 2021 created a carve-out for post-2022 geothermal systems in Tier 1 
beginning in 2023. 
 
Limited Applicability to Municipal Electric Utilities and Electric Cooperatives 
 
As RPS percentage requirements have grown over time, legislation has been enacted to 
limit the effect on municipal electric utilities and electric cooperatives. Tier 1 percentage 
requirements for municipal electric utilities are limited to 20.4% in total beginning in 2021, 
including at least 1.95% from solar energy and up to 2.5% from offshore wind. Municipal 
electric utilities are also exempt from Tier 2 after 2021. Electric cooperatives are exempt 

END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
    
SB 783/ Page 16 
from future increases to the solar carve-out beyond 2.5%, and the RPS does not apply to 
Choptank Electric Cooperative. 
 
Renewable Energy Credits 
 
Generally, a REC is a tradable commodity equal to one megawatt-hour of electricity 
generated or obtained from a renewable energy generation resource. In other words, a REC 
represents the “generation attributes” of renewable energy – the lack of carbon emissions, 
its renewable nature, etc. A REC has a three-year life during which it may be transferred, 
sold, or redeemed. REC generators and electricity suppliers are allowed to trade RECs 
using a Public Service Commission (PSC) approved system known as the Generation 
Attributes Tracking System, a trading platform designed and operated by PJM 
Environmental Information Services, Inc., that tracks the ownership and trading of RECs. 
 
Eligible Sources 
 
Tier 1 sources include wind (onshore and offshore); solar (photovoltaic and certain 
water-heating systems); qualifying biomass; methane from anaerobic decomposition of 
organic materials in a landfill or wastewater treatment plant; geothermal; ocean, including 
energy from waves, tides, currents, and thermal differences; a fuel cell that produces 
electricity from specified sources; a small hydroelectric plant of less than 30 megawatts; 
poultry litter-to-energy; waste-to-energy; refuse-derived fuel; thermal energy from a 
thermal biomass system; and raw or treated wastewater used as a heat source or sink for 
heating or cooling. Tier 2 includes only large hydroelectric power plants. 
 
Chapter 673 of 2021 excluded black liquor, or any product derived from black liquor, from 
Tier 1 beginning in 2022.  
 
Trends in Compliance Costs, Renewable Energy Credit Prices, and Resources Used 
 
Compliance costs for electricity suppliers totaled $438.8 million in 2022:  $332.7 million 
for 15.2 million RECs; and $77.1 million in ACPs. Costs and RECs are shown in Exhibit 1. 
This continues a multi-year trend of increasing compliance costs and, generally, average 
REC prices. 
 
In 2021, wind (50.8%), solar (13.2%), black liquor (12.5%), small hydroelectric (8.0%), 
and municipal solid waste (6.4%) were the primary energy sources used for Tier 1 RPS 
compliance. This continues a multi-year trend of increasing reliance on wind and solar 
energy. Maryland facilities generated 5.0 million RECs in 2021:  approximately 2.9 million 
Tier 1 RECs; and 2.1 million Tier 2 RECs. Many RECs can be used for compliance in both 
Maryland and other surrounding states, although there are geographic and energy source 
restrictions. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
    
SB 783/ Page 17 
 
Exhibit 1 
RPS Compliance Costs and REC Prices 
2017-2022 
 
 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
2022 
Compliance Costs ($ Millions) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar RECs 
$50.0 
$56.4 
$79.3 
$99.8  
$187.3 
$246.5 
Tier 1 Solar RECs 
21.3 
27.4 
55.2 
122.9 
144.4 
101.4 
Tier 2 RECs 
0.7 
1.0 
0.06 
0.4 
1.0 
4.4 
ACPs 
0.1 
0.1 
7.7 
0.1 
77.1 
86.6 
Total 
$72.1 
$84.9 
$142.3 
$223.2  
$409.8 
$438.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average REC Price ($) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tier 1 Nonsolar 
$7.14  
$6.54  
$7.77 
$8.24  
$14.36 
$17.80 
Tier 1 Solar 
38.18  
31.91  
47.26 
66.10  
72.59 
57.80 
Tier 2 
0.48  
0.66  
1.05 
1.06  
6.45 
7.42 
 
ACP:  alternative compliance payment 
REC:  renewable energy credit 
RPS:  Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
 
Note:  Numbers may not sum to total due to rounding. The vast majority of ACPs in 2021 and 2022 
($76.9 million and $85.9 million, respectively) were due to a shortfall of solar RECs. 
 
Source:  Public Service Commission 
 
 
Related Studies and Reports 
 
PSC must submit an RPS compliance report to the General Assembly each year. The most 
recent report, which contains historical data through 2022, can be found here. 
 
The Power Plant Research Program (PPRP) in the Department of Natural Resources has 
frequently been required to conduct RPS studies. PPRP submitted a final report on a 
comprehensive RPS study in December 2019, which can be found here. PPRP also 
submitted a related required study on nuclear energy at that time, which can be found here. 
A supplemental study on the overall costs and benefits of increasing the RPS to a goal of 
100% by 2040 was due by January 1, 2024, but has been delayed. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services also issued a report on the RPS in 2023, which can 
be found here. The report contains additional detail on the program, significant statutory 
changes, and visualizations of planned and actual RPS percentage requirements over time. 

END OF PAGE 17