START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 729 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 729 
(Senator Carter) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Economic Matters 
 
Business Occupations and Professions - Security Guards - Use of Force 
Reporting, Standards, and Certifications 
 
 
This bill requires the employer of a security guard providing security guard services on the 
premises of a health care facility to report every seven days to the Secretary of State Police 
on the number of code greens initiated for combative persons and code purples initiated for 
security only responses – as those emergency codes are identified in Title 10 of the 
Code of Maryland Regulations – occurring in the previous seven days. It also delays the 
effective date of Chapter 763 of 2023 from June 1, 2024, to January 1, 2025. The bill takes 
effect June 1, 2024, except that provisions related to security guards at health care 
facilities take effect January 1, 2025; if the effective date of Chapter 763 of 2023 is 
amended, those provisions take effect on the same date as Chapter 763. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State operations or finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government operations 
or finances. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The bill exempts employers of security guards at health care facilities 
from a requirement due to take effect June 1, 2024, that they report any use of force by a 
security guard to the Secretary of State Police within 48 hours of receiving notice of the 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 729/ Page 2 
use of force, as specified by Chapter 763. It also prohibits a use of force report from 
including information that is prohibited from disclosure by State or federal law.   
 
Current Law:  
 
Use of Force Reports and Security Guards  
 
Due to take effect June 1, 2024, Chapter 763, among other things, requires individuals 
serving as security guards and employed by security guard employers to also be certified 
by the Secretary of State Police. Chapter 763 also requires that a security guard report any 
use of force against a person while providing security guard services on behalf of the 
licensed security guard agency or for the security guard employer to the security guard 
agency or the security guard employer within 48 hours after the use of force occurs. 
However, a security guard is not required to report any use of force against a person within  
48 hours after the use of force if the security guard is seriously injured or disabled. In 
addition, a licensed security guard agency or security guard employer must report any use 
of force by a security guard while providing security guard services on its behalf to the 
Secretary of State Police within 48 hours after receiving the report, as specified. The use 
of force report must include specified information, including the type of encounter, the type 
of forced used, and the location of the incident where force was used. 
 
As defined by Chapter 763, “use of force” means (1) any physical striking of an individual; 
(2) any significant physical contact that restricts the movement of an individual, including 
control techniques; or (3) the detainment of an individual without the individual’s consent. 
“Use of force” includes the discharge of a firearm, of pepper mace, and the use of an 
electronic control device, as specified. “Use of force” does not include mere presence, 
verbal commands, or escorting an individual with minimal resistance. 
 
Uniform Emergency Codes  
 
Each hospital must adopt and implement a specified set of uniform codes for identified 
emergency situations as a part of its emergency or disaster plans. Among other color codes, 
a Code Green is a combative person, and a Code Purple is a security only response.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1277 (Delegates Embry and Amprey) - Economic Matters. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 729/ Page 3 
Information Source(s):  Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 19, 2024 
 
js/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3