START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 718 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
Senate Bill 718 
(Senators Lam and McKay) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Maryland Pathway to Nursing Pilot Program and Advisory Committee - 
Establishment 
 
 
This bill establishes the Maryland Pathway to Nursing Pilot Program under the Maryland 
Higher Education Commission (MHEC) to provide practical and financial support to 
specified nursing students. The bill also establishes the Maryland Pathway to Nursing 
Advisory Committee with specified membership to assist the Secretary of Higher 
Education in the development and implementation of the program. By December 15, 2024, 
and annually thereafter through 2029, the Secretary of Higher Education must report to the 
Governor and General Assembly on implementation of the program. The bill takes effect 
June 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. Under the assumptions discussed below, general fund 
expenditures increase by $184,200 in FY 2025 to staff the advisory committee and develop 
the pilot program. In FY 2026, general fund expenditures escalate to, under one scenario, 
$829,500 for ongoing staff costs and provision of financial support through the award of 
grants to two pilot sites, with the potential for additional significant costs to provide 
wraparound services as further discussed below. However, costs may be considerably 
lower, depending on the actual services provided and the number of students served. 
Out-year costs depend on timing for any expansion. MHEC general fund expenditures are 
offset to the extent the program is able to utilize new revenue sources from local workforce 
development boards, local health care systems, and federal grants. 
 
Local Effect:  Local health departments may benefit to the extent the program fills vacant 
nursing positions. Revenues are not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 718/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:   
 
Maryland Pathway to Nursing Program 
 
The goals of the program include (1) supporting students in licensed practical nursing 
education programs who intend to practice licensed practical nursing as a career in the State 
or continue to become a registered nurse (RN) in the State; (2) alleviating the shortage of 
nursing professionals; (3) increasing the number of licensed practical nurses (LPNs) and 
RNs that reflect the diversity of the communities they serve; (4) facilitating student 
applications for financial resources that provide tuition assistance, loan repayment, and 
support for other educational costs; and (5) providing program participants with financial 
assistance to cover the cost of computers, textbooks, and other supplies and additional 
education support services as well as wraparound support services that provide assistance 
with transportation, child care, elder care, and other living expenses that pose a barrier to 
students successfully completing their educational requirements. 
 
In consultation with the advisory committee, the Secretary must determine the timeframe 
and steps necessary to establish the pilot program, the areas of the State in which the pilot 
program will operate, funding to support the pilot program (including a strategy for 
sustainability through “braided” funding from local workforce development boards, local 
health care systems, and federal grants), the resources necessary to support the pilot 
program, and the types of evaluations needed to make recommendations about the pilot 
program’s design and expansion statewide. By July 1, 2025, the Secretary must issue grants 
to at least two pilot sites located in diverse areas that meet MHEC’s requirements for 
participation. 
 
Maryland Pathway to Nursing Advisory Committee 
 
The Secretary of Higher Education must designate a chair of the advisory committee, and 
MHEC must staff the committee. A committee member may not receive compensation but 
is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under standard State travel regulations. 
 
Current Law:  Generally, an individual must be licensed and/or certified by the Maryland 
Board of Nursing (MBON) to practice as a nurse or nursing worker. 
 
Licensed Practical Nurse 
 
An applicant for an LPN license must meet all the requirements for a high school diploma 
or its equivalent. An applicant for an LPN license must also complete satisfactorily and 
meet all the requirements for a diploma from a licensed practical nursing program approved 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 718/ Page 3 
by MBON or an education program in licensed practical nursing in any other state or 
country that MBON finds substantially equivalent to the education program in Maryland 
at the time of the applicant’s graduation. LPN applicants must also pass an examination 
developed by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing, demonstrate English 
language competency, and be of good moral character. 
 
Registered Nurse 
 
“Practice registered nursing” means the performance of acts requiring substantial 
specialized knowledge, judgment, and skill based on the biological, physiological, 
behavioral, or sociological sciences as the basis for assessment, nursing diagnosis, 
planning, implementation, and evaluation of the practice of nursing to maintain health, 
prevent illness, or care for or rehabilitate the ill, injured, or infirm. 
 
An applicant for an RN license must complete and meet all requirements for a diploma or 
degree from a registered nursing education program approved by MBON, or an education 
program in registered nursing in any other state or country that MBON finds substantially 
equivalent to programs in the State. RN applicants must also pass an examination 
developed by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing, demonstrate English 
language competency, and be of good moral character. 
 
State Expenditures:  MHEC advises that the commission requires six full-time positions 
to administer the program with four positions hired in the first year (fiscal 2025) of the 
program and two additional positions hired in the second year of program operation 
(fiscal 2026). The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) advises that actual costs to 
staff the pilot program depend on the size of it, the duration of the program at each pilot 
site, and the scope of services and financial assistance provided in the pilot program. DLS 
further advises that, as these decisions require advisory committee input and may require 
subsequent development and promulgation of regulations, it is unlikely a pilot program 
could be implemented for the 2024-2025 academic year (fiscal 2025). Further, due to 
significant variation in how the pilot program could be implemented, DLS cannot reliably 
quantify all expenditures for fiscal 2026 and subsequent years, as discussed below. 
 
Nevertheless, DLS assumes general fund staffing expenditures increase by $184,204 in 
fiscal 2025 (which reflects a 30-day start-up delay from the bill’s June 1, 2024 effective 
date) for a full-time director to come on board and expeditiously coordinate with the 
advisory committee to develop the pilot program. The director would also be responsible 
for handling the bill’s implementation reports beginning December 15, 2024. As the pilot 
program must be in place for the 2025-2026 academic year, given the requirement to issue 
grants by July 1, 2025, to at least two pilot sites, this analysis assumes additional staff must 
be in place before then as well. Accordingly, three more staff (one staff specialist and 
two supporting administrative officers) are assumed to be hired April 1, 2025, to be fully 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 718/ Page 4 
prepared to implement the program within three months. These staff will act as regional 
coordinators, manage data for applications and awards, track program finances, and handle 
various administrative tasks. For a fully operational pilot program, MHEC advises that 
two additional staff persons are required in fiscal 2026 and beyond. Accordingly, 
two additional supporting administrative officers are assumed to be hired beginning 
July 1, 2025, to support the implementation of the program at pilot sites after the initial 
distribution of grants and coordinate wraparound services as they become available. The 
estimate includes salaries, fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating 
expenses.  
 
FY 2025 
 FY 2026 
New Positions 
4.0 
2.0 
Salaries and Fringe Benefits 
$156,530 
$479,026 
One-time Start-up Expenditures 
25,784 
12,892 
Operating Expenses 
1,890 
6,545 
Total Administrative State Expenditures 
$184,204 
$498,463 
 
Future year expenditures include full salaries with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
To the extent the pilot program expands in future years beyond its required minimum of 
two sites in geographically diverse areas, staffing costs may be greater. Although a 
statewide program is not mandated, the advisory committee still must make 
recommendations about the pilot program’s design and expansion statewide. Therefore, to 
the extent the pilot program is expanded, particularly if it is made available statewide, in 
the out-years and depending on the approaches selected for that expansion, staffing costs 
may rise to hire additional regional program coordinators. The exact timing and scope of 
these costs will depend on the duration of the pilot program and decisions made about 
expansion, but such additional staffing expenditures could occur as early as fiscal 2027 if 
MHEC decides to expand the pilot program after one year.  
 
MHEC expenditures increase further, by a potentially significant amount, to provide 
financial support and wraparound services to program participants. The level of additional 
expenditures depends on multiple factors to be decided by MHEC as the Secretary and 
advisory committee create the pilot and potentially a subsequent statewide program. The 
type of wraparound services, number of program participants, and amount of financial 
support provided all impact the non-staffing expenditures associated with program 
implementation. Although additional nonadministrative costs may be significant, MHEC 
advises that it cannot reliably estimate such costs at this time.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 718/ Page 5 
For illustrative purposes and a more expansive pilot program, general fund expenditures 
could increase by approximately $340,000 for a full year of services (for a total annual cost 
of approximately $838,500 for the pilot program in fiscal 2026, assuming the staffing 
above). The cost of attendance at Anne Arundel Community College, which offers a 
practical nursing program, includes an estimated $600 for books, course materials, and 
supplies and equipment; $850 for personal laptop computers; and $1,946 for transportation. 
Assuming the pilot program targets newly enrolling licensed practical nursing students 
only at two yet-to-be-selected community colleges, with a total of 100 such students 
receiving support, total costs for computers, textbooks, transportation, and other supplies 
alone could reach $340,000.  
 
In addition, costs to provide education support services, child care, elder care, and other 
living expenses listed in the bill may also be significant. The U.S. Department of Labor’s 
National Database of Childcare Prices estimates that, in Maryland in 2023, infant, toddler, 
preschool, and school-age child care costs range from approximately $9,300 for school-age 
home-based care to $16,700 for infant center-based care. Elder care services can be even 
more expensive. According to one survey conducted by an insurance company (Genworth), 
the average cost of a home health aide in Maryland is roughly $62,000. The exact costs for 
any such additional wraparound services depend on the number of students in need, the 
type of services they require, and the extent to which the program is able to connect 
students to external sources of support for these services rather than providing them 
directly. Further, DLS notes that provision of such services is not specifically mandated by 
the bill. 
 
Based on 2022 MHEC data on enrollment trends, approximately 500 students are assumed 
to be enrolled in licensed practical nursing programs in fiscal 2025. Part of the advisory 
committee’s duties include making recommendations about the pilot program’s design and 
expansion statewide. Therefore, although the initial pilot must only be at least 
two geographically diverse locations, to the extent the pilot program expands to cover 
students across the entire State, costs may significantly increase. 
 
However, program costs could be substantially lower than the illustrative example above, 
depending on MHEC’s implementation decisions. The bill does not specify an overall 
funding maximum for the pilot program or a minimum level of benefits for students. 
Accordingly, the Secretary and advisory committee could decide to simply award small 
cash stipends and provide minimal wraparound services to only a subset of licensed 
practical nursing students. For a smaller scaled program, costs could be substantially lower 
than estimated above as the number of students served, the scope of assistance provided to 
them, and the associated administrative costs would presumably be substantially lower. 
Further, licensed practical nursing students might be able to take advantage of existing 
financial aid, in which case additional expenditures for financial assistance would be less. 
 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 718/ Page 6 
State Revenues:  The bill requires MHEC and the advisory committee to determine 
additional sources of funding to support the program in a strategy for sustainability through 
braided funding from local workforce development boards, local health care systems, and 
federal grants. To the extent the program secures outside funding or is able to provide 
wraparound services through partner organizations, general fund expenditures for the 
program are offset. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1160 and SB 774 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Genworth; U.S. Department of Labor; Maryland Higher 
Education Commission; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
Maryland Independent College and University Association; Maryland Department of 
Health; Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Veterans Affairs; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - April 4, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 4, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 4, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 6