START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 781 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 781 
(Senator James) 
Finance 
Ways and Means 
 
Economic Development - Regional Additive Manufacturing Partnership of 
Maryland - Alterations 
 
   
This bill renames the Regional Additive Manufacturing Partnership of Maryland to be the 
Regional Advanced Manufacturing Partnership of Maryland (in both cases, RAMP MD). 
The RAMP MD Fund is likewise renamed. The bill makes similar changes to the purposes, 
membership, and duties of RAMP MD to incorporate advanced manufacturing instead of 
additive manufacturing. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect State finances or operations, 
as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations, as discussed below.    
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal.    
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapters 570 and 571 of 2014 established the Northeastern Maryland 
Additive Manufacturing Innovation Authority and Fund. Chapter 444 of 2016 renamed the 
authority and fund to be RAMP MD and the RAMP MD Fund and made other minor 
changes. The Department of Commerce, Cecil County Office of Economic Development, 
and Harford County Office of Development jointly must provide staff, office space, and 
operational support for RAMP MD. Harford and Cecil counties may provide funding to 
RAMP MD, as may the State, contingent on county funding.  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 781/ Page 2 
The purposes of RAMP MD are to: 
 
 
foster the economic development of the region by (1) promoting collaboration 
among government, businesses, educational institutions, and entrepreneurs and 
innovators and (2) leveraging the established advanced manufacturing investments 
in the region; and 
 
position the State as a leader in advanced manufacturing. 
 
To further the purposes of the Acts, RAMP MD must, among other things:  
 
 
foster collaborative efforts among government agencies, military installations, 
educational institutions, businesses, nonprofits, individuals, and other entities in the 
region to share resources, cooperate in the development of new products and 
processes, and bridge gaps between research, product development, and the 
commercial application of new technologies and manufacturing processes; 
 
facilitate the involvement of specified institutions of higher education in developing 
and sustaining a skilled additive manufacturing workforce through degree, 
certification, specialized training, and continuing education programs;  
 
obtain, coordinate, and disseminate marketing resources to promote and enhance 
additive manufacturing opportunities and investment in the region; and  
 
pursue federal, State, local, and other public and private funding and collaboration 
initiatives. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  Commerce advises that RAMP MD has historically received 
little to no State funding and does not have staff. The partnership has been the occasional 
recipient of small grants from Commerce through its economic development programs. 
Neither the fiscal 2024 budget as passed by the General Assembly, nor the fiscal 2025 
budget as introduced, includes funding for the RAMP MD Fund. RAMP MD advises that 
it has similarly received minimal support from Cecil and Harford counties. 
 
The bill does not appear to significantly alter the purpose or duties of the partnership. As 
such, there is no obvious expectation for State or local funding levels to change from their 
intermittent and minimal levels. Accordingly, the bill is not anticipated to materially affect 
State or local finances or operations. Any additional funding provided due to the bill would 
be at the discretion of the State and/or Harford and Cecil counties.  
 
Additional Comments:  For context, a well-known form of additive manufacturing is 
“3D printing,” which is when a machine spreads layers of plaster or resin powder in a 
similar fashion to an inkjet printer and then binds them together. “Advanced 
manufacturing” is a broader term that encompasses additive manufacturing and other types 
of manufacturing. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 781/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Regional Additive Manufacturing 
Partnership of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3