START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 845

Chapter 845

(Senate Bill 790)

AN ACT concerning

Maryland Medical Assistance Program – Employed Individuals With Disabilities

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Department of Health to provide Maryland
Medical Assistance Program services for individuals under the Employed
Individuals with Disabilities Program in accordance with certain requirements;
prohibiting the Department from limiting eligibility to receive services under the
EID Program based on certain criteria; repealing certain provisions of law relating
to the Employed Persons with Disabilities Program; and generally relating to the
Maryland Medical Assistance Program and services for individuals with disabilities.

BY repealing
Article – Health – General
Section 15–138
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 15–138
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

[15–138.

(a) To the extent that funding is available in the State budget, the Maryland
Department of Health shall implement the Employed Persons with Disabilities Program
by July 1, 2005.

(b) The purpose of the Employed Persons with Disabilities Program is to
encourage individuals with disabilities to seek or maintain employment.

(c) (1) The Secretary shall adopt regulations that develop specific eligibility
criteria for participation in the Employed Persons with Disabilities Program.

(2) Prior to adopting the regulations required under paragraph (1) of this
subsection, the Department shall:
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 845 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) Consult with the Coalition for Work Incentives Improvement;
and

(ii) Give preference to the recommendations for eligibility criteria
developed by the Coalition.

(d) At least every 3 years after the adoption of the regulations required under
subsection (c) of this section, the Department shall review the regulations in consultation
with the Coalition for Work Incentives Improvement.]

15–138.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “EID PROGRAM” MEANS THE EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS WITH
DISABILITIES PROGRAM OPERATED UNDER THE MARYLAND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM.

(3) “INDEPENDENCE ACCOUNT” MEANS A FINANCIAL ACCOUNT
DESIGNATED BY A RECIPIENT OF EID PROGRAM SERVICES:

(I) THAT CONSISTS OF EARNED INCOME OF A RECIPIENT OR
FUNDS FROM OTHER SOURCES DEPOSITED BY OR FOR THE RECIPIENT;

(II) FOR WHICH THERE IS AN UPPER LIMIT ON THE TOTAL
AMOUNT OF EARNED INCOME RECEIVED BY THE RECIPIENT IN AN ENROLLMENT
YEAR AND DEPOSITED INTO THE ACCOUNT; AND

(III) FOR WHICH THERE ARE NO RESTRICTIONS UNDER THE EID
PROGRAM ON HOW FUNDS MAY BE EXPENDED BY THE RECIPIENT.

(B) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR
INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE EID PROGRAM IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS SECTION.

(C) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) PROVIDE EID PROGRAM SERVICES TO QUALIFIED APPLICANTS,
INCLUDING EXISTING PROGRAM RECIPIENTS, WHO ARE AT LEAST 16 YEARS OLD;

(2) FOR INITIAL APPLICATIONS TO RECEIVE EID PROGRAM
SERVICES, ACCEPT DOCUMENTS TO VERIFY INCOME AND RESOURCES THAT ARE
DATED UP TO 30 DAYS BEFORE THE DATE THE APPLICATION IS RECEIVED;

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 845

(3) TRANSITION PROGRAM RECIPIENTS WHO BECOME ELIGIBLE FOR
THE EID PROGRAM IN A MANNER THAT IS LEAST DISRUPTIVE TO THE RECIPIENT’S
ACCESS TO SERVICES, INCLUDING ENABLING A TRANSITION TO THE EID PROGRAM
WITHOUT REQUIRING AN APPLICANT TO BE TERMINATED FROM A PROGRAM
ELIGIBILITY CATEGORY IN EFFECT AS A PREREQUISITE TO APPLYING FOR EID
~~PROGRAM~~ ~~SERVICES;~~

(4) ENSURE THAT THE APPLICATION PROCESS FOR THE EID
PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT AUTHORIZED BY THE CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID SERVICES, PROVIDES MAXIMUM FLEXIBILITY AND PLAIN LANGUAGE
INFORMATION FOR APPLICANTS, INCLUDING:

(I) INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING THE APPLICATION;

(II) A DESCRIPTION OF DOCUMENTS THE APPLICANT MUST
ENCLOSE WITH THE APPLICATION; AND

(III) NOTICE TO THE APPLICANT OF APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF AN
APPLICATION; AND

(5) (I) ESTABLISH A PREMIUM CONTRIBUTION FOR EID PROGRAM
SERVICES THAT IS BASED SOLELY ON A RECIPIENT’S EARNED AND UNEARNED
INCOME; AND

(II) ESTABLISH MONTHLY PREMIUM CONTRIBUTIONS LEVELS
FOR RECIPIENTS WITH COUNTABLE INCOME LEVELS ABOVE 300% OF THE FEDERAL
POVERTY LEVEL IN ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (D) OF THIS SECTION.

(D) FOR RECIPIENTS WITH COUNTABLE INCOME LEVELS ABOVE 300% OF
THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL, THE MONTHLY PREMIUM LEVELS SHALL BE AS
~~FOLLOWS:~~

(1) FOR A RECIPIENT WITH A COUNTABLE INCOME THAT IS AT LEAST
301% BUT LESS THAN 451% OF THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL, THE MONTHLY
PREMIUM AMOUNT IS $129;

(2) FOR A RECIPIENT WITH A COUNTABLE INCOME THAT IS AT LEAST
451% BUT LESS THAN 601% OF THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL, THE MONTHLY
PREMIUM AMOUNT IS $242; AND

(3) FOR A RECIPIENT WITH A COUNTABLE INCOME THAT IS AT LEAST
601% OF THE FEDERAL POVERTY LEVEL, THE MONTHLY PREMIUM AMOUNT IS $484.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 845 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(E) (D) SUBJECT TO SUBSECTION (F) (E) OF THIS SECTION, THE
DEPARTMENT MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS THAT DEVELOP SPECIFIC ELIGIBILITY
CRITERIA FOR PARTICIPATION IN THE EID PROGRAM.

(F) (E) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT:

(1) LIMIT ELIGIBILITY TO RECEIVE EID PROGRAM SERVICES BASED
ON:

(I) THE EARNED OR UNEARNED INCOME OF THE APPLICANT OR
THE APPLICANT’S SPOUSE;

(II) ANY ASSETS OR RESOURCES OF THE APPLICANT’S OR
RECIPIENT’S SPOUSE THAT ARE NOT JOINT ASSETS FOR A RECIPIENT;

(III) ANY RETIREMENT ACCOUNT ASSETS OR RESOURCES FOR AN
APPLICANT OR A RECIPIENT; OR

(IV) ANY ASSETS OR RESOURCES IN AN INDEPENDENCE
ACCOUNT ESTABLISHED FOR A RECIPIENT OF EID PROGRAM SERVICES; OR

(2) ESTABLISH AN UPPER AGE LIMIT ON ELIGIBILITY TO RECEIVE
EID PROGRAM SERVICES; OR

(3) ESTABLISH AS A PREREQUISITE FOR ELIGIBILITY TO RECEIVE
EID PROGRAM SERVICES THAT AN APPLICANT APPLY FOR SOCIAL SECURITY
DISABILITY INSURANCE BENEFITS WHEN THE APPLICANT DOES NOT RECEIVE THE
BENEFITS AND HAS EARNINGS THAT ARE ABOVE THE SUBSTANTIAL GAINFUL
ACTIVITY LEVEL ESTABLISHED BY THE SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION.

~~(G)~~ (F) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) MEET WITH A STATE–BASED COALITION OF DISABILITY
ADVOCATES TWICE A YEAR TO RECEIVE FEEDBACK ON AND DISCUSS ANY NEEDED
CHANGES TO THE EID PROGRAM; AND

(2) REQUEST FEEDBACK FROM THE COALITION BEFORE PROVIDING
ANY INFORMATION OR MATERIALS ON THE EID PROGRAM TO THE PUBLIC.

(H) (G) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL APPLY TO THE CENTERS FOR
MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES FOR ANY AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE PLAN,
WAIVERS, OR OTHER FEDERAL APPROVALS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS SECTION.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 845

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2024, the Maryland Department of Health shall report to the Senate Finance Committee and
the House Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article, on the fiscal and operational impact of the following:

(1) implementing an Employed Individuals with Disabilities Program that
serves individuals age 65 and older, including options of eliminating or increasing the age
cap with enrollment; and

(2) establishing a premium contribution for EID Program services that is
based on an applicant’s earned and unearned income.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5