START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 769 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 769 
(Frederick County Senators) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Frederick County - Property Tax Credit for Property Located in Historic 
District - Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters a local property tax credit in Frederick County for property located in a 
historic district by repealing the calculation and duration of the property tax credit and 
instead authorizes Frederick County to provide for (1) the amount and duration of the 
property tax credit; (2) additional eligibility criteria for the property tax credit; 
(3) regulations and procedures for the application and uniform processing of requests for 
the property tax credit; and (4) any other provision necessary to carry out the property tax 
credit. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024, and applies to taxable years beginning after 
June 30, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. 
  
Local Effect:  Frederick County property tax revenues decrease by a minimal amount to 
the extent that property owners qualify for the property tax credit. County expenditures are 
not affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. Eligible small businesses will realize a 
reduction in county property taxes. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Frederick County must grant a property tax credit against the county tax 
imposed on:  (1) real property that is owned by the Emmitsburg Civic Association; and 
(2) real property on which an improvement is made to an existing structure that is located 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 769/ Page 2 
in a historic district. The amount of the property tax credit for real property improvements 
in a historic district is equal to the following percentage of the increase that is due to the 
improvement:  (1) 100% of the increase in the assessment of the real property in the 
first and second taxable years that the improved structure is subject to the county property 
tax; (2) 80% of the increase in the assessment of the real property in the third taxable year 
that the improved structure is subject to the county property tax; (3) 60% of the increase in 
the assessment of the real property in the fourth taxable year that the improved structure is 
subject to the county property tax; and (4) 40% of the increase in the assessment of the 
real property in the fifth taxable year that the structure is subject to the county property tax. 
The property tax expires at the end of the fifth taxable year. 
 
Local Fiscal Effect:  Frederick County property tax revenues decrease to the extent 
property owners qualify for the property tax credit. The amount of the revenue decrease 
depends on the eligibility criteria and amount of the property tax credit established by the 
county. Frederick County reports that no taxpayer received the property tax credit in 
fiscal 2023, and one taxpayer received a credit for $3,436 in fiscal 2022. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 740 (Frederick County Delegation) - Ways and Means. 
 
Information Source(s):  Frederick County; State Department of Assessments and 
Taxation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 16, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
js/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael D. Sanelli 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2