START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 445

Chapter 445

(Senate Bill 808)

AN ACT concerning

Anaerobic Digestion Technology – Coordination and Guidance

FOR the purpose of requiring the Department of Agriculture to coordinate with certain
State agencies and other stakeholders to ensure anaerobic digestion technology
projects are ~~not~~ ~~unduly~~ ~~delayed~~ appropriately coordinated; requiring the
Department, in coordination with certain State agencies, to establish certain
guidance for farmers regarding the development and implementation of anaerobic
digestion technology; and generally relating to anaerobic digestion technology.

BY adding to
Article – Agriculture
Section 2–2301 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle 23. Anaerobic Digestion
Technology”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Agriculture

SUBTITLE 23. ANAEROBIC DIGESTION TECHNOLOGY.

2–2301.

(A) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL COORDINATE WITH THE MARYLAND ENERGY
ADMINISTRATION, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, THE DEPARTMENT
OF COMMERCE, THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURE AND
NATURAL RESOURCES, THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE,
ELECTRIC COMPANIES, FARMERS, AND INDUSTRY TO ENSURE ANAEROBIC
DIGESTION TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS ARE ~~NOT~~ ~~UNDULY~~ ~~DELAYED~~ APPROPRIATELY
COORDINATED.

(B) (1) THE DEPARTMENT, IN COORDINATION WITH THE MARYLAND
ENERGY ADMINISTRATION, THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, AND THE
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, SHALL ESTABLISH GUIDANCE FOR FARMERS
REGARDING THE DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF ANAEROBIC DIGESTION
TECHNOLOGY.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 445 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) THE GUIDANCE ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION SHALL INCLUDE INFORMATION ON:

(I) OBTAINING REQUIRED PERMITS AND ELECTRIC
INTERCONNECTION;

(II) AVAILABLE TAX INCENTIVES AND ENERGY REBATES; AND

(III) RELEVANT REGULATIONS FOR WASTE SYSTEMS,
INCLUDING FOR SYSTEMS THAT INCORPORATE ANIMAL WASTE AND OTHER
RESOURCES, SUCH AS FOOD WASTE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2