START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 873 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 873 
(Senator McKay) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Courts - Immunity From Liability - Maryland Safe Haven Program 
 
 
This bill extends, from 10 to 60 days after the birth of a newborn, the timeframe during 
which a person can leave an unharmed newborn with a responsible adult without the intent 
to return for the newborn, without being subject to civil liability or criminal prosecution. 
A person is also authorized to leave an unharmed newborn at a “designated facility.” The 
bill authorizes a designated facility to receive a newborn in a newborn safety device, as 
specified. Subject to existing funding, the Secretary of Human Services must develop, 
implement, and maintain a public information program about the Maryland Safe Haven 
Program. By December 31, 2025, and annually thereafter, the Secretary must provide a 
report to the General Assembly on program metrics, as specified. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The Department of Human Services (DHS) can complete the required report 
with existing budgeted resources. DHS general fund expenditures increase by $250,000 
annually beginning in FY 2025 for the public information program, as discussed below. 
Program literature can be distributed at State health department offices and publicly funded 
educational institutions using existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
250,000 
Net Effect 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000) 
($250,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances or 
operations, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 873/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Designated facility” means a hospital, the office of a licensed medical 
provider, a police department or State Police barracks, a professional or volunteer fire 
company that is insured, or any other facility designated by the Secretary by regulation. 
 
A designated facility may receive a newborn in a newborn safety device, provided that the 
device is: 
 
 
climate controlled;  
 
physically affixed to an exterior wall or located inside the designated facility; 
 
located in an area that is conspicuous and visible to the employees of the designated 
facility;  
 
clearly marked with appropriate signage; and  
 
equipped with (1) an alert system such that when the newborn safety device is 
opened, it automatically connects to the 9-1-1 system and transmits a request for 
immediate dispatch of an emergency medical services (EMS) provider to the 
location of the newborn safety device; (2) a video surveillance system that allows 
employees of the designated facility to monitor the interior of the newborn safety 
device 24 hours a day; and (3) an automated lock that secures the newborn inside 
the device after deposit. 
 
The public information program about the Maryland Safe Haven Program must include:  
 
 
the maintenance of an interactive website that provides pertinent information about 
the program, including (1) authorized designated facilities; (2) instructions for the 
method by which the parent of a newborn may surrender the newborn; (3) the 
manner in which the parent of a newborn surrendered under the program may 
anonymously provide information to a local department of social services (LDSS) 
regarding the medical history of the newborn or the newborn’s family medical 
history; and (4) a method by which the parent of a newborn surrendered under the 
program may reconsider the surrender and that allows the parent to undergo 
paternity testing for the purposes of the reunification with the newborn; 
 
promotion of educational and informational materials in print, audio, electronic, and 
other media formats that describe the mission and purpose of the program and 
include the program’s toll-free telephone number; 
 
regular distribution of program literature at State and local health department 
offices, each LDSS, and each publicly funded educational institution in the State; 
 
creation and distribution of decals and placards listing designated facilities and the 
toll-free telephone number of the program; and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 873/ Page 3 
 
training for EMS providers, 9-1-1 operators, hospital staff, firefighters, law 
enforcement officers, or any other employee of a designated facility on how to 
implement and follow the program. 
 
The Secretary’s annual report to the General Assembly must include (1) the number of 
newborns surrendered in the prior year; (2) the disposition of the custody of each newborn 
surrendered through the program in the prior year; and (3) the cost of maintaining 
equipment related to and used by the program. 
 
Current Law:  Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 07.02.27.01), the Maryland Safe 
Haven Program is intended to provide the mother of a newborn the opportunity to provide 
a safe abandonment of her newborn by (1) providing immunity from civil liability and 
criminal prosecution for a mother who leaves an unharmed newborn with a responsible 
adult person under certain circumstances; (2) requiring the approval of the responsible 
adult with whom the newborn is left; (3) requiring a responsible adult who accepts the 
newborn to take certain action as soon as reasonably possible; and (4) providing immunity 
from civil liability and criminal prosecution for certain persons, hospitals, and other 
facilities under certain circumstances. These provisions are codified under § 5-641 of the 
Courts and Judicial Proceedings Article as described below. 
 
A person who leaves an unharmed newborn with a responsible adult within 10 days after 
the birth of the newborn, and does not express an intent to return for the newborn, is 
immune from civil liability or criminal prosecution for the act. If the person leaving a 
newborn is not the mother of the newborn, the person must have the approval of the mother 
to do so. 
 
A person with whom a newborn is left must take the newborn as soon as reasonably 
possible to a hospital or other facility designated by the Secretary by regulations. A hospital 
or other designated facility that accepts a newborn must notify the LDSS within 24 hours 
after accepting the newborn. 
 
A responsible adult and a hospital or other designated facility that accepts a newborn and 
an employee or agent of the hospital or facility is immune from civil liability or criminal 
prosecution for good faith actions taken related to the acceptance of or medical treatment 
or care of the newborn unless injury to the newborn was caused by gross negligence or 
willful or wanton misconduct. 
 
Maryland regulations (COMAR 07.02.27.03) specify that a hospital presented with an 
abandoned newborn must make an effort to obtain information on a voluntary basis 
pertaining to the newborn’s medical history or risk factors from the individual presenting 
the newborn. The hospital must make reasonable, diligent efforts to obtain information as 
to why the mother of the newborn has no intention of returning for the newborn. The 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 873/ Page 4 
hospital or other designated facility that accepts a newborn must notify the LDSS within 
24 hours after accepting the newborn. 
 
The LDSS in the jurisdiction where the hospital is located must take responsibility of the 
newborn when the newborn is medically ready for discharge under an order of shelter care 
(OSC). A child in need of assistance (CINA) petition must be filed by the LDSS on behalf 
of the abandoned newborn in the jurisdiction where the hospital is located with the request 
for an OSC. A Child Protective Services investigation must be initiated if the mother, 
father, or relative of the newborn comes forth to identify the newborn and requests that the 
newborn be placed in the individual’s care. The child must remain in the care of the LDSS 
under an OSC with a CINA finding and commitment to the LDSS pending the outcome of 
the investigation. The LDSS must pursue the legal process for the termination of parental 
rights on the newborn relating to the involuntary termination of parental rights if the LDSS 
believes the newborn to be abandoned. 
 
State Expenditures:  DHS general fund expenditures increase by $250,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025 to develop, implement, and maintain a public awareness program 
for the Maryland Safe Haven Program. DHS estimates that an extensive campaign will be 
necessary to meet the bill’s requirement to promote educational and informational 
materials in print, audio, electronic, and other media formats. Additionally, the bill requires 
regular distribution of program literature at State and local health department offices, each 
LDSS, and each publicly funded educational institution in the State, as well as the creation 
and distribution of decals and placards listing designated facilities and the toll-free 
telephone number of the program. 
 
Local Expenditures:  The bill requires local health departments, each LDSS, and publicly 
funded education institutions (including community colleges) to distribute program 
literature, which can be implemented using existing budgeted resources. 
 
The Secretary, as part of the public information program, must include training for, among 
other entities, EMS providers, 9-1-1 operators, firefighters, and law enforcement officers 
on how to implement and follow the program. This analysis assumes that any training 
developed by the Secretary can be shared with or implemented by these entities with 
existing budgeted resources. To the extent that additional resources are required for such 
training, local government expenditures may increase by an indeterminate but likely 
minimal amount, beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 
The bill authorizes, but does not require, designated facilities to receive a newborn in a 
newborn safety device. DHS estimates that a newborn safety device that meets the 
requirements of the bill costs approximately $15,000 to install, with ongoing annual 
maintenance fees ranging between $500 and $5,000. To the extent that a local government 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 873/ Page 5 
installs a newborn safety device in a designated facility, expenditures increase accordingly, 
beginning as early as fiscal 2025. 
 
Additional Comments:  The DHS website includes pertinent safe haven information and 
lists several hospitals and police stations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1323 (Delegates Wivell and Valentine) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Maryland 
Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; Harford and Montgomery counties; 
Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland School for the Deaf; Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Independent College and University Association; Maryland Department of Health; 
Department of Human Services; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5