START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 896 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 896 
(Senator Carter)(By Request - Baltimore City 
Administration) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Baltimore Convention and Tourism Redevelopment and Operating Authority 
Task Force 
 
 
This bill establishes the Baltimore Convention and Tourism Redevelopment and Operating 
Authority Task Force. The Department of Commerce must provide staff for the task force. 
Task force members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for 
travel expenses. By December 1, 2024, the task force must report its findings and 
recommendations to the Mayor of Baltimore City, the Governor, and the 
General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures for Commerce increase by $100,000 in FY 2025 
to hire a consultant with the requisite expertise in downtown redevelopment. Expense 
reimbursements for task force members are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within 
existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
100,000 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($100,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  The bill does not materially affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 896/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The task force must study the establishment of an entity or strategy to 
govern and redevelop, revitalize, construct, design, manage, finance, and operate certain 
State and local real property assets while promoting the Baltimore Convention site and the 
immediate surrounding area. 
 
The task force must make related recommendations on the membership, purpose, and 
function of any recommended entity, as specified, including the ability of the entity to:   
 
 
acquire any property, franchises, and other interests in the Baltimore Convention 
site and other property functionally related to and located in the immediate 
surrounding area of the Baltimore Convention site, and take title to the property in 
the name of the recommended entity or its designated agent; 
 
determine the character of any renovation, revitalization, or development projects 
relating to the Baltimore Convention site and the immediate surrounding area, as 
specified; 
 
enter into any agreements, leases, partnerships, or contracts necessary to renovate, 
revitalize, maintain, and manage the Baltimore Convention site or any other State 
or local real property assets identified by the task force; 
 
fix and collect rates, rentals, fees, and charges for services required to successfully 
operate the Baltimore Convention site or any other State or local real property 
assets; 
 
establish rules and regulations for the use of the Baltimore Convention site or any 
other State or local real property assets; and 
 
issue bonds for renovation, revitalization, and ongoing maintenance and 
management of the Baltimore Convention site or any other State or local real 
property assets identified by the task force, including operating expenses. 
 
In conducting its study and making recommendations, the task force must consider the 
findings and recommendations in the Baltimore Convention Industry Benchmark Study 
previously commissioned by the Baltimore Convention Center (BCC). The task force must 
also consider and make recommendations of at least one option that does not include a 
public-private partnership and that is not the status quo. 
 
Current Law:  BCC was opened in 1979 and an expansion was completed in 1997. The 
State contributed to the initial project by issuing $35.0 million in general obligation (GO) 
bonds and to the expansion by issuing $101.0 million in GO bonds and Maryland Stadium 
Authority (MSA) bonds. Baltimore City agreed to provide $15.0 million for the opening 
and $50.0 million for the renovation. Under its existing statutory authority as part of that 
agreement, MSA is authorized to have up to $55.0 million in outstanding bonds related to 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 896/ Page 3 
BCC. The original bonds were retired in fiscal 2015. The current arrangement between 
MSA and BCC, under which the State contributes two-thirds of the annual operating deficit 
and one-half ($200,000) of the annual capital reserve fund, has been in place since 1996. 
Legislation in 2008, 2013, and 2018 extended the arrangement through its current 
expiration date of December 31, 2029. 
 
Chapter 695 of 2019 required MSA and Baltimore City to promptly enter into a written 
agreement to begin the planning and design of the expansion or renovation of BCC in 
fiscal 2020. 
 
State Expenditures:  Commerce advises that a consultant is needed, given the scope of 
the task force’s charge relating to recommendations and the timeframe for completing a 
report. Commerce estimates the cost to procure a consultant at approximately $100,000. 
Accordingly, general fund expenditures increase by $100,000 in fiscal 2025 only.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 897 (Baltimore City Delegation) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; Baltimore City; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
Revised - Clarification - April 18, 2024 
 
rh/ljm 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3