START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 509

Chapter 509

(Senate Bill 816)

AN ACT concerning

Economic Development – Cyber Maryland Fund and Program – Alterations

FOR the purpose of requiring the Maryland Technology Development Corporation to
administer the Cyber Maryland Fund; altering the uses of the Fund; requiring the
Corporation to adopt certain standards; requiring the Governor to include a certain
appropriation in the annual budget bill for certain fiscal years for talent pipeline
management; and generally relating to the Cyber Maryland Fund and the Cyber
Maryland Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–401(a) and (c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Economic Development
Section 10–491
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2018 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Economic Development

10–401.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(c) “Corporation” means the Maryland Technology Development Corporation.

10–491.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Board” means the Cyber Maryland Board.

(3) “FUND” MEANS THE CYBER MARYLAND FUND.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 509 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(3)] (4) “Program” means the Cyber Maryland Program.

(b) There is a Cyber Maryland Program in the Corporation.

(c) The purposes of the Program are to:

(1) create and execute a talent pipeline that materially reduces workforce
vacancies by July 1, 2026;

(2) serve as a one–stop shop for employers seeking to leverage cyber
workforce development programs offered by the State and its partners;

(3) inform cybersecurity training and education programs operated by
public or private entities with industry–driven needs;

(4) build the most advanced local and State information technology
workforce in the nation, which, to the maximum extent possible, reflects the racial, gender,
ethnic, and geographic diversity of the State;

(5) coordinate and accelerate cybersecurity research and innovation in the
State; and

(6) support the efforts of the Department of Information Technology to
improve the State government’s cybersecurity posture, including State agencies, local
government units, and critical infrastructure.

(d) The Program shall:

(1) conduct ongoing research by collaborating with the Cybersecurity
Association of Maryland, Inc., Cybersecurity Talent Advisory Board to collect and analyze
real–time industry data to identify cybersecurity workforce needs as described in the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach;

(2) use the results of the research described in item (1) of this subsection
to increase the effectiveness of existing State cybersecurity workforce programs for
employers in the State;

(3) facilitate partnerships for new training and education programs to
address the workforce needs identified under item (1) of this subsection;

(4) develop a statewide strategic plan for cybersecurity workforce
development, using the results of the research described in item (1) of this subsection and
with input from the Cybersecurity Association of Maryland, Inc., Cybersecurity Talent
Advisory Board on or before December 1, 2023; AND

[(5) administer and manage the Cyber Maryland Fund; and]

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 509

[(6)] (5) ensure that outcomes of the Program are inclusive and, to the
maximum extent practicable, reflect the racial, gender, ethnic, and geographic diversity of
the State.

(e) (1) [In this subsection, “Fund” means the Cyber Maryland Fund.

(2)] There is a Cyber Maryland Fund.

[(3)] (2) The purposes of the Fund are to:

(i) achieve the purposes identified under subsection (c) of this
section; and

(ii) support innovative approaches to meeting cybersecurity
workforce needs.

[(4)] (3) The [Program] CORPORATION shall administer the Fund.

[(5)] (4) (i) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject
to § 7–302 of the State Finance and Procurement Article.

(ii) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately, and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

[(6)] (5) The Fund consists of:

(i) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund; and

(ii) any other money from any other source accepted for the benefit
of the Fund.

[(7)] (6) The Fund may be used only for:

(i) [administering] ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES OF the Program,
INCLUDING HIRING STAFF IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STATE BUDGET AND HIRING
CONSULTANTS AND OTHER PROFESSIONALS AS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT,
MAINTAIN, AND ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM AND THE FUND; and

(ii) providing grants to elementary and secondary schools,
institutions of higher education, including community colleges, for–profit corporations, and
nonprofit organizations to operate cybersecurity programs based on the strategic plan of
the Program.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 509 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(7) THE CORPORATION SHALL ADOPT STANDARDS TO AWARD
GRANTS UNDER THIS SECTION.

(8) (i) The State Treasurer shall invest the money of the Fund in the
same manner as other State money may be invested.

(ii) Any interest earnings of the Fund shall be credited to the
General Fund of the State.

(9) Expenditures from the Fund may be made only in accordance with the
State budget.

(10) For fiscal year 2025 and each year thereafter, the Governor:

(I) SHALL INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION OF $250,000 $99,000 FOR THE FUND TO BE USED FOR TALENT
PIPELINE MANAGEMENT; AND

(II) may include in the annual budget bill an ADDITIONAL
appropriation of $250,000 for the Fund.

(11) Subject to the availability of funding, for fiscal year 2025 and each year
thereafter, $250,000 of the Fund shall be used for implementing the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach.

(12) [(i)] The Governor shall include in the annual budget bill an
appropriation in an amount sufficient for [hiring individuals to conduct the duties of] the
Program[, including an Executive Director and at least one administrator.

(ii) The Executive Director shall:

1. be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer;

2. have relevant qualifications and experience with the
activities and purposes of the Program; and

3. serve at the pleasure of the Chief Executive Officer].

(f) (1) There is a Cyber Maryland Board.

(2) The Board consists of the following members:

(i) the Senate and House of Delegates cochairs of the Joint
Committee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Biotechnology;

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 509

(ii) the Secretary, or the Secretary’s designee;

(iii) the Secretary of Labor, or the Secretary’s designee;

(iv) the Maryland Secretary of Veterans Affairs, or the Secretary’s
designee;

(v) the Secretary of Information Technology, or the Secretary’s
designee;

(vi) the Chair of the Board of Directors of the Cybersecurity
Association of Maryland, Inc., or the Chair’s designee;

(vii) the Chair of the Maryland Workforce Association, or the Chair’s
designee;

(viii) the following members, appointed by the Governor:

1. five members from the private sector with cybersecurity
needs;

2. one representative from a nonprofit organization with
expertise in cybersecurity talent development;

3. one representative from a community college;

4. one representative from a 4–year, public HBCU college;
AND

5. one representative from a 4–year, public college; and

(ix) the Chief Executive Officer, or the Chief Executive Officer’s
designee.

(3) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the members of
the Board shall elect a chair from among the members of the Board.

(ii) The chair may not be:

1. a State employee; or

2. the Chief Executive Officer.

(4) The Board shall:

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 509 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(i) provide input regarding the development of the statewide
cybersecurity workforce development strategic plan required under subsection (d)(4) of this
section;

(ii) assist the [Executive Director and staff of the] Program with
stakeholder outreach and engagement;

(iii) help the [Executive Director of the] Program explore synergies
where appropriate with cybersecurity workforce development efforts by regional and
county workforce development entities;

(iv) coordinate as necessary with the Maryland Department of Labor
and the Department; and

(v) provide other advice and support for the Program.

(5) A member of the Board:

(i) may not receive compensation as a member of the Board; but

(ii) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard
State Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(6) The Governor may remove an appointed member of the Board for
incompetence, misconduct, or failure to perform the duties of the position.

(g) On or before December 1 each year, beginning in 2026, the Program, in
conjunction with the Corporation, shall submit a report on the operation and performance
of the Program to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government
Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6