START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 822 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 822 
(Senator Kramer, et al.) 
Budget and Taxation 
Ways and Means 
 
Income Tax - Subtraction Modification - State Law Enforcement Officers 
 
 
This bill expands eligibility for the existing subtraction modification for law enforcement 
officers who reside in political subdivisions with specified crime rates to include State law 
enforcement officers who reside in these qualifying political subdivisions. The bill takes 
effect July 1, 2024, and applies to tax year 2024 and beyond.    
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues decrease by $203,000 annually beginning in 
FY 2025, as discussed below. Expenditures are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
Expenditure 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
($203,000) 
($203,000)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  Local revenues decrease by $132,000 annually beginning in FY 2025. Local 
expenditures are not affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  None.     
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 519 of 2016 established an income tax subtraction modification 
of up to $5,000 of income earned by a law enforcement officer if (1) the officer resides in 
the political subdivision in which the officer is employed and (2) the crime rate in the 
political subdivision exceeds the State’s crime rate. Every three years, the Maryland Police 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 822/ Page 2 
Training and Standards Commission must certify to the Comptroller the political 
subdivisions in which the crime rate exceeds the State’s crime rate. 
 
Subsequent legislation enacted in 2019 and 2020 extended eligibility to law enforcement 
officers of the Maryland Transportation Authority Police, the Maryland-National Capital 
Park Police, and the Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission Police Force who reside 
in qualifying political subdivisions.  
 
Federal and most State law enforcement officers do not qualify for the subtraction 
modification.  
 
State Revenues:  General fund revenues decrease by an estimated $203,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025 due to additional subtraction modifications claimed against the 
personal income tax. This estimate assumes a stable number of claimants and is based on 
Maryland police employee data published by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, current 
qualifying political subdivisions, and claims for the existing subtraction modification in 
recent tax years.  
 
Local Revenues:  Local income tax revenues decrease by an estimated $132,000 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025 due to additional subtraction modifications claimed against the 
personal income tax.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 70 of 2023; SB 137 of 2022; and SB 176 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1467 (Delegate Fraser-Hidalgo) - Rules and Executive 
Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Public Safety and 
Correctional Services; Federal Bureau of Investigation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 25, 2024 
Third Reader - March 18, 2024 
 
rh/hlb 
 
Analysis by:   Elizabeth J. Allison 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2