START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 808 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 808 
(Senator Carozza, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation and 
Economic Matters 
 
Anaerobic Digestion Technology - Coordination and Guidance 
 
   
This bill requires the Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) to coordinate with the 
Maryland Energy Administration (MEA), the Maryland Department of the Environment 
(MDE), the Department of Commerce, the University of Maryland College of Agriculture 
and Natural Resources (UMD AGNR), the University of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES), 
electric companies, farmers, and industry to ensure anaerobic digestion technology projects 
are appropriately coordinated. In addition, MDA, in coordination with MEA, MDE, and 
Commerce, must establish guidance for farmers regarding the development and 
implementation of anaerobic digestion technology; the guidance must include specified 
information. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures likely increase by between $40,000 and $100,000 
only in FY 2025 for one-time contractual services to assist with the development of the 
required guidance; however, costs could be less, as discussed below. Revenues are not 
directly affected. 
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The guidance must include information on (1) obtaining required permits 
and electric interconnection; (2) available tax incentives and energy rebates; and 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 808/ Page 2 
(3) relevant regulations for waste systems, including for systems that incorporate animal 
waste and other resources, such as food waste. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Animal Waste Technology Fund 
 
Maryland’s Animal Waste Technology Fund, which is administered by MDA, provides 
grants to vendors, businesses, and individuals that (1) conduct research or develop 
technologies that are intended to reduce the amount of nutrients in animal waste; (2) alter 
the composition of animal waste; (3) develop alternative waste management strategies; or 
(4) use animal waste in a production process. The statutory goal of the fund is to encourage 
the development and implementation of economically feasible technologies that help 
protect the public health and the environment by reducing the amount of nutrients from 
animal waste to enable farmers to meet nutrient management requirements and provide 
alternative animal waste management strategies to farmers. 
 
In September 2023, UMD AGNR published the Maryland Animal Waste Technology 
Assessment and Strategy Planning to provide guidance regarding grant awards from the 
Animal Waste Technology Fund. Among other things, the plan included a recommendation 
that MDA work more closely with other government agencies, such as MDE and MEA, to 
create unity in the process of permitting, energy rebates, and tax credits, and in creating a 
regional approach to funding animal waste technologies. 
 
Anaerobic Digestion Regulation 
 
Anaerobic digestion facilities may be subject to several MDE, MDA and Public Service 
Commission (PSC) permits, approvals, and regulations. In 2022, MDE issued Permitting 
Guidance for Maryland Anaerobic Digestion Facilities to serve as an informational guide 
to assist prospective anaerobic digestion facilities in identifying applicable State laws and 
regulations. According to the guidance, potential permits, registrations, and certificates that 
may be needed for such facilities include:   
 
 
from MDE regarding solid waste and recyclable materials, a (1) refuse disposal 
permit and (2) sewage sludge utilization permit; 
 
from MDE regarding water, a (1) general permit for stormwater discharges 
associated with industrial activity; (2) State groundwater discharge permit; 
(3) municipal or industrial surface water discharge permit; (4) pretreatment permit; 
and (5) water and sewerage construction permit; 
 
from MDE regarding air, a (1) permit to construct and (2) permit to operate; 
 
from the MDA State Chemist Section, a soil conditioner or fertilizer registration; 
and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 808/ Page 3 
 
from PSC regarding renewable energy generation, a (1) certificate of public 
convenience and necessity exemption; (2) standard small generator interconnection 
agreement; (3) certification of a renewable energy generating facility; and 
(4) renewable energy credit account. (Anaerobic digestion is recognized as an 
eligible renewable energy source under the State’s Renewable Energy Portfolio 
Standard.) 
 
In addition, MDA’s Nutrient Management Program regulates the land application of all 
soil amendments and issues guidance for Agricultural Waste Characteristics through the 
Maryland Nutrient Management Manual. 
 
State Fiscal Effect:  General fund expenditures for MDA likely increase by between 
$40,000 and $100,000 only in fiscal 2025 for one-time contractual services to assist with 
the development of the required guidance. MDA advises that although the bill does not 
establish a deadline by which the guidance must be developed, the information is of interest 
to the farming community and the department plans to provide a guidance document as 
soon as possible. The Department of Legislative Services notes that costs could be less if 
the information contained in MDE’s existing guidance for anaerobic digestion facilities 
(discussed above) can be used to inform the guidance developed under the bill.  
 
The other affected State agencies can coordinate with MDA to complete the required 
guidance using existing budgeted resources. 
 
The bill also requires MDA to coordinate with MEA, MDE, Commerce, UMD AGNR, 
UMES, electric companies, farmers, and industry to ensure anaerobic digestion technology 
projects are appropriately coordinated. Although the intent of the bill appears to be to 
further the deployment of anaerobic digestion technology in the State, this analysis does 
not address any potential impact on State finances from any additional permitting activity. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Any small businesses, such as farmers, who seek to incorporate 
anaerobic digestion technology into their operations may benefit from the coordination 
provided by the bill and the guidance developed as a result of the bill. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1466 (Delegate Jacobs) - Rules and Executive Nominations. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 808/ Page 4 
Information Source(s):  Department of Commerce; University System of Maryland; 
Maryland Department of Agriculture; Maryland Department of the Environment; 
Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4