START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 850 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 850 
(Senator Corderman) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
State Personnel - Line-of-Duty Death and Funeral Benefits 
 
   
This bill increases the cap on reasonable funeral expenses, from $10,000 to $25,000, paid 
to surviving family members or the estate of specified public safety individuals who are 
killed or die in the performance of duties, and indexes the cap to inflation beginning in 
fiscal 2026. This funeral benefit no longer must be reduced by any related workers’ 
compensation benefits paid. Additionally, the bill increases the death benefit, from 
$100,000 to $125,000, for specified surviving family members of specified Maryland 
National Guard members and all State employees (including, under the bill, employees in 
the Legislative and Judicial branches) who are killed in the performance of their duties, 
and provides for reasonable funeral expenses, of up to $25,000, to be paid for such 
individuals. These death and funeral benefits, along with the death benefit of $50,000 for 
specified public safety employees under current law, are indexed to inflation beginning in 
fiscal 2026. Specified surviving family members of State employees who are killed in the 
performance of duties on or after January 1, 2023, may request death and funeral benefits 
under the bill by December 31, 2024, and the Secretary of Budget and Management must 
administer the benefits as specified. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
    
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Likely no effect in FY 2024. Under assumptions discussed below, general 
fund expenditures increase by $340,000 in FY 2025, and by at least $206,700 annually 
thereafter; actual expenditures likely vary annually depending on the number of claims 
made. State revenues are not affected. This bill increases the cost of an entitlement likely 
beginning in FY 2025.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
340,000 
206,700 
223,400 
240,800 
258,900 
Net Effect 
($340,000) 
($206,700) 
($223,400) 
($240,800) 
($258,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 850/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Minimal, as discussed below. 
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:           
 
Death and Funeral Benefits for Public Safety Employees 
 
The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS) is required to pay a 
death benefit to the surviving spouse, child, dependent parent, or estate of each of the 
following individuals who is killed or dies in the performance of duties:  (1) a law 
enforcement officer; (2) a correctional officer; (3) a volunteer or career firefighter or rescue 
squad member; (4) a sworn member of the State Fire Marshal’s Office; (5) a public safety 
aviation employee; (6) a Maryland resident who was a member of the uniform services of 
the United States serving in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict; or (7) a hazardous material 
response team employee of the Maryland Department of the Environment or a local 
government agency. With the exception of a member of the Armed Forces serving in 
Afghanistan or Iraq, reasonable funeral expenses of up to $10,000 must also be paid. This 
funeral benefit must be reduced by the amount of any related workers’ compensation 
benefits paid. 
 
Generally, an application for a death benefit must be submitted within three years after the 
death of the decedent. Beginning in fiscal 2009, the $125,000 death benefit is adjusted 
annually by the Consumer Price Index. The death benefit is in addition to any workers’ 
compensation benefits, life insurance proceeds, and the funeral benefits mentioned above 
(which are not indexed to inflation). 
 
The Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services may award a death benefit on a 
case-by-case basis as specified. Payments of death or funeral benefits must be made out of 
money that the Governor includes for that purpose in the State budget. 
 
Death and Funeral Expenses for State Employees 
 
The State must pay a death benefit of $100,000 to the surviving spouse, children, or 
dependent parents of specified State employees and members of the Maryland National 
Guard serving on orders who are killed in the performance of duties.  
 
A death benefit of $50,000 must be paid to the surviving spouse, children, or dependent 
parents of public safety employees covered under the death benefits for public safety 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 850/ Page 3 
employees who are killed in the performance of duties, but an individual who receives this 
benefit may not also receive the State employee death benefit of $100,000.  
 
A death benefit may not be paid if an employee is killed as a result of the employee’s 
negligence or for other specified reasons. A death benefit is in addition to any workers’ 
compensation benefits, life insurance premiums, death and funeral benefits for public 
safety employees, and other specified benefits paid relating to Maryland National Guard 
members. 
 
When the head of the unit that employed the decedent notifies the Secretary of Budget and 
Management, the Secretary must determine whether a death benefit will be paid and, if so, 
make the payment to the surviving spouse, children, or dependent parents, as specified. A 
death benefit must be paid out of funds that the Governor may appropriate for that purpose 
in the State budget. The Secretary’s decision is the final administrative decision and not 
subject to appeal.  
 
Pension System Line-of-duty Death Benefits 
 
State pension law includes special line-of-duty death benefits for surviving spouses of 
members of the Employees’ Combined System, Teachers’ Combined System, Correctional 
Officers’ Retirement System, Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System, and State Police 
Retirement System. The benefits are paid in addition to other benefits payable by the State 
and consist of (1) the member’s accumulated contributions and (2) an allowance equal to 
two-thirds of the member’s final compensation. The benefit is paid first to the surviving 
spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse, to any surviving children who are younger than 
age 26 or disabled, as specified. If there are no surviving children, the benefit is paid to a 
dependent parent. 
 
The Judges’ Retirement System (JRS) does not have a special line-of-duty death benefit; 
however, when an active JRS member dies, the Board of Trustees of the State Retirement 
and Pension System (SRPS) must pay the surviving spouse 50% of the retirement 
allowance that would be payable if the member were alive and eligible to receive a 
retirement allowance. If there is no surviving spouse or children who are younger than age 
26 or disabled, the SRPS board must pay to the member’s designated beneficiary a 
lump-sum death benefit consisting of (1) the member’s accumulated contributions and 
(2) an amount equal to the member’s annual salary at the time of death. If there is more 
than one designated beneficiary, the lump-sum payment is divided equally among them. 
 
State Expenditures:  Based on the assumptions described below, general fund 
expenditures increase by $250,000 for the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) 
and by $90,000 for DPSCS in fiscal 2025, which assumes it takes at least a month from the 
bill’s June 1, 2024 effective date for survivors to request benefits and for those benefits to 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 850/ Page 4 
be paid. General fund expenditures increase annually by at least $113,347 for DBM and by 
at least $93,337 for DPSCS beginning in fiscal 2026, with future years reflecting the 
cumulative impact of inflation. The following assumptions used in calculating the estimate 
are based on recent experience (including the recent murder of a circuit court judge) and 
reflect the maximum benefit allowed being paid. 
 
 
One request is made in fiscal 2025 for the death benefit and funeral expenses under 
the bill due to expanding coverage for State employees who are killed in the 
performance of duties to include Legislative and Judicial employees. Accordingly, 
general fund expenditures for DBM increase by as much as $150,000 in fiscal 2025. 
While additional claims may be made in future years, the Department of Legislative 
Services assumes these are rare occurrences and no additional claims are made after 
fiscal 2025 due to this expansion of coverage.  
 
General fund expenditures for DBM also increase by at least $50,000 for each State 
employee killed in the performance of duties – specifically as a result of increasing 
the death benefit, from $100,000 to $125,000, and paying for reasonable funeral 
expenses, of up to $25,000, with these benefits indexed to inflation beginning in 
fiscal 2026. Accordingly, assuming two claims would normally be paid each year, 
general fund expenditures increase by at least $100,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025 (future years will reflect inflation).      
 
General fund expenditures for DPSCS increase by at least $15,000 for each public 
safety individual who is killed or dies in the performance of duties – as a result of 
increasing the cap on funeral expenses paid from $10,000 to $25,000, with this 
benefit indexed to inflation beginning in fiscal 2026. Assuming six public safety 
individuals are killed or die in the performance of duties each year, general fund 
expenditures for DPSCS increase by at least $90,000 annually beginning in 
fiscal 2025 (future years will reflect inflation). Expenditures may further increase 
from no longer reducing funeral benefits by related workers’ compensation benefits 
paid. 
 
The bill also indexes to inflation, beginning in fiscal 2026, the death benefit of 
$50,000 paid under § 10-404 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article for public 
safety State employees who are killed or die in the performance of duties. Assuming 
six claims each year, general fund expenditures for DBM increase by at least 
$6,674 annually beginning in fiscal 2026 (future years will reflect the cumulative 
impact of inflation). 
  
To the extent that actual claims each year vary from these assumptions, general fund 
expenditures also vary. 
 
This analysis assumes DBM pays the death and funeral benefits for all employees covered 
under § 10-404 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, and DPSCS pays the death and 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 850/ Page 5 
funeral benefits for public safety employees covered under § 1-202 of the Public Safety 
Article. To the extent State agencies of the applicable employees pay these expenses, other 
State agencies’ expenditures, which may include general, special, and/or federal funds, 
increase and DBM’s expenditures decrease.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Any local government desiring to pay the death and funeral benefit 
to a hazardous material response team employee of a local agency must reserve $15,000 of 
additional funds to cover the increased funeral expenses for one covered employee.            
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Comptroller’s Office; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of Labor; Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of State Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Heather N. MacDonagh  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5