START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 816 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 816 
(Senator Hester) 
Finance and Budget and Taxation 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Economic Development – Cyber Maryland Fund and Program – Alterations 
 
 
This bill alters administrative and funding requirements for the Cyber Maryland Program 
and Fund in the Maryland Technology Development Corporation (TEDCO). More 
specifically, the bill (1) requires TEDCO to administer the Cyber Maryland Fund; 
(2) clarifies the types of administrative expenses that may be paid for from the fund, 
including hiring staff and hiring consultants and other necessary professionals; (3) removes 
the requirement to hire specific staff for the program; (4) removes the mandate to provide 
funding for specific staff and instead establishes a $99,000 mandate for the fund to be used 
for talent pipeline management; and (5) modifies an existing authorization for the Governor 
to include an annual appropriation of $250,000 for the fund to instead allow for an 
additional $250,000 annual appropriation for the fund. TEDCO is also required to adopt 
regulations to award grants under the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State finances or operations, under the 
assumptions discussed below. This bill eliminates a mandated appropriation and 
establishes a new mandated appropriation beginning in FY 2026. 
  
Local Effect:  While the bill may alter the amount of grant funding for local governments, 
the overall effect is anticipated to be minimal. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. While the bill may alter the amount of grant funding for 
small businesses, the overall effect is anticipated to be minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 816/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 578 of 2023 established the Cyber Maryland Program in TEDCO 
to create a talent pipeline in cybersecurity, serve as a hub for State workforce development 
programs in cybersecurity, and generally coordinate cybersecurity and research and 
innovation in the State, among other things. The Act also created the Cyber Maryland Fund 
as a special, nonlapsing fund, and the Cyber Maryland Board. 
 
The program must conduct ongoing research by collaborating with specified entities to 
collect and analyze real-time industry data to identify cybersecurity workforce needs as 
described in the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach. The 
program must use the results of its research to (1) increase the effectiveness of existing 
State cybersecurity workforce programs for employers in the State; (2) facilitate 
partnerships for new training and education programs to address the workforce needs 
identified in the program’s research; and (3) develop a statewide strategic plan for 
cybersecurity workforce development. The program, and not TEDCO, must also 
administer and manage the Cyber Maryland Fund. 
 
The program’s executive director must be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the 
Chief Executive Officer of TEDCO and must have relevant qualifications and experience 
with the activities and purposes of the program. 
 
The Cyber Maryland Fund consists of money appropriated in the State budget and any 
money from any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. The Cyber Maryland 
Fund exists to facilitate the Cyber Maryland Program’s achievement of the program’s 
specified purposes and support innovative approaches to meeting cybersecurity workforce 
needs. Funds may only be used for (1) administering the program (with no further detail 
on eligible uses) and (2) providing grants to elementary and secondary schools, institutions 
of higher education, including community colleges, for-profit corporations, and nonprofit 
organizations to operate cybersecurity programs based on the strategic plan of the 
Cyber Maryland Program. 
 
The Act established a mandated appropriation beginning in fiscal 2025 for an amount 
sufficient for hiring individuals to conduct the duties of the Cyber Maryland Program, 
including an executive director and at least one administrator. The Act also authorizes but 
does not require (1) the Governor to include $250,000 in the annual budget bill beginning 
in fiscal 2025 that, subject to the availability of funding, must be used for implementing 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Talent Pipeline Management Approach and (2) funds from 
the Dedicated Purpose Account (DPA) to be transferred by budget amendment to 
implement the Act beginning in fiscal 2025. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 816/ Page 3 
State Fiscal Effect:  The bill removes the requirement in Chapter 578 that the amount of 
funding annually provided in the budget bill be sufficient for hiring individuals to conduct 
the duties of the program, including an executive director and at least one administrator. 
Instead, the bill (1) requires the Governor to include in the annual budget bill an 
appropriation of $99,000 for the Cyber Maryland Fund to be used for talent pipeline 
management and (2) modifies an existing authorization for the Governor to include an 
annual appropriation of $250,000 for the fund to instead allow for an additional $250,000 
annual appropriation for the fund. (In practice, the new mandated appropriation applies 
beginning in fiscal 2026, and the Governor may provide discretionary funding of any 
amount, irrespective of the authorization.) The fiscal 2025 budget includes $440,000 in 
general funds for the Cyber Maryland Program. 
 
The bill does not otherwise alter overall requirements for the program. TEDCO advises 
that the flexibility to hire consultants may reduce administrative expenses, which could 
leave more funding available for programmatic purposes, all else being equal. 
Additionally, the bill’s $99,000 mandate provides some funding stability for the program 
and will be used to partially cover costs associated with the talent pipeline management 
approach, which includes programmatic and administrative expenses. TEDCO employees 
are not State employees. 
 
Accordingly, assuming a combination of mandated and discretionary State funding 
continues to be provided in future years and at similar levels, overall State finances are not 
materially affected. While the amount of grant funding for public institutions of higher 
education could change, the overall effect is anticipated to be minimal. Alternatively, if 
only the new funding amounts specified under the bill are appropriated to the Cyber 
Maryland Fund, State expenditures (and corresponding special fund revenues and 
expenditures) may decrease beginning in fiscal 2026. Under current law, the program may 
be funded by capitalizing the special fund with either general funds or monies from DPA. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1486 (Delegate Forbes) - Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Technology Development Corporation; Department of 
Budget and Management; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 816/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 23, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 22, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4