START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 964 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 964 
(Senator Ready) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Carroll County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Alcohol Awareness Training 
 
 
This bill requires, in Carroll County, a holder of a Class B or Class D alcoholic beverages 
license or an individual designated by the license holder who is in a supervisory capacity 
to (1) be certified by an alcohol awareness training program and (2) be present on the 
licensed premises during the hours in which alcoholic beverages may be sold. The bill also 
establishes specified penalties that include a fine of $100 for the first offense and a fine up 
to $500 and/or suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverages license for subsequent 
offenses. The bill requires at least one individual who is listed on the license as a license 
holder to maintain a current certificate reflecting the completion of an alcohol awareness 
program while the individual is listed on the license. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not affect State operations or finances. 
  
Local Effect:  Carroll County can handle any additional enforcement activity with existing 
resources. Carroll County revenues are not materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  The requirement to have a certified individual on the licensed 
premises at all times may require small businesses to pay for employees to receive alcohol 
awareness training. However, the total impact is expected to be minimal. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, alcoholic beverages license holders are subject to alcohol 
awareness training requirements under State law. The program includes instruction on how 
alcohol affects an individual’s behavior and body, provides education on the dangers of 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 964/ Page 2 
drinking and driving, and defines effective methods to (1) determine whether a customer 
is under the legal drinking age; (2) serve customers to minimize the chance of intoxication; 
and (3) stop service before a customer becomes intoxicated. 
 
Under current law, each local licensing board generally must enforce this requirement. 
Violators are subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense and subsequent violations are 
subject to a fine up to $500 and/or suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverages 
license. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Carroll County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 15, 2024 
 
km/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2