START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 943 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 943 
(Senators Kelly and Lam) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Vehicle Laws - Bus Lane Obstruction - Monitoring Systems Expansion and 
Workgroup (Better Bus Service Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill establishes a statewide authorization for local jurisdictions to use bus lane 
monitoring systems to enforce the prohibition against driving a motor vehicle in a dedicated 
bus lane. As a result, current statutory provisions governing bus lane monitoring systems 
in Baltimore City are expanded to incorporate all local jurisdictions in the State. In 
addition, the bill establishes new prohibitions against standing or parking in a bus lane. 
Finally, the bill establishes the Workgroup on Curb Space Management, staffed by the 
Maryland Department of Transportation (MDOT). Provisions related to the workgroup 
take effect July 1, 2024, and terminate June 30, 2026.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund revenues increase minimally to the extent additional local 
jurisdictions establish bus lane monitoring systems and due to additional violations in 
Baltimore City. General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by approximately 
$17,300 for reprogramming in FY 2025 only; any increase in District Court caseloads can 
likely be handled with existing resources. Transportation Trust Fund (TTF) revenues may 
increase minimally from additional flag fees placed on the registrations of vehicle owners 
who fail to pay a fine or contest a violation under the bill. MDOT can staff the workgroup 
with existing resources. 
  
Local Effect:  Local government revenues increase, potentially significantly, to the extent 
bus lane monitoring systems are established. Expenditures increase to install and maintain 
the systems, with any remaining revenue balances after recovery of implementation and 
administration costs reserved for public safety expenditures. In Baltimore City only, 
revenues and expenditures may increase further due to the bill’s new prohibitions against 
standing or parking in a bus lane. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 943/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions 
 
The bill generally substitutes references to the Baltimore City Police Department (BPD) 
with “agency,” which the bill defines as:   
 
 
a law enforcement agency of the State or a local political subdivision that is 
authorized to issue a citation for a violation of the Maryland Vehicle Law or of local 
traffic laws or regulations;  
 
for a municipal corporation that does not maintain a police force, an agency 
established or designated by the municipal corporation to use bus lane monitoring 
systems; or 
 
a local, regional, or statewide multistate transit agency or authority, including the 
Maryland Transit Administration (MTA) and the Washington Metropolitan Area 
Transit Authority (WMATA). 
 
Under current law, a “dedicated bus lane” is a lane designated for use by mass transit 
vehicles owned, operated, or contracted for by MTA or a local department of 
transportation; under the bill, it also includes (1) mass transit vehicles owned, operated, or 
contracted for by WMATA and (2) transit bus stops located proximate to lanes designated 
for use by mass transit vehicles. As under current law, a “recorded image” is an image 
recorded by a bus lane monitoring system on a photograph, microphotograph, electronic 
image, videotape, or any other visual medium, which clearly identifies the motor vehicle’s 
registration plate number.  
 
Under current law, a “bus lane monitoring system” is an enforcement system that is 
designed to capture a recorded image of a driver of a motor vehicle committing a violation. 
Under the bill, the definition is altered to mean an enforcement system, including an 
onboard or fixed monitoring system, that is designed to capture a recorded image of a motor 
vehicle during the commission of a violation. Also, under the bill, the definition of a “bus 
lane monitoring system operator” is altered to mean a representative of an agency (rather 
than BPD) or a contractor that operates a bus lane monitoring system. 
 
Prohibitions Related to Bus Lanes 
 
Under current law, a person is expressly prohibited from driving a vehicle in a dedicated 
bus lane, unless authorized to do so by the local jurisdiction in which that bus lane is 
located. However, certain vehicles may be driven in a dedicated bus lane, specifically:   

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 943/ Page 3 
 
a transit vehicle owned, operated, or contracted for by MTA or a local department 
of transportation; 
 
a school bus; 
 
a bicycle; 
 
an emergency vehicle; and 
 
a vehicle making a right turn at the next immediate intersection. 
 
As noted earlier, the bill expands these provisions to also apply to standing or parking in a 
dedicated bus lane as well to WMATA transit vehicles.  
 
Bus Lane Monitoring Systems, Generally 
 
The bill authorizes an agency (rather than only Baltimore City) to use a bus lane monitoring 
system to record images of motor vehicles during the commission of a violation. Generally, 
an “agency” (rather than only BPD) may issue warnings or citations to vehicle owners or 
drivers committing a violation; however, during the first 45 days of operation of the 
monitoring system, a warning notice must be mailed in place of a citation. The maximum 
fine for a violation recorded by a bus lane monitoring system is $75. Otherwise, a violation 
is a misdemeanor, subject to a maximum fine of $500.  
 
Training, Recordkeeping, and Other Operating Requirements 
 
Among other requirements under current law, a bus lane monitoring system may be used 
only when operated by a bus lane monitoring system operator. The bill also requires that 
conspicuous signage be placed, as specified. Additionally, under the bill, the system must 
produce video for each alleged violation that allows for the differentiation between a 
vehicle that is being driven, standing, or parked in a dedicated bus lane improperly and a 
vehicle that is lawfully stopped or moving in order to execute a right turn at an intersection. 
Specific training and recordkeeping requirements apply for system operators, including the 
performance of calibration checks as specified by an independent laboratory; these 
requirements are unchanged under the bill.  
 
Retention of Recorded Images 
 
Currently, a bus lane monitoring system may be used to record only the images of vehicles 
that are traveling in a bus lane. Under the bill, such systems may retain only the images of 
vehicles that contain evidence of a violation. Recorded images from a bus lane monitoring 
system:   
 
 
that contain evidence of a violation may be retained up to 6 months or 60 days after 
final disposition of the citation, whichever is later; 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 943/ Page 4 
 
that do not contain evidence of a violation must be destroyed within 15 days after 
the recorded image was first captured; and 
 
may not be used for any other purpose without a warrant, subpoena, or court order. 
 
A bus lane monitoring system may not use biometric identification techniques, including 
facial recognition technology. 
 
Citations 
 
Unless a driver of a motor vehicle received a citation from a police officer at the time of 
the violation, a person who receives a citation by mail may pay the specified civil penalty 
directly to the local jurisdiction or may elect to stand trial in District Court, which is granted 
exclusive jurisdiction in proceedings for civil infractions. In a contested case, the penalty 
must be paid to the District Court. 
 
A citation issued by a bus lane monitoring system is not a moving violation for which 
points may be assessed and may not be placed on the driving record of the owner or driver 
of the vehicle. However, it may be treated as a parking violation for purposes of 
enforcement. In addition, the citation may not be considered in the provision of vehicle 
insurance. If the civil penalty is not paid and the violation is not contested, the 
Motor Vehicle Administration (MVA) may refuse to register or reregister the motor 
vehicle. 
 
In addition to other required information, the mailed citation must include a copy of the 
recorded image of the vehicle and a signed statement by a police officer employed by the 
local law enforcement agency. The citation must also be mailed within two weeks of the 
violation. 
 
Similar to current requirements, a certificate alleging that the violation occurred, that is 
sworn to or affirmed by a duly authorized law enforcement officer employed by or under 
contract with an agency (rather than only a Baltimore City police officer) is evidence of 
the facts contained therein and is also admissible in any proceeding. On request of a person 
who received a citation, video of the alleged violation must be made available to the person; 
video evidence made available in this manner must be admitted as evidence in any court 
proceeding for a bus lane monitoring violation. Adjudication of liability is to be based on 
a preponderance of evidence standard. The District Court may consider specified defenses, 
including that the vehicle was stolen or that the owner was not operating the vehicle at the 
time of the violation. For violations involving certain trucks, tractors, trailers, and buses, 
the person named in the citation may satisfy the burden of proof that he or she was not 
operating the vehicle at the time of the violation by providing a sworn letter containing the 
name, address, and driver’s license number of the person who was operating the vehicle at 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 943/ Page 5 
the time. Similarly, for violations involving rental vehicles, a process is specified by which 
companies may demonstrate that the company is not liable for the violation. 
 
Authorized Uses of Collected Fines 
 
From the fines it collects, a political subdivision may recover the costs of implementing 
and administering the bus lane monitoring system; any remaining revenue balances must 
be spent for public safety purposes, including pedestrian safety programs.  
 
Implementation 
 
An agency (rather than BPD) or a designated contractor must administer and process civil 
citations issued in coordination with the District Court. 
 
If a contractor provides, deploys, or operates a bus lane monitoring system for an agency 
(rather than only for BPD), the contractor’s fee may not be contingent on the number of 
citations issued or paid. 
 
Workgroup on Curb Space Management 
 
The workgroup must (1) analyze curb space regulations within transit-served areas of the 
State; (2) provide recommendations on how to effectively manage curb space changes on 
roadways with frequent bus service, dedicated lanes, and parking, loading, or standing 
needs; (3) examine strategies on obstruction enforcement at bus stops; (4) provide 
recommendations for a public education campaign about dedicated bus lanes and the 
enforcement of bus lane laws, including messaging and potential signage; and (5) analyze 
potential privacy concerns related to onboard monitoring cameras and how to address such 
concerns. 
 
The workgroup must report its findings and recommendations to the Governor and the 
General Assembly by July 1, 2025. 
 
State/Local Fiscal Effect:  The Judiciary advises that reprogramming is necessary to 
implement the bill’s requirements. In fiscal 2025 only, general fund expenditures increase 
by $17,298 to make the necessary changes. 
 
The number of citations issued in local jurisdictions authorizing bus lane monitoring 
systems likely increases significantly due to the establishment of an automated bus lane 
enforcement system. As a result, the number of individuals opting for a trial in 
District Court likely also increases – even with the penalty capped at $75. Accordingly, 
general fund revenues likely increase minimally, as fine revenues paid by individuals 
convicted in the District Court are paid into the general fund.  

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 943/ Page 6 
However, in an uncontested case, fine revenues are paid to a local jurisdiction. As a result, 
local revenues increase for a local jurisdiction to the extent it implements an automated bus 
lane monitoring system. Based on citation revenues from other automated enforcement 
systems, the Department of Legislative Services advises that revenues received under the 
bill may be significant. 
 
To the extent relatively few additional jurisdictions authorize bus lane monitoring systems, 
State and local revenues may be more minimally affected. 
 
The bill authorizes MVA to refuse to register or reregister a motor vehicle if a citation is 
not paid or contested pursuant to the bill’s requirements. Assuming MVA receives 
additional flagging requests from local jurisdictions under the bill, TTF revenues may 
increase, as individuals must pay the administrative flag fee ($30) to register or reregister 
a vehicle. However, the overall effect on TTF revenues is expected to be negligible. 
 
As noted above, a local jurisdiction may recover the costs for implementation and 
administration of a bus lane monitoring system from the fines collected from violations 
enforced by the system; revenue balances remaining after recovery of these costs must be 
spent for public safety purposes. 
 
In Baltimore City only, due to the bill’s expanded prohibitions against standing and parking 
in a bus lane, current enforcement procedures may need to be modified in order to capture 
different types of violations. Revenues likely also increase, as additional types of violations 
are subject to enforcement.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1027 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Maryland Association of Counties; Maryland 
Municipal League; Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 943/ Page 7 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 2, 2024 
Enrolled - April 23, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 23, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Joanne E. Tetlow 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 7