START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 867

Chapter 867

(Senate Bill 991)

AN ACT concerning

Behavioral Health – Language Assistance Services Pilot Program

FOR the purpose of establishing the Language Assistance Services Pilot Program in the
Behavioral Health Administration to provide grants to local behavioral health
authorities to reimburse behavioral health providers for language assistance
services for certain children, parents, and legal guardians; and generally relating to
the Language Assistance Services Pilot Program.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 10–929 to be under the new part “Part V. Language Assistance Services Pilot
Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

10–927. RESERVED.

10–928. RESERVED.

PART V. LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES PILOT PROGRAM.

10–929.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “PROGRAM” MEANS THE LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE
SERVICES PILOT PROGRAM.

(B) THERE IS A LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES PILOT PROGRAM.

(C) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO:

(1) PROVIDE MEANINGFUL ACCESS TO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE
TO CHILDREN WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY; AND

(2) ESTABLISH A COMPETITIVE GRANT PROCESS FOR LOCAL
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH AUTHORITIES TO PROVIDE REIMBURSEMENT TO BEHAVIORAL
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 867 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

HEALTH PROVIDERS FOR LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES, INCLUDING
INTERPRETATION AND TRANSLATION SERVICES TO:

(I) CHILDREN WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY
ACCESSING AND RECEIVING BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES; AND

(II) PARENTS AND LEGAL GUARDIANS COORDINATING THE
PROVISION OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES AND MAKING HEALTH CARE
DECISIONS REGARDING THE SERVICES ON BEHALF OF A CHILD.

(D) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM.

(E) ON OR BEFORE OCTOBER 1, 2024, THE THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL
ADOPT REGULATIONS TO IMPLEMENT AND ADMINISTER THE PROGRAM, INCLUDING
~~REGULATIONS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~ESTABLISH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~FOLLOWING~~ THE FOLLOWING REQUIREMENTS
AS PART OF ADMINISTERING THE PROGRAM:

(1) A REQUIREMENT THAT A GRANTEE DOCUMENT AND REPORT:

(I) THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN WHO RECEIVED LANGUAGE
ASSISTANCE SERVICES BROKEN DOWN BY PRIMARY LANGUAGE SPOKEN;

(II) THE NUMBER OF PARENTS AND LEGAL GUARDIANS WHO
RECEIVED LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES BROKEN DOWN BY PRIMARY
LANGUAGE SPOKEN; AND

(III) THE NUMBER OF LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES THAT
WERE REIMBURSED BROKEN DOWN BY THE TYPE OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICE
PROVIDED; AND

(2) A REQUIREMENT THAT, TO REQUEST AND RECEIVE A
REIMBURSEMENT FROM A PROGRAM GRANTEE, A HEALTH CARE PROVIDER MUST:

(I) BE A LICENSED AND ACCREDITED BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
PROVIDER; AND

(II) HAVE A CURRENT, WRITTEN LANGUAGE ACCESS PLAN
DEMONSTRATING HOW THE PROVIDER ENSURES MEANINGFUL ACCESS TO ITS
PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH
PROFICIENCY.

(F) THE LANGUAGE ACCESS PLAN REQUIRED UNDER SUBSECTION (E)(2)(II)
OF THIS SECTION SHALL:

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 867

(1) BE PROVIDED TO THE GRANTEE IN ADDITION TO ANY REQUEST
FOR REIMBURSEMENT FOR LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES; AND

(2) INCLUDE:

(I) A SELF–ASSESSMENT OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER
WHICH THE PROVIDER MAY ENCOUNTER AN INDIVIDUAL WITH LIMITED ENGLISH
PROFICIENCY;

(II) A SELF–ASSESSMENT OF THE NUMBER OR PROPORTION OF
INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY FROM EACH LANGUAGE GROUP
IN THE PROVIDER’S SERVICE AREA TO DETERMINE APPROPRIATE LANGUAGE
ASSISTANCE SERVICES;

(III) THE PROVIDER’S PROCEDURE FOR IDENTIFYING AN
INDIVIDUAL’S PRIMARY LANGUAGE;

(IV) THE PROVIDER’S PROCEDURE FOR PROVIDING LANGUAGE
ASSISTANCE SERVICES, INCLUDING ORAL AND WRITTEN LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE
SERVICES;

(V) THE PROVIDER’S PROCEDURE FOR ENSURING EFFECTIVE
COMMUNICATION WITH INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH PROFICIENCY IN
LANGUAGES ENCOUNTERED LESS FREQUENTLY;

(VI) THE PROVIDER’S PLAN FOR TRAINING STAFF ON THE
PROVIDER’S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES; AND

(VII) THE PROVIDER’S PROCEDURE FOR PROVIDING NOTICE OF
LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES AT NO COST TO INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED
ENGLISH PROFICIENCY.

(G) FOR EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2025 AND 2026, THE GOVERNOR SHALL
INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $120,000 TO THE
PROGRAM.

(H) THE ADMINISTRATION SHALL AWARD, AT A MINIMUM, THREE GRANTS
OF $30,000 EACH IN EACH OF FISCAL YEARS 2025 AND 2026.

(I) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1, 2025, 2026, AND 2027, THE
ADMINISTRATION SHALL SUBMIT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY A REPORT
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROGRAM THAT INCLUDES:
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 867 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF INDIVIDUALS WITH LIMITED ENGLISH
PROFICIENCY WHO RECEIVED LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES BROKEN DOWN BY
JURISDICTION;

(2) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF CHILDREN WHO RECEIVED LANGUAGE
ASSISTANCE SERVICES BROKEN DOWN BY PRIMARY LANGUAGE SPOKEN;

(3) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PARENTS AND LEGAL GUARDIANS WHO
RECEIVED LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES BROKEN DOWN BY PRIMARY
LANGUAGE SPOKEN;

(4) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF LANGUAGE ASSISTANCE SERVICES THAT
WERE REIMBURSED BROKEN DOWN BY THE TYPE OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICE
PROVIDED; AND

(5) THE TOTAL AMOUNT IN GRANT MONEY PROVIDED TO EACH
GRANTEE DURING THE IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING FISCAL YEAR.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 4 years and, at the end of June 30, 2028,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4