START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 952 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 952 
(Senator Hettleman) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Assisted Living Programs - Assisted Living Referrers - Requirements and 
Prohibitions 
 
 
This bill establishes additional requirements for an assisted living referrer. An assisted 
living referrer must (1) maintain general liability insurance; (2) require employees to obtain 
a criminal history records check; (3) provide to the client or the client’s representative a 
description of the services that will be provided by the referrer; and (4) if the referrer has a 
financial agreement with the client or the client’s representative, provide the agreement to 
the client or client’s representative in writing or by electronic means. An assisted living 
referrer may not request payment of a referral fee from an assisted living program more 
than two years after the assisted living referrer provided the referral. By 
September 30, 2025, an assisted living referrer (1) must keep a client or potential client’s 
medical record confidential and may disclose the medical record only for the purpose of 
making a referral if the client or potential client gives informed written, electronic, or audio 
recorded consent and (2) may not sell the personal data of a client, potential client, or 
client’s representative to another person unless the client or client’s representative gives 
informed written, electronic, or audio recorded consent. By October 1, 2025, an assisted 
living referrer must comply with all applicable data privacy laws. The Office of Health 
Care Quality (OHCQ) must maintain a user-friendly database of licensed assisted living 
programs. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill’s requirements can be handled with existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 952/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 589 of 2020 defines an “assisted living referrer” as an individual 
or agency that (1) makes referrals to assisted living programs without cost to the person 
receiving the referral and (2) is compensated by an assisted living program or other 
third party for referring individuals to a licensed assisted living program.  
 
Each assisted living referrer (1) must register with OHCQ within the Maryland Department 
of Health (MDH); (2) must disclose to a client or potential client of the assisted living 
referrer all financial relationships the assisted living referrer has with assisted living 
programs; (3) must affirm that an assisted living program is licensed if referring a client or 
potential client; (4) may refer the client or potential client only to a licensed assisted living 
program if referring a client or potential client; and (5) must notify OHCQ immediately on 
learning that an assisted living program is operating without a license. 
 
An assisted living referrer may not (1) receive funding from MDH if the referrer violates 
these requirements or (2) make referrals only to licensed assisted living programs from 
which the referrer receives compensation. If requested by any person or on its own 
initiative, the Office of Attorney General may investigate whether an assisted living 
referrer violated the bill’s provisions and may seek appropriate relief. 
 
OHCQ currently maintains an assisted living program licensee directory on its public 
website that includes the name of the assisted living program, full address, county, license 
number, date licensed, contact person, phone number, electronic mail address, and website. 
This information is updated monthly and is available as an Excel spreadsheet. 
 
Medical Records 
 
Pursuant to § 4-301 of the Health-General Article, “medical record” means any oral, 
written, or other transmission in any form or medium that (1) is entered in the record of a 
patient or recipient; (2) identifies or can readily be associated with the identity of a patient 
or recipient; and (3) relates to the health care of the patient or recipient. “Medical record” 
includes any (1) documentation of disclosures of a medical record to any person who is not 
an employee, agent, or consultant of the health care provider; (2) file or record maintained 
by a pharmacy, as specified, or may be readily associated with the identity of a patient; 
(3) documentation of an examination of a patient regardless who requested the examination 
or is making payment for the examination; and (4) file or record received from another 
health care provider that relates to the health care of a patient or recipient received from 
that health care provider and identifies or can be readily associated with the identity of the 
patient or recipient. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 952/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 624 of 2022. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1263 (Delegate Pasteur, et al.) - Health and Government 
Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3