START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1045

Chapter 1045

(Senate Bill 964)

AN ACT concerning

Carroll County – Alcoholic Beverages Licenses – Alcohol Awareness Training

FOR the purpose of requiring ~~an~~ the holder of a Class B or Class D alcoholic beverages
license ~~holder~~ in Carroll County or an individual designated by the license holder
who has completed training in an approved alcohol awareness program to be present
on the licensed premises at certain times when alcoholic beverages may be sold;
providing for certain penalties; requiring at least one license holder to maintain
alcohol awareness program certification while listed on the license; and generally
relating to alcoholic beverages in Carroll County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 4–505(e) and 16–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 16–1901
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 16–1904
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

4–505.

(e) A holder of any retail alcoholic beverages license or an employee designated
by the holder shall complete training in an approved alcohol awareness program.

16–102.

This title applies only in Carroll County.
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1045 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

16–1901.

(a) The following sections of Title 4, Subtitle 5 (“Conduct of Local License
Holders”) of Division I of this article apply in the county without exception or variation:

(1) § 4–502 (“Storage of alcoholic beverages”);

(2) § 4–503 (“Solicitations and sales outside of licensed premises”);

(3) [§ 4–505 (“Alcohol awareness program”);

(4)] § 4–506 (“Evidence of purchaser’s age”);

[(5)] (4) § 4–507 (“Retail delivery of alcoholic beverages”); and

[(6)] (5) § 4–508 (“Display of license”).

(b) [Section 4–504] THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS OF TITLE 4, SUBTITLE 5
(“CONDUCT OF LOCAL LICENSE HOLDERS”) OF DIVISION I OF THIS ARTICLE APPLY
IN THE COUNTY:

(1) § 4–504 (“Employment of underage individuals”) [of Division I of this
article applies in the county], subject to § 16–1902 of this subtitle; AND

(2) § 4–505 (“ALCOHOL AWARENESS PROGRAM”), SUBJECT TO §
16–1904 OF THIS SUBTITLE.

16–1904.

(A) THE HOLDER OF A CLASS B OR CLASS D LICENSE HOLDER OR AN
INDIVIDUAL DESIGNATED BY THE LICENSE HOLDER WHO IS EMPLOYED IN A
SUPERVISORY CAPACITY SHALL BE:

(1) CERTIFIED BY AN APPROVED ALCOHOL AWARENESS PROGRAM;
AND

(2) PRESENT ON THE LICENSED PREMISES DURING THE HOURS IN
WHICH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MAY BE SOLD.

(B) A LICENSE HOLDER WHO VIOLATES THIS SECTION IS SUBJECT TO:

(1) FOR THE FIRST OFFENSE, A $100 FINE; AND

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1045

(2) FOR EACH SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE, A FINE NOT EXCEEDING $500
OR A SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF THE LICENSE OR BOTH.

(C) AT LEAST ONE INDIVIDUAL WHO IS LISTED ON THE LICENSE AS A
LICENSE HOLDER SHALL MAINTAIN A CURRENT CERTIFICATE REFLECTING THE
COMPLETION OF AN ALCOHOL AWARENESS PROGRAM WHILE THE INDIVIDUAL IS
LISTED ON THE LICENSE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3