START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 790

Chapter 790

(Senate Bill 973)

AN ACT concerning

Hospitals – Private Hospital Grant Program – Funding

FOR the purpose of codifying a private hospital grant program for the purpose of making
recommendations to the Governor for funding for capital projects at private hospitals
in the State; requiring the Maryland Hospital ~~Asssociation~~ Association to establish
a certain review committee; authorizing the Governor to include in the capital or
operating budget bill a certain amount of funding in each fiscal year for the Private
Hospital Grant Program; and generally relating to funding for hospitals in the State.

BY adding to
Article – Health – General
Section 19–310.4
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–310.4.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “COMMITTEE” MEANS THE REVIEW COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH SUBSECTION (E) OF THIS SECTION.

(3) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE PRIVATE HOSPITAL GRANT PROGRAM.

(B) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION, THIS
SECTION MAY NOT BE CONSTRUED TO PROHIBIT AN ORGANIZATION FROM
RECEIVING FUNDS FROM A GOVERNMENT SOURCE OTHER THAN THE PRIVATE
HOSPITAL GRANT PROGRAM.

(C) THERE IS A PRIVATE HOSPITAL GRANT PROGRAM.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 790 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(D) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
THE GOVERNOR FOR FUNDING IN THE ANNUAL STATE BUDGET FOR CAPITAL
PROJECTS AT PRIVATE HOSPITALS IN THE STATE.

(E) (1) THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION SHALL ESTABLISH A
REVIEW COMMITTEE TO:

(I) DEVELOP THE PROCESS FOR HOSPITALS IN THE STATE TO
SUBMIT REQUESTS FOR FUNDING IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET;

(II) ESTABLISH ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR A HOSPITAL TO
SUBMIT A REQUEST FOR FUNDING UNDER THE PROGRAM;

(III) ESTABLISH CRITERIA FOR PROJECTS ELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE
FUNDING UNDER THE PROGRAM;

(IV) ESTABLISH DEADLINES FOR THE SUBMISSION OF
REQUESTS FOR FUNDING AND THE DETERMINATION OF PROJECTS RECOMMENDED
FOR FUNDING;

(V) DEVELOP PROJECT SCORING AND SELECTION CRITERIA
GUIDELINES;

(VI) REVIEW ELIGIBLE REQUESTS FOR FUNDING; AND

(VII) MAKE FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROJECTS TO BE
FUNDED IN THE ANNUAL STATE BUDGET.

(2) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE
COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL
REFLECT THE GEOGRAPHIC DIVERSITY OF HOSPITALS IN THE STATE.

(3) THE COMMITTEE SHALL CONSULT WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF
BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT AND THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES
SHALL CONSULT WITH THE COMMITTEE IN:

(I) ESTABLISHING THE PROJECT FUNDING REQUEST PROCESS
UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION; AND

(II) MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FUNDING REQUESTS.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 790

(F) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND
MANAGEMENT, THE COMMITTEE MAY ESTABLISH CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH A
REQUEST FOR FUNDING MAY BE REJECTED FOR CONSIDERATION.

(G) THE MARYLAND HOSPITAL ASSOCIATION SHALL SUBMIT THE
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE TO THE GOVERNOR AND THE SECRETARY
OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT.

(H) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR THEREAFTER, THE
GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE CAPITAL OR OPERATING BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION OF $20,000,000 FOR THE PRIVATE HOSPITAL GRANT PROGRAM.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3