START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

Chapter 497

(Senate Bill 982)

AN ACT concerning

Information Technology – Modernization of Information Technology Projects

FOR the purpose of altering the duties of the Secretary of Information Technology related
to modernization of information technology systems; ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~authority~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~Board~~ ~~of~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Works~~ ~~over~~ ~~certain~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~projects;~~ ~~establishing~~ ~~the~~
~~Information~~ ~~Technology~~ ~~Investment~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~special,~~ ~~nonlapsing~~ ~~fund~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~
~~Technology~~ ~~Investment~~ ~~Board;~~ renaming the Major Information Technology
Development Fund; requiring a certain amount of the Fund to be set aside for certain
projects each fiscal year; requiring the Board of Public Works to expedite the
placement on an agenda and approval of certain contracts; altering the ~~duties~~ name,
duties, and membership of the Modernize Maryland Oversight Commission;
providing for the terms of certain Commission members; and generally relating to
information technology modernization.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section ~~3.5–303(a)(4),~~ ~~3.5–307,~~ ~~3.5–316,~~ ~~and~~ ~~12–101~~ 3.5–201, 3.5–301, 3.5–307,
3.5–308, 3.5–309, and 3.5–316
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Finance and Procurement
Section ~~3.5–309.1~~ ~~and~~ ~~3.5–309.2~~ 12–101(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – State Finance and Procurement

3.5–201.

(A) There is a Department of Information Technology established as a principal
department of State government.

(B) IT SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF § 3.5–302 OF THIS TITLE, IT IS THE
INTENT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT RESPONSIBILITY AND OVERSIGHT OF
THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS FOR UNITS OF STATE GOVERNMENT BE

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

CENTRALIZED AT THE DEPARTMENT AND THAT PRIORITY BE GIVEN TO FUNDING
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS THAT ADDRESS THE ~~GREATEST~~ NEEDS FOR
THE PUBLIC HEALTH, EDUCATION, SAFETY, OR FINANCIAL WELL–BEING OF THE
RESIDENTS OF MARYLAND.

3.5–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) “Cybersecurity” means processes or capabilities wherein systems,
communications, and information are protected and defended against damage,
unauthorized use or modification, and exploitation.

(c) “Cybersecurity strategy” means a vision, a plan of action, or guiding
principles.

(d) (1) “Development” means all expenditures for a new information
technology system or an enhancement to an existing system including system:

(i) planning;

(ii) creation;

(iii) installation;

(iv) testing; and

(v) initial training.

(2) “Development” does not include:

(i) ongoing operating costs, software or hardware maintenance,
routine upgrades, or modifications that merely allow for a continuation of the existing level
of functionality; or

(ii) expenditures made after a new or enhanced system has been
legally accepted by the user and is being used for the business process for which it was
intended.

(e) “EXPEDITED PROJECT” MEANS A PROJECT THAT IS NOT A MAJOR
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT THAT RECEIVES MONEY
FROM THE FUND IN A MANNER THAT ALLOWS FOR MODERNIZATION PROJECTS
CONSISTENT WITH THE STATE MODERNIZATION PLAN TO MOVE FORWARD IN A
NIMBLE AND EXPEDITED MANNER.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(F) “Fund” means the [Major Information Technology Development Project Fund]
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT FUND.

[(f)] (G) “Information technology” means all electronic information processing,
including:

(1) maintenance;

(2) NETWORKING;

(3) telecommunications;

[(3)] (4) hardware;

[(4)] (5) software AND APPLICATIONS; and

[(5)] (6) associated services.

[(g)] (H) “Information technology services” means information provided by
electronic means by or on behalf of a unit of State government.

(I) “LEGACY SYSTEM” MEANS A HARDWARE OR SOFTWARE SYSTEM THAT IS
OUTMODED OR OBSOLETE END OF SUPPORT OR END OF LIFE.

[(h)] (J) (1) “Major information technology development project” means any
information technology development project that meets one or more of the following
criteria:

[(1)] (I) EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS
SUBSECTION, the estimated total cost of development equals or exceeds [$1,000,000]
$5,000,000;

[(2)] (II) the project is undertaken to support a critical business function
associated with the public health, education, safety, or financial well–being of the [citizens]
RESIDENTS of Maryland; or

[(3)] (III) the Secretary determines that the project requires the special
attention and consideration given to a major information technology development project
due to:

[(i)] 1. the significance of the project’s potential benefits or risks;

[(ii)] 2. the impact of the project on the public or local
governments;

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(iii)] 3. the public visibility of the project; or

[(iv)] 4. other reasons as determined by the Secretary.

(2) “MAJOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT”
DOES NOT INCLUDE:

(I) TECHNOLOGY THAT IS REOCCURRING, STANDARD
OPERATING TECHNOLOGY AS DETERMINED BY THE SECRETARY AND SUBMITTED TO
THE LEGISLATIVE POLICY COMMITTEE FOR A 30–DAY REVIEW AND COMMENT
PERIOD; OR

(II) A PROJECT WITH AN ESTIMATED TOTAL COST OF
DEVELOPMENT THAT IS:

1. LESS THAN $5,000,000 AND IS FUNDED WITH MONEY
SET ASIDE FOR EXPEDITED PROJECTS IN THE FUND; OR

2. MORE THAN $5,000,000 AND IS FUNDED WITH THE
MONEY SET ASIDE FOR EXPEDITED PROJECTS IN THE FUND IF THE SECRETARY
DETERMINES THAT:

A. THE UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT HAS SUFFICIENT
IMPLEMENTATION RESOURCES, INCLUDING HUMAN CAPITAL, SUBJECT MATTER
EXPERTISE, AND TECHNOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, OR HAS THE MEANS TO
OBTAIN THESE RESOURCES BEFORE PROJECT INITIATION;

B. THERE IS NO SUFFICIENT ALTERNATIVE WITHIN THE
STATE’S INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVENTORY; AND

C. THE PROJECT WILL RESULT IN A SINGLE,
COMPREHENSIVE SOLUTION DESIGNED TO MEET A COHESIVE SET OF BUSINESS AND
TECHNOLOGICAL OBJECTIVES.

[(i)] (K) “Master plan” means the statewide information technology master plan
and statewide cybersecurity strategy.

[(j)] (L) “Nonvisual access” means the ability, through keyboard control,
synthesized speech, Braille, or other methods not requiring sight to receive, use, and
manipulate information and operate controls necessary to access information technology in
accordance with standards adopted under § 3.5–303(b) of this subtitle.

(M) (1) SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF § 3.5–302 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
“OVERSIGHT” MEANS THE OBLIGATION TO MONITOR, ASSESS, APPROVE, AND

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

~~REPORT~~ ~~ON~~ ~~THE~~ ~~IMPLEMENTATION~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FINANCIAL~~ ~~STATUS~~ ~~OF~~ ~~MAJOR~~
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.

(2) “OVERSIGHT” DOES NOT INCLUDE CONTINUED PROJECT OR
~~PROGRAM~~ ~~MANAGEMENT~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~OR~~ ~~RESPONSIBILITY~~ ~~OVER~~ ~~PROJECT~~ ~~ACTIVITIES~~
OF A SUCCESSFULLY IMPLEMENTED PROJECT AS DELEGATED BY THE SECRETARY
TO A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT UNDER § 3.5–308(E)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

[(k)] (N) (M) “Resource sharing” means the utilization of a State resource by
private industry in exchange for the provision to the State of a communication service or
other consideration.

(O) (N) “STATE MODERNIZATION PLAN” MEANS THE PLAN DEVELOPED
AND ADOPTED BY THE SECRETARY TO MODERNIZE STATE INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY.

[(l)] (P) (O) “Systems development life cycle plan” means a plan that defines all
actions, functions, or activities to be performed by a unit of State government in the
definition, planning, acquisition, development, testing, implementation, operation,
enhancement, and modification of information technology systems.

~~3.5–303.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Secretary~~ ~~is~~ ~~responsible~~ ~~for~~ ~~carrying~~ ~~out~~ ~~the~~ ~~following~~ ~~duties:~~

~~(4)~~ ~~developing~~ ~~and~~ ~~maintaining~~ ~~a~~ ~~statewide~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~master~~
~~plan~~ ~~that~~ ~~will:~~

(i) IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MODERNIZE MARYLAND
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION ESTABLISHED UNDER § 3.5–316 OF THIS SUBTITLE,
~~centralize~~ ~~the~~ ~~management~~ ~~and~~ ~~direction~~ ~~of~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~policy~~ ~~within~~ ~~the~~
~~Executive~~ ~~Branch~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~government~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~control~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~include~~ ~~all~~ ~~aspects~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~including~~
~~telecommunications,~~ ~~security,~~ ~~data~~ ~~processing,~~ ~~and~~ ~~information~~ ~~management;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~consider~~ ~~interstate~~ ~~transfers~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~result~~ ~~of~~ ~~federal~~ ~~legislation~~ ~~and~~
~~regulation;~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~ensure~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~plan~~ ~~and~~ ~~related~~
~~policies~~ ~~and~~ ~~standards~~ ~~are~~ ~~consistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~State~~ ~~goals,~~ ~~objectives,~~ ~~and~~ ~~resources,~~ ~~and~~
~~represent~~ ~~a~~ ~~long–range~~ ~~vision~~ ~~for~~ ~~using~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~to~~ ~~improve~~ ~~the~~ ~~overall~~
~~effectiveness~~ ~~of~~ ~~State~~ ~~government;~~

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(v)~~ ~~include~~ ~~standards~~ ~~to~~ ~~assure~~ ~~nonvisual~~ ~~access~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~information~~
~~and~~ ~~services~~ ~~made~~ ~~available~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~public~~ ~~over~~ ~~the~~ ~~Internet;~~ ~~and~~

~~(vi)~~ ~~allows~~ ~~a~~ ~~State~~ ~~agency~~ ~~to~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~the~~ ~~agency’s~~ ~~own~~ ~~information~~
~~technology~~ ~~unit~~ ~~that~~ ~~provides~~ ~~for~~ ~~information~~ ~~technology~~ ~~services~~ ~~to~~ ~~support~~ ~~the~~ ~~mission~~ ~~of~~
~~the~~ ~~agency;~~

3.5–307.

(a) (1) A unit of State government may not purchase, lease, or rent information
technology unless consistent with the master plan, AS DETERMINED BY THE
SECRETARY.

(2) A unit of State government other than a public institution of higher
education may not make expenditures for major information technology development
projects or cybersecurity projects except as provided in § 3.5–308 of this subtitle.

(b) The Secretary may review any information technology project or cybersecurity
project for consistency with the master plan.

(c) (1) A unit of State government shall advise the Secretary of any
information technology proposal involving:

(i) resource sharing;

(ii) the exchange of goods or services;

(iii) a gift, contribution, or grant of real or personal property; or

(iv) the sale, lease, exchange, or other disposition of communications
facilities or communications frequencies.

(2) The Secretary shall determine if the value of the resources, services,
property, or other consideration to be obtained by the State under the terms of any proposal
submitted in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subsection equals or exceeds $100,000.

(3) If the value of any proposal submitted in accordance with this
subsection equals or exceeds $100,000 and the Secretary and unit agree to proceed with the
proposal, information on the proposal shall be:

(i) advertised for a period of at least 30 days in the eMaryland
Marketplace; and

(ii) submitted, simultaneously with the advertisement, to the
Legislative Policy Committee for a 60–day review and comment period, during which time

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

the Committee may recommend that the proposal be treated as a procurement contract
under Division II of this article.

(4) (I) [Following] EXCEPT AS PROVIDED IN SUBJECT TO
SUBPARAGRAPH (II) OF THIS PARAGRAPH, FOLLOWING the period for review and
comment by the Legislative Policy Committee under paragraph (3) of this subsection, the
proposal is subject to approval by the Board of Public Works.

(II) A PROPOSAL CONTRACT TO MODERNIZE AN INFORMATION
~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~SYSTEM~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~IS~~ ~~AN~~ ~~EXPEDITED~~ ~~PROJECT~~ ~~FUNDED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~MONEY~~ ~~SET~~
ASIDE FOR EXPEDITED PROJECTS IN THE FUND SHALL BE EXEMPT FROM
EXPEDITED FOR APPROVAL BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AS PROVIDED IN §
12–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(5) This subsection may not be construed as authorizing an exception from
the requirements of Division II of this article for any contract that otherwise would be
subject to the State procurement process.

(6) (D) (1) THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES, IN
CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES, SHALL HIRE A
~~CONTRACTOR~~ CONSULTANT TO ASSESS THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS FOR
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS INVOLVING MODERNIZATION AND MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS TO INCREASE THE STATE’S ABILITY TO PROCEED WITH A
MODERNIZATION PROJECT IN A RAPID AND RESPONSIVE MANNER.

(7) (2) (I) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY JULY 1, 2025, THE
DEPARTMENT SHALL INVENTORY AND ASSESS THE STATE’S LEGACY SYSTEMS AND
PRIORITIZE MODERNIZATION.

(II) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2026, AND EACH EVERY OTHER
JANUARY 1 THEREAFTER, THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH EACH UNIT
OF STATE GOVERNMENT, SHALL SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR, THE
SECRETARY, AND, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT
ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY THAT PROVIDES:

1. AN ESTIMATE OF THE FUNDING REQUIRED TO
MODERNIZE EACH LEGACY SYSTEM IN THE UNIT; AND

2. A 5–YEAR PROJECTION OF FUNDING REQUIRED TO
MODERNIZE EACH LEGACY SYSTEM.

3.5–308.

(a) This section does not apply to a public institution of higher education.

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) [In] BEFORE submitting its information technology project requests, a unit
of State government shall [designate projects which are major information technology
development projects] SUBMIT INFORMATION IN SUPPORT OF THE REQUEST
REQUIRED BY THE SECRETARY FOR REVIEW AND DETERMINATION CONSISTENT
WITH § 3.5–301(J) OF THIS SUBTITLE.

(c) In reviewing information technology project requests, the Secretary may
change a unit’s designation of a major information technology development project.

(d) The Secretary shall review and, with the advice of the Secretary of Budget and
Management, approve major information technology development projects and
specifications for consistency with all statewide plans, policies, and standards, including a
systems development life cycle plan.

(e) (1) The Secretary shall be responsible for [overseeing] THE OVERSIGHT
OF the implementation of major information technology development projects AND
EXPEDITED PROJECTS, regardless of fund source.

(2) (I) THE SECRETARY MAY DELEGATE OVERSIGHT OF A
SUCCESSFULLY IMPLEMENTED PROJECT TO A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT IF THE
SECRETARY DETERMINES THE UNIT HAS THE INTERNAL CAPACITY, INCLUDING
HUMAN CAPITAL, SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTISE, AND TECHNICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE, TO ADEQUATELY SUPPORT CONTINUED PROJECT AND PROGRAM
MANAGEMENT AND RESPONSIBILITY OVER PROGRAM ACTIVITIES.

(II) THE SECRETARY, INDEPENDENT OF THE REQUIRED
OVERSIGHT, MAY PROVIDE SUPPORT, INCLUDING DESIGN, ENGINEERING, AND
PRODUCT SUPPORT, TO A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT.

(III) THE SECRETARY MAY REVOKE THE DELEGATION UNDER
SUBPARAGRAPH (I) OF THIS PARAGRAPH IF THE SECRETARY DETERMINES A UNIT
~~NO~~ ~~LONGER~~ ~~HAS~~ ~~THE~~ ~~CAPACITY~~ ~~TO~~ ~~ADEQUATELY~~ ~~SUPPORT~~ ~~CONTINUED~~ ~~PROJECT~~ ~~OR~~
PROGRAM MANAGEMENT OR RESPONSIBILITY OVER PROGRAM ACTIVITIES.

(f) (1) With the advice of the Secretary of Budget and Management,
expenditures for major information technology development projects shall be subject to the
approval of the Secretary who shall approve expenditures only when those projects are
consistent with statewide plans, policies, and standards.

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL MAKE A RECOMMENDATION TO THE
SECRETARY OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT THAT PROJECT FUNDS, REGARDLESS OF
FUND SOURCE, BE WITHHELD IF:

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(I) A UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT IS NOT CONSISTENTLY
REPORTING ON THE STATUS OF A PROJECT OR PROJECTS TO THE DEPARTMENT IN
THE FORM AND MANNER REQUIRED BY THE DEPARTMENT; OR

(II) THE DEPARTMENT DETERMINES THAT PROJECT
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES EXIST, INCLUDING PROJECT TIMELINE DELAYS,
SIGNIFICANT COST INCREASES, VENDOR NONPERFORMANCE, DECREASED AGENCY
CAPACITY, OR OTHER ISSUES THAT INDICATE ISSUES OF CONCERN THAT COULD
JEOPARDIZE SUCCESSFUL IMPLEMENTATION.

(g) (1) The Secretary shall approve funding for major information technology
development projects, EXPEDITED PROJECTS, AND OTHER EXPENDITURES FROM THE
FUND only when [those]:

(I) THE MAJOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
PROJECTS OR THE EXPEDITED PROJECTS ARE IN COMPLIANCE WITH STATEWIDE
PLANS, POLICIES, AND STANDARDS, AS DETERMINED BY THE SECRETARY; AND

(II) THE MAJOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
projects are supported by an approved systems development life cycle plan.

(2) An approved systems development life cycle plan shall include
submission of:

(i) a project planning request that details initial planning for the
project, including:

1. the project title, appropriation code, and summary;

2. a description of:

A. the [needs addressed by the project] BUSINESS AND
TECHNOLOGY OUTCOMES TO BE ACHIEVED BY THE PROJECT;

B. THE FEATURES AVAILABLE TO THE END USER ON
COMPLETION, INCLUDING USER ACCEPTANCE TESTING AND ACCESSIBILITY PLANS;

C. the potential risks associated with the project;

[C.] D. possible alternatives; and

[D.] E. the scope and complexity of the project; and

3. an estimate of:

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

A. the total costs required to complete through planning; and

B. the fund sources available to support planning costs; and

(ii) a project implementation request to begin full design,
development, and implementation of the project after the completion of planning, including:

1. the project title, appropriation code, and summary;

2. a description of:

A. the [needs addressed by the project] BUSINESS AND
TECHNOLOGY OUTCOMES TO BE ACHIEVED BY THE PROJECT AND THE METRICS BY
WHICH THE SUCCESS OF THOSE OUTCOMES WILL BE MEASURED;

B. THE FEATURES AVAILABLE TO THE END USER ON
COMPLETION, INCLUDING USER ACCEPTANCE TESTING AND ACCESSIBILITY PLANS;

C. the potential risks associated with the project;

[C.] D. possible alternatives;

[D.] E. the scope and complexity of the project; and

[E.] F. how the project meets the goals of the statewide
master plan; and

3. an estimate of:

A. the total project cost, BY PHASE; and

B. the fund sources [available] TO BE UTILIZED.

(3) The Secretary may approve funding incrementally, consistent with the
systems development life cycle plan.

(H) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE MODERNIZE
MARYLAND COMMISSION ESTABLISHED UNDER § 3.5–316 OF THIS ARTICLE
SUBTITLE, SHALL:

(1) DEVELOP STANDARDS FOR UNITS OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO
ASSIST IN IDENTIFYING LEGACY SYSTEMS THAT REQUIRE MODERNIZATION
PROJECTS APPROPRIATE TO BE FINANCED AS AN EXPEDITED PROJECT THROUGH
THE FUND;

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(2) ADOPT AN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT MATURITY
MODEL THAT INCLUDES:

(I) CRITERIA TO INFORM AND PRIORITIZE INVESTMENT
DECISIONS;

(II) PROCESSES TO DEVELOP THE INFORMATION REQUIRED TO
EVALUATE INVESTMENT PROPOSALS AGAINST THE CRITERIA UNDER ITEM (I) OF
THIS ITEM; AND

(III) MANAGEMENT PROCESSES TO MONITOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF APPROVED MODERNIZATION PROJECTS; AND

(3) DEVELOP A STATE MODERNIZATION PLAN.

3.5–309.

(a) There is [a Major Information Technology Development Project Fund] AN
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT FUND.

(b) The purpose of the Fund is to support major information technology
development projects AND EXPEDITED PROJECTS.

(c) The Secretary:

(1) shall administer the Fund in accordance with this section; and

(2) subject to the provisions of § 2–201 of this article and § 3.5–307 of this
subtitle, may receive and accept contributions, grants, or gifts of money or property.

(d) (1) The Fund is a special, nonlapsing fund that is not subject to § 7–302 of
this article.

(2) The State Treasurer shall hold the Fund separately and the
Comptroller shall account for the Fund.

(3) The State Treasurer shall invest and reinvest the money of the Fund in
the same manner as other State money may be invested.

(4) Any investment earnings of the Fund shall be paid into the Fund.

(e) Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, the Fund consists of:

(1) money appropriated in the State budget to the Fund;

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) as approved by the Secretary, money received from:

(i) the sale, lease, or exchange of communication sites,
communication facilities, or communication frequencies for information technology
purposes; or

(ii) an information technology agreement involving resource
sharing;

(3) that portion of money earned from pay phone commissions to the extent
that the commission rates exceed those in effect in December 1993;

(4) money received and accepted as contributions, grants, or gifts as
authorized under subsection (c) of this section;

(5) general funds appropriated for major information technology
development projects of any unit of State government other than a public institution of
higher education that:

(i) are unencumbered and unexpended at the end of a fiscal year;

(ii) have been abandoned; or

(iii) have been withheld by the General Assembly or the Secretary;

(6) any investment earnings; and

(7) any other money from any source accepted for the benefit of the Fund.

(f) The Fund does not include any money:

(1) received by the Department of Transportation, the Maryland
Transportation Authority, Baltimore City Community College, or the Maryland Public
Broadcasting Commission;

(2) received by the Judicial or Legislative branches of State government; or

(3) generated from pay phone commissions that are credited to other
accounts or funds in accordance with other provisions of law or are authorized for other
purposes in the State budget or through an approved budget amendment.

(g) The Governor shall submit with the State budget:

(1) a summary showing the unencumbered balance in the Fund as of the
close of the prior fiscal year and a listing of any encumbrances;

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(2) an estimate of projected revenue from each of the sources specified in
subsection (e) of this section for the fiscal year for which the State budget is submitted;
[and]

(3) a descriptive listing of MAJOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPMENT projects reflecting projected costs for the fiscal year for which the State
budget is submitted and any estimated future year costs; AND

(4) THE AMOUNT PROPOSED TO BE SET ASIDE FOR EXPEDITED
PROJECTS.

(h) Expenditures from the Fund shall be made only:

(1) in accordance with an appropriation approved by the General Assembly
in the annual State budget; [or]

(2) through an approved State budget amendment under Title 7, Subtitle
2, Part II of this article, provided that a State budget amendment for any project not
requested as part of the State budget submission or for any project for which the scope or
cost has increased by more than 5% or $250,000 shall be submitted to the budget
committees allowing a 30–day period for their review and comment; OR

(3) FOR EXPEDITED PROJECT CONTRACTS APPROVED FOR FUNDING
BY THE SECRETARY AND APPROVED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS AS
PROVIDED IN § 12–101 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(i) The Fund may be used:

(1) for major information technology development projects;

(2) as provided in subsections (j) and [(l)] (M) of this section; [or]

(3) notwithstanding § 3.5–301(b)(2) of this subtitle, for the costs of the first
12 months of operation and maintenance of a major information technology development
project;

(4) FOR EXPEDITED PROJECTS; OR

(5) FOR MAJOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
PROJECTS AND EXPEDITED PROJECTS THROUGH A REVOLVING LOAN PROCESS
THROUGH WHICH AN AGENCY MAY REIMBURSE THE FUND IN FUTURE FISCAL YEARS
AS ESTABLISHED BY THE SECRETARY IN REGULATION.

(j) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section and except for the cost incurred
in administering the Fund, each fiscal year up to $1,000,000 of this Fund may be used for:

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) educationally related information technology projects;

(2) application service provider initiatives as provided for in Title 9,
Subtitle 22 of the State Government Article; or

(3) information technology projects, including:

(i) pilots; and

(ii) prototypes.

(k) A unit of State government or local government may submit a request to the
Secretary to support the cost of an information technology project with money under
subsection (j) of this section.

(L) (1) EACH FISCAL YEAR, AT LEAST 20% OF THE AMOUNT INCLUDED IN
THE GOVERNOR’S ALLOWANCE AND APPROPRIATED TO THE FUND SHALL BE SET
ASIDE TO BE USED FOR EXPEDITED PROJECTS.

(2) ANY AMOUNT SET ASIDE UNDER PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS
SUBSECTION THAT IS NOT USED IN THE FISCAL YEAR THAT IT IS SET ASIDE SHALL
REMAIN SET ASIDE IN THE FUND AND AVAILABLE TO BE USED FOR FUTURE
EXPEDITED PROJECTS.

[(l)] (M) (1) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section and in accordance
with paragraph (2) of this subsection, money paid into the Fund under subsection (e)(2) of
this section shall be used to support:

(i) the State telecommunication and computer network established
under § 3.5–404 of this title, including program development for these activities; and

(ii) the Statewide Public Safety Interoperability Radio System, also
known as Maryland First (first responder interoperable radio system team), under Title 1,
Subtitle 5 of the Public Safety Article.

(2) The Secretary may determine the portion of the money paid into the
Fund that shall be allocated to each program described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.

[(m)] (N) (1) On or before November 1 of each year, the Secretary shall report
to the Governor[,] AND the Secretary of Budget and Management[, and to the budget
committees of the General Assembly and submit a copy of the report to the General
Assembly,] AND, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, TO THE
SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE, THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON
EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT, THE HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE,
AND THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,
AND BIOTECHNOLOGY.

(2) The report shall include:

(i) the financial status of the Fund and a summary of its operations
for the preceding fiscal year;

(ii) an accounting for the preceding fiscal year of all money from each
of the revenue sources specified in subsection (e) of this section, including any expenditures
made from the Fund; and

(iii) for each project receiving money from the Fund in the preceding
fiscal year and for each major information technology development project OR EXPEDITED
PROJECT receiving funding from any source other than the Fund in the preceding fiscal
year:

1. the status of the project AND PROJECT FUNDING
DECISIONS;

2. a comparison of estimated and actual costs of the project;

3. any known or anticipated changes in scope or costs of the
project;

4. an evaluation of whether the project is using best
practices; and

5. a summary of any monitoring and oversight of the project
from outside the agency in which the project is being developed, including a description of
any problems identified by any external review and any corrective actions taken.

[(n)] (O) On or before January 15 of each year, for each major information
technology development project OR EXPEDITED PROJECT currently in development or for
which operations and maintenance funding is being provided in accordance with subsection
(i)(3) of this section, subject to § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the Secretary
shall provide a summary report to the Department of Legislative Services with the most
up–to–date project information including:

(1) project FUNDING DECISIONS AND PROJECT status;

(2) any schedule, cost, and scope changes since the last annual report;

(3) a risk assessment including any problems identified by any internal or
external review and any corrective actions taken; and
– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(4) any change in the monitoring or oversight status.

(P) (1) THE SECRETARY MAY ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO
CARRY OUT THIS SECTION.

(2) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADOPT REGULATIONS NECESSARY TO
ESTABLISH A PROCESS FOR UNITS OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO REQUEST AND
RECEIVE FUNDING FOR AN EXPEDITED PROJECT ALIGNED WITH THE STATE
MODERNIZATION PLAN THAT SHALL:

(I) ALLOW UNITS OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO APPLY FOR
PROJECT FUNDING BIANNUALLY;

(II) BE CONSISTENT WITH THE GOALS AND PREFERENCES
ESTABLISHED UNDER TITLE 14 OF THIS ARTICLE AND ENCOURAGE SMALL AND
MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE VENDORS; AND

(III) PROVIDE MEASURES THAT ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
SUBTITLE AND THE DEPARTMENT’S REGULATIONS BY BOTH VENDORS AND UNITS OF
STATE GOVERNMENT.

~~3.5–309.1.~~

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
~~INDICATED.~~

(2) “FUND” MEANS THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT
~~FUND.~~

(3) “LEGACY SYSTEM” MEANS A HARDWARE OR SOFTWARE SYSTEM
THAT IS OUTMODED OR OBSOLETE.

(B) THERE IS AN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT FUND.

(C) (1) THE PURPOSE OF THE FUND IS TO ASSESS AND REPLACE LEGACY
~~SYSTEMS.~~

(2) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL HIRE A CONSULTANT TO ASSESS A
LEGACY SYSTEM, PRIORITIZED BASED ON THE SECURITY RISK OF THE SYSTEM.

(D) THE SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE FUND.

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(E) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH EACH UNIT OF STATE
GOVERNMENT, SHALL DETERMINE THE FUNDING REQUIRED TO ASSESS EACH
LEGACY SYSTEM IN THE UNIT AND A 5–YEAR PROJECTION OF FUNDING REQUIRED
TO MODERNIZE THE LEGACY SYSTEM.

(F) (1) THE FUND IS A SPECIAL, NONLAPSING FUND THAT IS NOT
SUBJECT TO § 7–302 OF THIS ARTICLE.

(2) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL HOLD THE FUND SEPARATELY,
AND THE COMPTROLLER SHALL ACCOUNT FOR THE FUND.

(G) THE FUND CONSISTS OF:

(1) TO THE EXTENT PRACTICABLE, MONEY RECEIVED FROM THE SALE
OF STATE GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS; AND

(2) MONEY APPROPRIATED IN THE STATE BUDGET TO THE FUND.

(H) THE FUND MAY BE USED FOR LEGACY SYSTEM ASSESSMENTS AND
~~REPLACEMENTS.~~

(I) (1) THE STATE TREASURER SHALL INVEST THE MONEY OF THE FUND
IN THE SAME MANNER AS OTHER STATE MONEY MAY BE INVESTED.

(2) ANY INTEREST EARNINGS OF THE FUND SHALL BE CREDITED TO
THE GENERAL FUND OF THE STATE.

(J) EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND MAY BE MADE ONLY IN ACCORDANCE
WITH THE STATE BUDGET.

(K) (1) BEGINNING IN FISCAL YEAR 2026 AND EACH FISCAL YEAR
THEREAFTER, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN
APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND ALIGNED WITH THE STATE MODERNIZATION PLAN.

(2) IN FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE APPROPRIATION MADE UNDER
PARAGRAPH (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION SHALL BE GREATER THAN THE
DEPARTMENT’S BUDGET FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025 FOR MAJOR INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.

(L) ON OR BEFORE JANUARY 1, 2028, THE DEPARTMENT SHALL:

(1) ESTABLISH A PROCESS THROUGH WHICH THE PROCESS TO ASSESS
~~AND~~ ~~REPLACE~~ ~~LEGACY~~ ~~SYSTEMS~~ ~~IS~~ ~~REPLACED~~ ~~WITH~~ ~~THE~~ ~~PROCESS~~ ~~FOR~~ ~~APPROVING~~
~~AND~~ ~~REVIEWING~~ ~~MAJOR~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~PROJECTS~~
– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

UNDER § 3.5–308 OF THIS SUBTITLE, INCLUDING GUARDRAILS TO ENSURE
COMPLIANCE WITH THE PROCESS; AND

(2) SUBMIT A REPORT TO THE GOVERNOR AND, IN ACCORDANCE
WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
ON THE PROCESS ESTABLISHED UNDER ITEM (1) OF THIS SUBSECTION.

~~3.5–309.2.~~

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “BOARD” MEANS THE TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT
~~BOARD.~~

(B) THERE IS A TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT BOARD IN THE DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE BOARD CONSISTS OF:

(1) THE SECRETARY, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) THE COMPTROLLER, OR THE COMPTROLLER’S DESIGNEE;

(3) THE STATE TREASURER, OR THE STATE TREASURER’S DESIGNEE;

(4) THE GOVERNOR, OR THE GOVERNOR’S DESIGNEE;

(5) A MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR; AND

(6) ANY OTHER MEMBERS THE GOVERNOR DETERMINES ARE
~~APPROPRIATE.~~

(D) THE SECRETARY OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE SHALL SERVE AS
CHAIR OF THE BOARD.

(E) THE DEPARTMENT SHALL PROVIDE STAFF FOR THE BOARD.

~~(F)~~ ~~THE~~ ~~BOARD~~ ~~SHALL:~~

(1) DEVELOP ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE STANDARDS FOR UNITS
OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO ASSIST IN IDENTIFYING LEGACY SYSTEMS THAT
REQUIRE MODERNIZATION;

(2) BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2028, EVALUATE AND APPROVE ALL
~~MAJOR~~ ~~INFORMATION~~ ~~TECHNOLOGY~~ ~~DEVELOPMENT~~ ~~PROJECTS~~ ~~INVOLVING~~ ~~THE~~
MODERNIZATION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND LEGACY SYSTEMS; AND

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(3) ADOPT AN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INVESTMENT MATURITY
MODEL THAT INCLUDES:

(I) CRITERIA TO INFORM INVESTMENT DECISIONS;

(II) PROCESSES TO DEVELOP THE INFORMATION REQUIRED TO
EVALUATE INVESTMENT PROPOSALS AGAINST THE CRITERIA UNDER ITEM (I) OF
THIS ITEM; AND

(III) MANAGEMENT PROCESSES TO MONITOR THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF APPROVED MODERNIZATION PROJECTS.

(G) ON OR BEFORE DECEMBER 1 EACH YEAR, THE BOARD SHALL REPORT
FUNDING DECISIONS MADE UNDER SUBSECTION (F) OF THIS SECTION TO THE
BOARD OF PUBLIC WORKS.

3.5–316.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Commission” means the Modernize Maryland ~~Oversight~~ Commission.

(3) “Critical system” means an information technology or cybersecurity
system that is severely outdated, as determined by the Department.

(4) “LEGACY SYSTEM” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 3.5–309.1 OF
THIS SUBTITLE.

(b) There is an independent Modernize Maryland ~~Oversight~~ Commission.

(c) The purpose of the Commission is to[:

(1) ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information
held by the State concerning State residents; and

(2) advise the Secretary and State Chief Information Security Officer on:

(i) the appropriate information technology and cybersecurity
investments and upgrades;

(ii) the funding sources for the appropriate information technology
and cybersecurity upgrades; and

(iii) future mechanisms for the procurement of appropriate
information technology and cybersecurity upgrades, including ways to increase the

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

efficiency of procurements made for information technology and cybersecurity upgrades]
~~ENSURE~~ RECOMMEND BEST PRACTICES RELATED TO THE MODERNIZATION AND THE
REPLACEMENT OF LEGACY SYSTEMS.

(d) The Commission consists of the following members:

(1) the Secretary, OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE;

(2) the State Chief Information Security Officer, OR THE CHIEF
INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER’S DESIGNEE;

(3) three chief information security officers representing different units of
State government, appointed by the Governor;

(4) one information technology modernization expert with experience in
the private sector, appointed by the Governor;

(5) one representative from RECOMMENDED BY the Maryland Chamber
of Commerce with knowledge of cybersecurity issues, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR;

(6) two individuals who are end users of State information technology
systems, appointed by the Governor;

(7) one representative from RECOMMENDED BY the Cybersecurity
Association of Maryland, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR; [and]

(8) one individual who is either an instructor or a professional in the
academic field of cybersecurity at a college or university in the State, appointed by the
Governor; AND

(9) ONE EMPLOYEE OF THE OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AUDITS,
APPOINTED BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR ONE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY, APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNOR.

(e) The cochairs of the Joint Committee on Cybersecurity, Information
Technology, and Biotechnology shall serve as advisory, nonvoting members of the
Commission.

(F) THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND GLOBAL CAMPUS SHALL STAFF THE
~~COMMISSION.~~

(F) A MEMBER OF THE COMMISSION:

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(1) MAY NOT RECEIVE COMPENSATION AS A MEMBER OF THE
COMMISSION; BUT

(2) IS ENTITLED TO REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES UNDER THE
STANDARD STATE TRAVEL REGULATIONS, AS PROVIDED IN THE STATE BUDGET.

(G) (1) THE TERM OF AN APPOINTED MEMBER IS 3 YEARS.

(2) THE TERMS OF MEMBERS ARE STAGGERED AS REQUIRED BY THE
TERMS PROVIDED FOR MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION ON JULY 1, 2024.

(3) AT THE END OF A TERM, A MEMBER CONTINUES TO SERVE UNTIL
A SUCCESSOR IS APPOINTED AND QUALIFIES.

(H) (1) THE DEPARTMENT, IN CONSULTATION WITH THE DEPARTMENT
OF LEGISLATIVE SERVICES, SHALL PROVIDE STAFF TO THE COMMISSION.

(2) THE SECRETARY OR THE SECRETARY’S DESIGNEE IS THE CHAIR
OF THE COMMISSION.

[(f)] (G) (I) The Commission shall:

[(1) advise the Secretary on a strategic roadmap with a timeline and budget
that will:

(i) require the updates and investments of critical information
technology and cybersecurity systems identified by the Commission in the first
recommendations reported under paragraph (2) of this subsection to be completed on or
before December 31, 2025; and

(ii) require all updates and investments of information technology
and cybersecurity to be made on or before December 31, 2030;

(2) make periodic recommendations on investments in State information
technology structures based on the assessments completed in accordance with the
framework developed in § 3.5–317 of this subtitle;

(3) review and provide recommendations on the Department’s basic
security standards for use of the network established under § 3.5–404(b) of this title; and

(4) each year, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
report its findings and recommendations to the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee,
the Senate Education, Health, and Environmental Affairs Committee, the House
Appropriations Committee, the House Health and Government Operations Committee, and
the Joint Committee on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Biotechnology.]

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) IDENTIFY BEST PRACTICES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
MODERNIZATION AND THE REPLACEMENT OF LEGACY SYSTEMS;

(2) PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MODERNIZATION OF
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS TO EACH UNIT OF STATE GOVERNMENT THE
GOVERNOR, THE SECRETARY, AND THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY;

(3) PROVIDE RECOMMENDATIONS TO PROMOTE TRANSPARENCY IN
MODERNIZATION EFFORTS IN UNITS OF STATE GOVERNMENT; AND

(4) EACH YEAR, IN ACCORDANCE WITH § 2–1257 OF THE STATE
GOVERNMENT ARTICLE, REPORT ITS FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE
GOVERNOR, THE SECRETARY, THE SENATE BUDGET AND TAXATION COMMITTEE,
THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, ENERGY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT, THE
HOUSE APPROPRIATIONS COMMITTEE, THE HOUSE HEALTH AND GOVERNMENT
OPERATIONS COMMITTEE, AND THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY,
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, AND BIOTECHNOLOGY.

[(g)] (H) (J) The report submitted under subsection [(f)(4)] (G)(4) (I)(4) of this
section may not contain information about the security of an information system.

~~12–101.~~

(a) (1) This section does not apply to:

[(1)] (I) capital expenditures by the Department of Transportation or the
~~Maryland~~ ~~Transportation~~ ~~Authority,~~ ~~in~~ ~~connection~~ ~~with~~ ~~State~~ ~~roads,~~ ~~bridges,~~ ~~or~~ ~~highways,~~
as provided in § 12–202 of this title; [or]

[(2)] (II) procurements by the Department of General Services for the
purpose of modernizing cybersecurity infrastructure for the State valued below $1,000,000;
~~OR~~

(III) PROCUREMENTS BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY TO MODERNIZE AN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM.

(2) THE AMOUNT IN PARAGRAPH (1)(II) OF THIS SUBSECTION MAY BE
ADJUSTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EACH YEAR FOR
~~INFLATION.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~(1)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Board~~ ~~may~~ ~~control~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~by~~ ~~units.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~To~~ ~~implement~~ ~~the~~ ~~provisions~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~Division~~ ~~II,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~may:~~

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

~~(i)~~ ~~set~~ ~~policy;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~adopt~~ ~~regulations,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~Title~~ ~~10,~~ ~~Subtitle~~ ~~1~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~
~~State~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Article;~~ ~~and~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~establish~~ ~~internal~~ ~~operational~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~consistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~this~~
~~Division~~ ~~II.~~

~~(3)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~ensure~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~
~~procurement~~ ~~units~~ ~~provide~~ ~~for~~ ~~procedures~~ ~~that~~ ~~are~~ ~~consistent~~ ~~with~~ ~~this~~ ~~Division~~ ~~II~~ ~~and~~ ~~Title~~
~~13,~~ ~~Subtitle~~ ~~4~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~Personnel~~ ~~and~~ ~~Pensions~~ ~~Article~~ ~~and,~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~extent~~ ~~the~~
~~circumstances~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~particular~~ ~~type~~ ~~of~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~or~~ ~~a~~ ~~particular~~ ~~unit~~ ~~do~~ ~~not~~ ~~require~~
~~otherwise,~~ ~~are~~ ~~substantially~~ ~~the~~ ~~same.~~

~~(4)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Board~~ ~~may~~ ~~delegate~~ ~~any~~ ~~of~~ ~~its~~ ~~authority~~ ~~that~~ ~~it~~ ~~determines~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~
~~appropriate~~ ~~for~~ ~~delegation~~ ~~and~~ ~~may~~ ~~require~~ ~~prior~~ ~~Board~~ ~~approval~~ ~~for~~ ~~specified~~ ~~procurement~~
~~actions.~~

~~(5)~~ ~~Except~~ ~~as~~ ~~limited~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Constitution,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~may~~
~~exercise~~ ~~any~~ ~~control~~ ~~authority~~ ~~conferred~~ ~~on~~ ~~a~~ ~~primary~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~unit~~ ~~by~~ ~~this~~ ~~Division~~ ~~II~~
~~and,~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~extent~~ ~~that~~ ~~its~~ ~~action~~ ~~conflicts~~ ~~with~~ ~~the~~ ~~action~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~primary~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~unit,~~
~~the~~ ~~action~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~shall~~ ~~prevail.~~

~~(c)~~ ~~On~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~December~~ ~~1~~ ~~each~~ ~~year,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~General~~ ~~Services~~ ~~shall~~
~~submit~~ ~~a~~ ~~report~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Board~~ ~~on~~ ~~procurements~~ ~~made~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(a)(2)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~
~~that~~ ~~shall~~ ~~include~~ ~~for~~ ~~each~~ ~~procurement:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~purpose~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~procurement;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~name~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~contractor;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~the~~ ~~contract~~ ~~amount;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~the~~ ~~method~~ ~~of~~ ~~procurement~~ ~~utilized;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~the~~ ~~number~~ ~~of~~ ~~bidders~~ ~~who~~ ~~bid~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~procurement;~~ ~~and~~

~~(6)~~ ~~the~~ ~~contract~~ ~~term.~~

12–101.

(D) A CONTRACT TO MODERNIZE AN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM
OR TO PROCEED WITH AN EXPEDITED PROJECT AS DEFINED IN § 3.5–101 3.5–301 OF
THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE EXPEDITED FOR APPROVAL BY THE BOARD AND PLACED ON
THE AGENDA OF THE BOARD AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE.

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 497 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That on or before December 1, ~~2024~~
2025, the Secretary of Information Technology shall:

(1) develop a State Modernization Plan that includes:

(i) identification of technical debt and legacy systems including
their criticality, complexity, and risk to the State;

(ii) designation of priority systems and applications for
modernization including rehosting, rebuilding, replacing, or retiring;

(iii) in consultation with the Comptroller, specific recommendations
for a process to remove State agencies from the Annapolis Data Center mainframes ~~and~~
~~the~~ ~~development~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~sunset~~ ~~goal~~ consistent with the January 1, 2029, sunset goal of the
Comptroller; ~~and~~

(iv) high level timeframe and cost estimates;

(v) identification of funding sources for the appropriate information
technology and cybersecurity upgrades; and

(vi) plans to train and uptrain existing employees to be able to fully
utilize technology as part of a modernization project.

(2) develop a strategy for centralization of information technology
management across the Executive Branch of State government under the Department of
Information Technology; ~~and~~

(3) identify positions in the Department of Information Technology that
would be suitable for independent salary setting authority or greater flexibility in position
classification to ensure the Department can recruit and retain the necessary staff to meet
the mission of the Department; and

(4) submit the strategic plan and centralization strategy to the Governor
and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article, the General Assembly.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, beginning in fiscal year 2026,
the Governor shall include in the annual budget bill two position identification numbers
and an appropriation in an amount sufficient to create two positions within the Department
of Information Technology to carry out duties as follows:

(1) one shall assist in administering the process for units of State
government to apply for expedited projects under this Act; and

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24

START OF PAGE 25
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 497

(2) one position shall be a grants administrator responsible for aggressively
seeking all possible federal or private grant funding to support major information
technology projects or expedited projects under this Act.

~~SECTION~~ ~~4.~~ ~~AND~~ ~~BE~~ ~~IT~~ ~~FURTHER~~ ~~ENACTED,~~ ~~That,~~ ~~on~~ ~~or~~ ~~before~~ ~~December~~ ~~1,~~
~~2024,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Department~~ ~~of~~ ~~Information~~ ~~Technology~~ ~~shall~~ ~~evaluate~~ ~~how~~ ~~the~~ ~~Information~~
~~Technology~~ ~~Investment~~ ~~Fund~~ ~~could~~ ~~be~~ ~~used~~ ~~as~~ ~~a~~ ~~reimbursable~~ ~~fund~~ ~~to~~ ~~assist~~ ~~with~~ ~~State~~ ~~and~~
~~local~~ ~~fiber~~ ~~and~~ ~~broadband~~ ~~projects~~ ~~and~~ ~~report~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~evaluation~~ ~~and~~ ~~any~~ ~~related~~
~~recommendations~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Governor~~ ~~and,~~ ~~in~~ ~~accordance~~ ~~with~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–1257~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~
~~Government~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~the~~ ~~General~~ ~~Assembly,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~Senate~~ ~~Budget~~ ~~and~~ ~~Taxation~~
~~Committee,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Senate~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~on~~ ~~Education,~~ ~~Energy,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~Environment,~~ ~~the~~ ~~House~~
~~Appropriations~~ ~~Committee,~~ ~~the~~ ~~House~~ ~~Health~~ ~~and~~ ~~Government~~ ~~Operations~~ ~~Committee,~~ ~~and~~
~~the~~ ~~Joint~~ ~~Committee~~ ~~on~~ ~~Cybersecurity,~~ ~~Information~~ ~~Technology,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Biotechnology.~~

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, on or before December 1,
2024, the Joint Audit and Evaluation Committee, in consultation with the Joint Committee
on Cybersecurity, Information Technology, and Biotechnology, shall study and make
recommendations for any statutory and operational changes necessary to address the
findings of the audit issued on April 2, 2024, by the Office of Legislative Audits in the
Department of Legislative Services and shall report on any recommendations for statutory
changes to the Governor and, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State Government Article,
the General Assembly, including the Senate Budget and Taxation Committee, the Senate
Committee on Education, Energy, and the Environment, the House Appropriations
Committee, and the House Health and Government Operations Committee.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the terms of the appointed
members of the Modernize Maryland Commission shall expire as follows:

(1) two members on July 1, 2024, as determined by the Governor;

(2) two members on July 1, 2025, as determined by the Governor; and

(3) the remaining appointed member on July 1, 2026.

SECTION ~~3.~~ ~~5.~~ 6. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 25 –
END OF PAGE 25