START OF PAGE 1
 
 
  SB 905 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled 
Senate Bill 905 
(Senator Kelly, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Public Safety – Extreme Risk Protective Orders – Review of Court Records 
 
 
This bill authorizes review of a court record related to a petition for an extreme risk 
protective order by researchers affiliated with institutions of higher education conducting 
related academic or policy research that have entered into an agreement with the Maryland 
Judiciary providing for the confidentiality of the record in accordance with the bill’s 
provisions. The Maryland Judiciary must require an institution of higher education that has 
researchers reviewing court records relating to extreme risk protective orders to enter into 
an agreement that provides for the storage and handling of the records, as specified. The 
agreement may not apply to or restrict the use or publication of any statistics, information, 
or other material that summarizes or refers to records in the aggregate, without disclosing 
the identity of any person who is the subject of the record. The Maryland Judiciary, on its 
own motion, may institute an injunction and any other appropriate remedy (1) for a 
violation of the agreement and (2) to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of a record 
relating to an extreme risk protective order by any person.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect governmental finances.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to materially affect local government finances.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None.  
 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 905/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The required agreement between the Maryland Judiciary and an institution 
of higher education must provide that (1) each record relating to an extreme risk protective 
order must remain in the custody of the institution of higher education receiving the record; 
(2) each record relating to an extreme risk protective order may be used only for the 
research and study for which it was assembled or obtained; and (3) a person may not 
disclose a record relating to an extreme risk protective order to any person who is not 
engaged in the research or study project.    
 
Current Law:  Statutory provisions set forth a process by which a petitioner may seek an 
extreme risk protective order to prevent a respondent from purchasing or possessing any 
firearm or ammunition for the duration of the order under specified circumstances. 
Individuals specifically authorized to petition for such an order include specified health 
professionals, law enforcement officers, and individuals who meet specified relationship 
requirements. A petition must meet specified requirements, such as the inclusion of a 
description of the behavior and statements of the respondent or any other information that 
led the petitioner to believe that the respondent presents an immediate and present danger 
of causing personal injury to self or others.   
 
A petitioner initiates the process for an order during court operating hours by filing a 
petition for a temporary order in the District Court. If the court is not open, a petitioner 
initiates the process by filing a petition for an interim order with a District Court 
Commissioner. Generally, if an interim order is granted by a District Court Commissioner, 
a temporary order hearing is heard on the first or second day on which a District Court 
judge is sitting after issuance of the interim order. Generally, if a temporary order is 
granted, a final extreme risk protective order hearing occurs one week later.   
 
A judge may enter a final extreme risk protective order to prohibit the respondent from 
possessing a firearm if the judge finds by clear and convincing evidence that the respondent 
poses a danger of causing personal injury to the respondent, the petitioner, or another by 
possessing a firearm. The judge must consider all relevant evidence presented by the 
petitioner and the respondent and the amount of time that has elapsed since any of the 
events described in the petition.   
 
The final extreme risk protective order must order the respondent to surrender to law 
enforcement authorities any firearm and ammunition in the respondent’s possession and 
prohibit the respondent from purchasing or possessing any firearm (or ammunition) for the 
duration of the order, as specified. All relief granted in a final extreme risk protective order 
is effective for the period stated in the order, not to exceed one year. Final orders may also 
be modified, rescinded, and (for good cause shown) extended for an additional six months, 
as specified. A subsequent circuit court order pertaining to any of the provisions included 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 905/ Page 3 
in the final extreme risk protective order supersedes those provisions. Among other 
provisions, statute also addresses (1) referrals for emergency evaluations and 
(2) procedures regarding the surrender and storage of firearms and ammunition and the 
return of such items after the expiration or termination of an order.   
 
With specified exceptions, court records relating to a petition for an extreme risk protective 
order are confidential and the contents may not be divulged, by subpoena or otherwise, 
except by order of the court on good cause shown. Exceptions to the prohibition authorize 
the following to review the court record:  (1) personnel of the court; (2) the respondent or 
counsel for the respondent; (3) authorized personnel of the Maryland Department of 
Health; (4) authorized personnel of a local core service agency or local behavioral health 
authority; (5) a law enforcement agency; or (6) a person authorized by a court order on 
good cause shown.   
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1267 (Delegate R. Lewis, et al.) - Judiciary. 
 
Information Source(s):  Judiciary (Administrative Office of the Courts); Baltimore City 
Community College; University System of Maryland; Morgan State University; 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 20, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 20, 2024 
Enrolled - April 18, 2024 
 
rh/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3