START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 991 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 991 
(Senator Lam) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Behavioral Health - Language Assistance Services Pilot Program 
 
 
This bill establishes the Language Assistance Services Pilot Program to (1) provide 
meaningful access to behavioral health care to children with limited English proficiency 
and (2) establish a competitive grant process for local behavioral health authorities 
(LBHAs) to provide reimbursement to behavioral health providers for language assistance 
services, as specified. The Behavioral Health Administration (BHA) must implement 
specified requirements as part of administering the program. In fiscal 2025 and 2026, the 
Governor must include $120,000 in the annual budget bill for the program. BHA must 
award at least three grants of $30,000 in fiscal 2025 and 2026 and submit a specified report 
to the Governor and the General Assembly by December 1 in 2025 through 2027. The bill 
takes effect July 1, 2024, and terminates June 30, 2028. 
  
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by an estimated $201,100 in FY 2025, 
reflecting discretionary funding for the pilot program and personnel. Future years reflect 
ongoing administrative costs, the mandated appropriation in FY 2026, and termination of 
the position on December 31, 2026, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. This 
bill establishes a mandated appropriation for FY 2026. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
201,100 
190,800 
36,900 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($201,100) 
($190,800) 
($36,900) 
$0 
$0  
Note () = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
 
Local Effect:  Revenues and expenditures for LBHAs increase to the extent that an LBHA 
receives grant funding under the program and expends those funds to reimburse for 
specified language assistance services. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 991/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Language Assistance Services Pilot Program 
 
The program, administered by BHA in the Maryland Department of Health (MDH), must 
establish a competitive grant program for LBHAs to provide meaningful access to 
behavioral health care to children with limited English proficiency. LBHAs that receive 
grants under the program may provide reimbursement to behavioral health providers for 
language assistance services, including interpretation and translation services to 
(1) children with limited English proficiency accessing and receiving behavioral health 
services and (2) parents and legal guardians coordinating the provision of behavioral health 
services and making health care decisions regarding the services on behalf of a child. 
 
Program Administration 
 
BHA must implement specified requirements as part of administering the program, 
including that a grantee document and report (1) the number of children and parents/legal 
guardians who received language assistance services broken down by the primary language 
spoken and (2) reimbursed language assistance services broken down by the type of 
behavioral health service provided. BHA must also require a health care provider seeking 
reimbursement from an LBHA to be a licensed and accredited behavioral health provider 
and have a current, written language access plan, as specified.  
 
A language access plan demonstrating how the provider ensures meaningful access to its 
program and activities for individuals with limited English proficiency must be provided 
to the LBHA grantee along with any request for reimbursement for language assistance 
services. The language access plan must include: 
 
 
a self-assessment of the circumstances under which the provider may encounter an 
individual with limited English proficiency; 
 
a self-assessment of the number or proportion of individuals with limited English 
proficiency from each language group in the provider’s service area to determine 
appropriate language assistance services; 
 
the provider’s procedure for identifying an individual’s primary language; 
 
the provider’s procedure for providing language assistance services, as specified; 
 
the provider’s procedure for ensuring effective communication with individuals 
with limited English proficiency in languages encountered less frequently; 
 
the provider’s plan for training staff on the policies and procedures; and 
 
the provider’s procedure for providing notice of language assistance services at no 
cost to individuals with limited English proficiency. 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 991/ Page 3 
Current Law:  Specified State departments, agencies, or programs, including MDH, must 
take reasonable steps to provide equal access to public services for individuals with limited 
English proficiency. Reasonable steps to provide equal access to public services include:   
 
 
the provision of oral language services for individuals with limited English 
proficiency, which must be through face‐to‐face, in‐house oral language services if 
contact between the agency and individuals with limited English proficiency is on 
a weekly or more frequent basis; 
 
the translation of vital documents ordinarily provided to the public into any 
language spoken by any limited English proficient population that constitutes 3% 
of the overall population within the geographic area, as specified, and the provision 
of vital documents translated on a statewide basis to any local office as necessary; 
and 
 
any additional methods or means necessary to achieve equal access to public 
services. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although the bill seeks to establish a mandated appropriation for 
both fiscal 2025 and 2026, funding is discretionary for fiscal 2025. Furthermore, this 
analysis assumes that additional general funds – beyond the $120,000 provided for grants 
in fiscal 2025 and 2026 – are needed to cover administrative costs. 
 
Thus, MDH general fund expenditures increase by $201,079 in fiscal 2025, which accounts 
for the bill’s July 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring 
one contractual health policy analyst to administer the grant program and issue the 
annual report in 2025 and 2026 only. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time start-up 
costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
1.0 
Grant Awards 
$120,000 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
73,553 
Operating Expenses 
7,526 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$201,079 
 
Future year expenditures reflect (1) a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses; (2) termination of 
mandatory funding after fiscal 2026; and (3) termination of the contractual position on 
December 31, 2026, following submission of the annual report on the second and final year 
of funding for the pilot program. While the bill requires a third annual report on the pilot 
program by December 1, 2027, this analysis assumes that there will be no additional 
funding on which to report and, thus, the report will not be submitted. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 991/ Page 4 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business behavioral health provider benefits to the extent 
that it applies to an LBHA for specified reimbursement of language assistance services. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Association of County Health Officers; Department of 
Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 7, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4