START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 975 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 975 
(Senator Elfreth, et al.) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Department of Health - Reproductive Health Care Clinic Security 
Grant Program - Establishment (Supporting Reproductive Health Care Clinics 
Act) 
 
 
This bill establishes the Reproductive Health Care Clinic Security Grant Program in the 
Maryland Department of Health (MDH). The program, administered by the Secretary of 
Health, is intended to assist “reproductive health care clinics” in the State with the costs 
associated with specified security improvements. The Secretary must establish grant 
application and award processes and the criteria a clinic must meet to qualify for a grant. 
MDH is prohibited from releasing, publishing, or otherwise disclosing specified 
information regarding grant recipients and awards. For fiscal 2026, the Governor may 
include an appropriation in the annual budget bill of $500,000 to the program; up to 5% of 
the money appropriated to the program may be used for administrative expenses. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $28,700 in FY 2025 for staffing and 
by $500,000 in FY 2026, which reflects discretionary funding for the grant program 
(including administrative costs) for one fiscal year only. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
28,700 
500,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($28,700) 
($500,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government finances or operations. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 975/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “reproductive health care clinic” is a health care provider that provides 
legally protected health care, as defined in the Health-General Article. 
 
MDH may not release, publish, or otherwise disclose (1) the personal information of an 
individual applying for, participating in, or administered a grant under the program or  
(2) information regarding a grant awarded under the program if the disclosure would 
compromise the safety of the grant recipient. 
 
Current Law:   
 
Status of Federal Abortion Law 
 
In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned precedent regarding abortion access in 
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization. Before this decision, abortions prior to 
viability were constitutionally protected based on Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of 
Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey. The petitioners in Dobbs sought to overturn the 
invalidation of Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act, which prohibited abortions after 
15 weeks gestation except for medical emergencies or severe fetal abnormalities. The 
U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Mississippi law by overturning Roe and Casey, holding 
that there is no constitutionally protected right to an abortion as it is not a right explicitly 
granted by the Constitution or a right “deeply rooted” in the country’s history and tradition. 
The Dobbs decision leaves states to decide how to regulate abortion access, resulting in a 
patchwork of state laws with varying degrees of access to abortion care. 
 
Maryland Abortion Law 
 
The Dobbs decision does not impact Maryland law as § 20-209 of the Health-General 
Article codifies the protections of Roe and Casey by prohibiting the State from interfering 
with an abortion conducted (1) before viability or (2) at any point, if the procedure is 
necessary to protect the health or life of the woman and in cases of fetal defect, deformity, 
or abnormality. 
 
If an abortion is provided, it must be performed by a qualified provider, which includes an 
individual who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized by law to practice in the State 
and for whom the performance of an abortion is within the scope of the individual’s license 
or certification.  
 
A qualified provider is not liable for civil damages or subject to a criminal penalty for a 
decision to perform an abortion made in good faith and in the qualified provider’s best 
clinical judgment using accepted standards of clinical practice.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 975/ Page 3 
MDH may adopt regulations consistent with established clinical practice if they are 
necessary and the least intrusive method to protect the life and health of the woman. 
 
Chapter 56 of 2022, in addition to other changes, established the Abortion Care Clinical 
Training Program to ensure there are a sufficient number of health care professionals to 
provide abortion services in the State, and requires health insurers and Maryland Medicaid 
to cover abortion services without a deductible, coinsurance, copayment, or other 
cost-sharing requirement. 
 
Reproductive Health Protection Act and Protected Health Care Information 
 
Chapters 246 and 247 of 2023 establish additional protections for information related to 
“legally protected health care” when that information is sought by another state. The Acts 
also prohibit (1) a health occupations board from taking specified disciplinary actions 
related to the provision of legally protected health care; (2) a medical professional liability 
insurer from taking specified adverse actions against a practitioner related to the practice 
of legally protected health care; and (3) specified State entities, agents, and employees from 
participating in any interstate investigation seeking to impose specified liabilities or 
sanctions against a person for activity related to legally protected health care (with limited 
exception).  
 
Under § 2-312 of the State Personnel and Pensions Article, “legally protected health care” 
means all reproductive health services, medications, and supplies related to the direct 
provision or support of the provision of care related to pregnancy, contraception, assisted 
reproduction, and abortion that is lawful in the State.  
 
Chapters 248 and 249 of 2023 generally prohibit the disclosure of mifepristone data or the 
diagnosis, procedure, medication, or related codes for abortion care and other “sensitive 
health services” by a health information exchange, electronic health network, or health care 
provider effective December 1, 2023. Beginning June 1, 2024, a person who knowingly 
violates this prohibition is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $10,000 
per day. The Acts also established a Protected Health Care Commission (PHCC), staffed 
by MDH, to make specified recommendations to the Secretary of Health on what should 
be classified as “legally protected health care.” 
 
Under the Health-General Article, “legally protected health care” means all reproductive 
health services, medications, and supplies related to the provision of abortion care and other 
sensitive health services as determined by the Secretary based on the recommendations of 
PHCC. “Sensitive health services” includes reproductive health services other than 
abortion care. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 975/ Page 4 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, the Governor is authorized to include in the annual 
budget bill for fiscal 2026 an appropriation of $500,000 for the grant program. Although 
the bill does not include a termination date for the grant program, this analysis assumes 
that it is a one-year grant program based on the bill’s funding language. Thus, discretionary 
funding of $500,000 is assumed to be provided in fiscal 2026 only. The bill also authorizes 
MDH to use up to 5% ($25,000) of the appropriated funds for the administrative costs of 
the grant program.  
 
MDH advises that additional staff is required to administer the grant program. Thus, MDH 
general fund expenditures increase by $28,732 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s 
October 1, 2024 effective date. Although discretionary funding is not assumed until 
fiscal 2026, MDH advises that staffing is necessary in fiscal 2025 to develop policies and 
procedures for the grant program and to initiate the grantmaking process prior to grant 
funding being available. Because this analysis assumes discretionary funding for grants for 
one fiscal year only, the added responsibilities for MDH are not permanent and, thus, may 
be performed by a part-time contractual employee. Therefore, this estimate reflects the cost 
of hiring one part-time (50%) contractual agency grants specialist for the first six months 
to complete the initial development of the grant program; after this initial development 
period, the position continues at a reduced part-time (25%) capacity through fiscal 2026 to 
manage all aspects of awarding grants. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, one-time 
start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Contractual Position 
0.5 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$21,948 
Operating Expenses 
6,784 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$28,732 
 
General fund expenditures increase by $500,000 in fiscal 2026, which represents 
administrative expenditures of $16,915 for the grants specialist (within the 5% limit 
authorized for administrative expenditures) and $483,085 in grant expenditures. The 
administrative expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee 
turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. This estimate assumes 
termination of the contractual position on June 30, 2026. 
 
This estimate does not include any health insurance costs that could be incurred for 
specified contractual employees under the State’s implementation of the federal Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act. 
 
Small Business Effect:  A small business reproductive health care clinic benefits to the 
extent that it applies for and receives a grant under the bill. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 975/ Page 5 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1091 (Delegate Vogel, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; Department 
of Budget and Management; Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - April 8, 2024 
 
Revised – Amendment(s) – April 8, 2024 
Enrolled - April 11, 2024 
 
Revised – Amendment(s) – April 11, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:  Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5