START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 768

Chapter 768

(Senate Bill 975)

AN ACT concerning

~~Public~~ ~~Safety~~ Maryland Department of Health – Reproductive Health Care
Clinic Security Grant Program – Establishment
(Supporting Reproductive Health Care Clinics Act)

FOR the purpose of establishing the Reproductive Health Care Clinic Security Grant
Program in the ~~Governor’s~~ ~~Office~~ ~~of~~ ~~Crime~~ ~~Prevention,~~ ~~Youth,~~ ~~and~~ ~~Victim~~ ~~Services~~
Maryland Department of Health to assist reproductive health care clinics in the
State with costs associated with security improvements and safety operational
expenses; and generally relating to the Reproductive Health Care Clinic Security
Grant Program.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 4–301(a), (h), and (j)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

BY adding to
Article – ~~Public~~ ~~Safety~~ Health – General
Section ~~4–1701~~ 13–5201 to be under the new subtitle “Subtitle ~~17.~~ 52. Reproductive
Health Care Clinic Security Grant Program”
Annotated Code of Maryland
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~ (2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

4–301.

(a) In this subtitle the following words have the meanings indicated.

(h) (1) “Health care provider” means:

(i) A person who is licensed, certified, or otherwise authorized under
the Health Occupations Article or § 13–516 of the Education Article to provide health care
in the ordinary course of business or practice of a profession or in an approved education or
training program; or

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 768 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) A facility where health care is provided to patients or recipients,
including a facility as defined in § 10–101(g) of this article, a hospital as defined in §
19–301 of this article, a related institution as defined in § 19–301 of this article, a health
maintenance organization as defined in § 19–701(g) of this article, an outpatient clinic, a
medical laboratory, a comprehensive crisis response center, a crisis stabilization center,
and a crisis treatment center established under § 7.5–207 of this article.

(2) “Health care provider” includes the agents, employees, officers, and
directors of a facility and the agents and employees of a health care provider.

(j) “Legally protected health care” means all reproductive health services,
medications, and supplies related to:

(1) The provision of abortion care; and

(2) Other sensitive health services as determined by the Secretary based
on the recommendations of the Protected Health Care Commission established under §
4–310 of this subtitle.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Public~~ ~~Safety~~

SUBTITLE ~~17.~~ 52. REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE CLINIC SECURITY GRANT
PROGRAM.

~~4–1701.~~ 13–5201.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR” MEANS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND VICTIM SERVICES.

(3) (2) “PROGRAM” MEANS THE REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE
CLINIC SECURITY GRANT PROGRAM.

(3) “REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE CLINIC” MEANS A HEALTH CARE
PROVIDER, AS DEFINED IN § 4–301(H)(1)(II) OF THIS ARTICLE, THAT PROVIDES
LEGALLY PROTECTED HEALTH CARE, AS DEFINED IN § 4–301(J) OF THIS ARTICLE.

(B) THERE IS A REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE CLINIC SECURITY GRANT
PROGRAM IN THE GOVERNOR’S OFFICE OF CRIME PREVENTION, YOUTH, AND
~~VICTIM~~ ~~SERVICES~~ DEPARTMENT.

(C) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SECRETARY SHALL ADMINISTER THE
PROGRAM.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 768

(D) THE PURPOSE OF THE PROGRAM IS TO ASSIST REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
CARE CLINICS IN THE STATE WITH THE COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH SECURITY
IMPROVEMENTS, INCLUDING INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR FACILITY HARDENING,
PERIMETER LIGHTING, FENCING AND OTHER BARRIERS, DOOR LOCKS AND ACCESS
CONTROL SYSTEMS, SECURITY CAMERAS, ALARMS, PANIC BUTTONS, LOCKDOWN
SYSTEMS, AND PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEMS.

(E) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SECRETARY SHALL ESTABLISH
PROCEDURES FOR:

(1) THE APPLICATION AND AWARD PROCESSES; AND

(2) THE CRITERIA A REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE CLINIC MUST
MEET TO QUALIFY FOR A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM.

(F) THE DEPARTMENT MAY NOT RELEASE, PUBLISH, OR OTHERWISE
DISCLOSE:

(1) THE PERSONAL INFORMATION OF AN INDIVIDUAL APPLYING FOR,
PARTICIPATING IN, OR ADMINISTERING A GRANT UNDER THE PROGRAM; OR

(2) INFORMATION REGARDING A GRANT AWARDED UNDER THE
PROGRAM IF THE DISCLOSURE WOULD COMPROMISE THE SAFETY OF THE GRANT
RECIPIENT.

(G) (1) FOR FISCAL YEAR 2026, THE GOVERNOR MAY INCLUDE IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET BILL AN APPROPRIATION OF $500,000 TO THE PROGRAM.

(2) UP TO 5% OF THE MONEY APPROPRIATED TO THE PROGRAM MAY
BE USED FOR ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3