START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 973 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 973 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Hospitals - Private Hospital Grant Program - Funding 
 
   
This bill codifies the Private Hospital Grant Program, to make recommendations to the 
Governor for funding in the annual State budget for capital projects at private hospitals. 
The Maryland Hospital Association (MHA) must establish a review committee and submit 
recommendations to the Governor and the Secretary of Budget and Management. The 
committee must consult with the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the 
Department of Legislative Services (DLS) in establishing the project funding request 
process and making recommendations for funding requests. Beginning in fiscal 2026, the 
Governor may include in the capital or operating budget bill an appropriation of 
$20.0 million for the program. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2025. DBM and DLS can provide consultation to the 
committee using existing budgeted resources. Assuming implementation with general 
obligation (GO) bonds in the capital budget rather than pay-as-you-go (PAYGO) general 
fund expenditures in the operating budget, GO bond expenditures may increase by 
$12.0 million annually beginning in FY 2026 to reflect additional discretionary funding for 
this program, but total spending in the capital budget is unaffected. Instead, less funding is 
available for other projects.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill is not anticipated to affect local government finances or operations. 
  
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall.   
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 973/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  MHA must establish a review committee to (1) develop the process for 
hospitals in the State to submit requests for funding in the annual budget; (2) establish 
eligibility criteria for a hospital to submit a request for funding; (3) establish criteria for 
projects eligible to receive funding; (4) establish deadlines for the submission of requests 
for funding and the determination of projects recommended for funding; (5) develop 
project scoring and selection criteria guidelines; (6) review eligible requests for funding; 
and (7) make final recommendations for projects to be funded in the annual State budget. 
To the extent practicable, the membership of the committee must reflect the geographic 
diversity of hospitals in the State.  
 
In consultation with DBM, the committee may establish conditions under which a request 
for funding may be rejected for consideration. Otherwise, the bill may not be construed to 
prohibit an organization from receiving funds from a government source other than the 
program. 
 
Current Law:  Since 1993, MHA has administered the Private Hospital Grant Program 
(also known as the Hospital Bond Program) to enable private hospitals to apply for State 
allocated capital funding. The program’s review committee consists of hospital 
stakeholders, an independent consultant, and representatives of DBM, DLS, and MHA.  
 
State funding for the program, which is considered an ongoing miscellaneous capital grant, 
varies according to the number of applications received, recommendations made by the 
review committee, and the State’s available GO bond capacity. The review committee 
evaluates individual private hospital capital project requests and typically submits a final 
combined request to DBM that closely aligns with planned funding for the program. 
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, the Governor may include in the capital or operating 
budget bill an appropriation of $20.0 million for the program for fiscal 2026 and each 
fiscal year thereafter. The Governor’s fiscal 2025-2029 Capital Improvement Program 
(CIP) includes $8.0 million in annual GO bond funding for the program for fiscal 2026 
through 2029. Assuming those amounts would be included in the capital budget in the 
absence of the bill, an additional $12.0 million of funding for the program is needed 
annually to reach the $20.0 million amount specified in the bill.  
 
Although the bill does not establish a mandated appropriation, this analysis assumes that 
discretionary funding of $12.0 million is provided annually beginning in fiscal 2026 and 
that GO bonds rather than PAYGO general funds are used. Thus, GO bond expenditures 
for the program increase by $12.0 million annually beginning in fiscal 2026. Even so, there 
is no effect on total State capital spending, which is established annually by the Governor 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 973/ Page 3 
and the General Assembly through the capital budget process. Instead, $12.0 million in 
GO bond funds is not available for other capital projects. 
 
DBM advises that the program has received the full amount requested since fiscal 2021. In 
fiscal 2024, private hospitals requested $9.5 million through the program and received 
approximately $1.1 million more than requested due to available PAYGO general fund 
capacity. The five-year average authorization for the program is $8.0 million, and DBM’s 
fiscal 2025 capital budget recommendation of $6.9 million would fully fund MHA’s 
request. The CIP (page 170) details approved projects for fiscal 2025. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Budget and Management; Maryland Department 
of Health; Legislative Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - March 14, 2024 
Enrolled - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 30, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - April 30, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3