START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 960 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 960 
(Senator Feldman) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Maryland Clean Energy Center - Climate Technology Founder's Fund 
 
 
This bill establishes the Climate Technology Founder’s Fund (CTFF) in the Maryland 
Clean Energy Center (MCEC) to provide early-stage funding for start-up companies 
focused on qualified projects in climate technologies. Funding recipients must provide 
1:1 matching funds. The bill requires transfers from the Strategic Energy Investment Fund 
(SEIF) to CTFF from fiscal 2025 through 2028. The bill also repeals two existing 
distributions from SEIF to other State programs:  one to the Small, Minority, and 
Women-Owned Businesses Account (SMWOBA) in the Department of Commerce and 
one to the Employment Advancement Right Now (EARN) program in the Maryland 
Department of Labor (MDL). The bill also authorizes the transfer of certain unused SEIF 
funds in SMWOBA to CTFF by the end of fiscal 2024. The bill takes effect June 1, 2024. 
     
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  No effect in FY 2024. Special fund expenditures for SEIF increase by  
$1.2 million annually from FY 2025 through 2028, under the assumptions discussed below. 
Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for CTFF increase correspondingly as funds are 
received and used for authorized purposes. Nonbudgeted revenues and expenditures for 
CTFF further increase in future years as investment returns are received and used for 
authorized purposes. Special fund revenues and expenditures for the Maryland Energy 
Innovation Fund (MEIF) may increase beginning in FY 2025 (not shown), as discussed 
below. This bill repeals two existing mandated distributions and establishes a new 
mandated distribution for FY 2025 through 2028.  
  
($ in millions) 
FY 2024 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
NonBud Rev. 
$0 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
SF Expenditure 
$0 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
NonBud Exp. 
$0 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
$1.2 
Net Effect 
$0.0 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
($1.2) 
($1.2)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 960/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None. MCEC advises that local governments are not intended recipients of 
CTFF funding. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary: 
 
Climate Technology Founder’s Fund 
  
“Climate technology” includes solar energy, wind energy, energy storage devices, grid 
modernization, carbon capture utilization and storage, and any other technology defined 
by MCEC that reduces greenhouse gas emissions, mitigates the impacts of climate change, 
or provides a negative emission benefit in the electric, oil, or gas sector. 
 
MCEC must administer CTFF and establish a Fund Oversight Committee, appointed by 
the MCEC board, to manage the fund. CTFF consists of (1) money appropriated in the 
State budget to the fund; (2) money made available to the fund through private 
contributions and federal grants or programs; (3) proceeds from the sale, disposition, lease, 
or rental of collateral related to financing made from the fund; (4) repayment of financing 
made from the fund; (5) returns from or recovery of any financing made from the fund; 
(6) proceeds from the sale of any financing made or assets acquired with proceeds from the 
fund; (7) money transferred from SEIF; (8) interest earnings; and (9) any other money from 
any other source accepted for the benefit of the fund. 
 
CTFF may be used only to (1) evaluate and coordinate financing for qualified projects 
related to the fund’s purpose; (2) provide financing to qualified projects; (3) secure private 
investment capital for financing of qualified projects; and (4) subject to a specified 
allocation, administer the fund and the activities of MCEC in carrying out the bill. Money 
in CTFF may be allocated as follows:  
 
 
up to $1.72 million for direct investments of the fund; 
 
up to $3.28 million for the MCEC and the Maryland Energy Innovation Accelerator 
tech support programs; and 
 
up to $2.0 million for Maryland Energy Innovation Institute (MEII) seed grants. 
 
Generally, in determining the qualified projects to receive investment from the fund, 
MCEC must give preference to companies that are small, minority, women-owned, and 
veteran-owned businesses in the clean energy industry. There are also two specific 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 960/ Page 3 
requirements:  (1) at least 40% of the funds awarded by MCEC must be used for equity 
investments in minority, women-owned, and veteran-owned businesses start-up 
companies; and (2) 40% of the funding from MCEC’s overall appropriation that is 
allocated for MEII seed grants must be used to provide grants for start-up companies from 
minority serving institutions. 
 
A recipient of financial assistance must provide matching funds for the qualified project 
equal to the amount of financial assistance awarded from the fund by MCEC. 
 
By October 1 each year, MCEC must report to the Governor and the General Assembly on 
the use of CTFF and outcomes of investments made from the fund. 
 
Strategic Energy Investment Fund Transfers 
 
The bill repeals two existing requirements that the Maryland Energy Administration 
(MEA) use SEIF to provide $15.0 million in total funding to SMWOBA and EARN:  
 
 
$7.0 million in total funding to SMWOBA from fiscal 2021 through 2028 (with 
$1.2 million provided in each of fiscal 2025 through 2028); and 
 
$8.0 million in funding to EARN beginning in fiscal 2021.  
 
Instead, the bill requires that MEA use SEIF to provide $1.2 million annually from 
fiscal 2025 through 2028 to CTFF. The bill also authorizes the Governor to transfer up to 
$2.2 million of the funds in SMWOBA that are attributable to SEIF (the total specified from 
fiscal 2021 through 2024 under current law) to CTFF on or before June 30, 2024.  
 
Current Law:  MCEC was established by Chapter 137 of 2008 as a body politic and 
corporate and an instrumentality of the State. The purpose of MCEC is to (1) promote 
economic development and jobs in the clean energy industry sector; (2) promote the 
deployment of clean energy technology; (3) serve as an incubator for the development of 
the clean energy industry; (4) in collaboration with MEA, collect, analyze, and disseminate 
industry data; (5) provide outreach and technical support to further the clean energy 
industry; and (6) work as a green bank and in conjunction with local and private green 
banks. MCEC may make grants or provide equity investment financing to clean energy 
technology-based businesses and may borrow money and issue bonds consistent with its 
purpose. 
 
Chapters 127 and 128 of 2008 created the Maryland Strategic Energy Investment Program 
and the implementing SEIF to decrease energy demand and increase energy supply to 
promote affordable, reliable, and clean energy. Chapter 757 of 2019 requires MEA to 
provide a total of $7.0 million from SEIF for access to capital for small, minority, women, 
and veteran-owned businesses in the clean energy industry under SMWOBA in Commerce, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 960/ Page 4 
subject to specified conditions. The funding must be allocated in annual increments from 
fiscal 2021 through 2028 as follows:  $200,000 in fiscal 2021; $500,000 in both fiscal 2022 
and 2023; $1.0 million in fiscal 2024; and $1.2 million annually in fiscal 2025 through 
2028. Chapter 757 also required MEA to provide a total of $8.0 million from SEIF 
beginning in fiscal 2021 to invest in pre-apprenticeship, youth apprenticeship, and 
registered apprenticeship programs to establish career paths in the clean energy industry 
under the EARN program. 
 
Maryland Energy Innovation Initiative and Fund  
 
Chapters 364 and 365 of 2017 established MEII in the A. James Clark School of 
Engineering at the University of Maryland, College Park Campus (UMCP) to  
(1) collaborate with academic institutions in the State to participate in clean energy 
programs and (2) develop and attract private investment in clean energy innovation.  
 
The Acts also established MEIF in UMCP to support the administrative costs of MCEC 
and MEII and required that $1.5 million be transferred from SEIF to MEIF each year from 
fiscal 2019 through 2022. MEII is authorized to use the fund to purchase advisory services 
and technical assistance and for administrative, legal, and actuarial expenses of MEII. 
 
Chapters 13 and 24 of the 2021 special session required MEII and MCEC to implement an 
accelerator program for Maryland-based technology companies engaged in clean energy 
innovation and required that at least $2.1 million annually be transferred from SEIF to 
MEIF, which must be apportioned to MEII (at least $0.9 million) and MCEC (at least  
$1.2 million).   
 
State Fiscal Effect:  The fiscal impact of the bill is largely due to a new mandated 
distribution from SEIF to CTFF, instead of mandated distributions to SMWOBA and 
EARN, from fiscal 2025 through 2028. However, other considerations and assumptions 
also contribute to the estimated overall effect, as discussed below.   
 
 
The bill establishes a mandated distribution of $1.2 million annually from SEIF to 
CTFF from fiscal 2025 through 2028. 
 
The bill repeals a mandated distribution of $1.2 million annually from SEIF to 
SMWOBA from fiscal 2025 through 2028. 
 
The bill repeals a mandated distribution totaling $8.0 million from SEIF to EARN, 
which began in fiscal 2021 but is otherwise open-ended.  
 
As SMWOBA has not received any SEIF funding under Chapter 757 and 
Commerce does not anticipate receiving any funding through the duration of the 
statutory transfers, special fund revenues and expenditures for Commerce are 
unaffected by the bill. 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 960/ Page 5 
 
While neither MDL nor MEA have been able to provide a full accounting of past 
EARN transfers, it appears that most funds have yet to be transferred, despite some 
amount being budgeted each year, and, thus, remain eligible for transfer in future 
years under current law. While it is possible that SEIF funds may otherwise be 
transferred to EARN under Chapter 757, this analysis assumes that special fund 
revenues and expenditures for MDL from fiscal 2025 through 2028 are unaffected 
by the bill. 
 
Since SEIF expenditures appear to have been largely unaffected by Chapter 757, 
this analysis assumes the bill increases SEIF expenditures to reflect the transfer of 
funds to CTFF. 
 
The bill authorizes the Governor to transfer up to $2.2 million of the funds in 
SMWOBA that are attributable to SEIF to CTFF before the end of fiscal 2024. 
However, SMWOBA has never received or used SEIF funding under Chapter 757. 
In practice, MEA and Commerce have agreed to provide SEIF funds to SMWOBA 
only if needed in a particular fiscal year. Even so, current law also requires unused 
SEIF funds to be transferred back to SEIF at the end of each fiscal year. Therefore, 
while the intent of the bill appears to be to reallocate previously unused SEIF funds 
associated with Chapter 757 from SMWOBA to CTFF, such funds are not in 
SMWOBA and, thus, are not available for transfer (and the bill does authorize a 
transfer directly from SEIF). As such, this analysis does not assume funds are 
transferred under this provision. 
 
The bill specifies uses of the transferred funds in CTFF as follows:  (1) up to  
$1.72 million for direct investment of the fund; (2) up to $3.28 million for the 
MCEC and the Maryland Energy Innovation Accelerator tech support programs; 
and (3) up to $2.0 million for MEII seed grants. Annual allocations for these 
purposes are unknown. Direct investments by CTFF are expected to generate future 
nonbudgeted revenues, which may be used for authorized purposes. Funds allocated 
to accelerator tech support programs and seed grants do not generate additional 
revenues but may increase special fund revenues and expenditures for MEIF 
(reflecting any transfer of funds), depending on how the bill is implemented. CTFF 
may be used for administrative costs. 
 
Accordingly, under the assumptions discussed above, special fund expenditures for SEIF 
increase by $1.2 million annually from fiscal 2025 through 2028. Nonbudgeted revenues 
for CTFF increase correspondingly. CTFF expenditures increase beginning in fiscal 2025 
to provide financial assistance for qualified projects and other authorized purposes, 
including payment of MCEC administrative costs (MCEC employees are not State 
employees). While expenditures may occur over one or more fiscal years, this estimate 
assumes expenditures occur in the year funds are received. CTFF revenues and 
expenditures further increase in future years as investment returns (from a limited portion 
of the overall SEIF funding) are received and used to provide additional rounds of financial 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 960/ Page 6 
assistance. Special fund revenues and expenditures for MEIF increase by an unknown 
amount beginning in fiscal 2025 to the extent CTFF funding is transferred for tech support 
programs and/or seed grants.  
 
While not assumed in the above estimate, the bill’s repeal of the SEIF to EARN distribution 
may reduce special fund expenditures for SEIF and corresponding special fund revenues 
and expenditures for EARN in future years; as described above, affected amounts are 
unknown at this time.   
 
Small Business Effect:  The bill redirects funding that was not being used under 
SMWOBA to a new fund which may be used to benefit small businesses. Also, the bill 
eliminates the funding requirement for EARN. The overall effect on any particular small 
business is unknown but could be meaningful. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See SB 900 and HB 911 of 2023. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1220 (Delegate Vogel, et al.) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Clean Energy Center; Department of Commerce; 
Maryland Energy Administration; Department of Budget and Management; Maryland 
Department of Labor; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 5, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
 
km/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Stephen M. Ross 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 6