START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

Chapter 918

(Senate Bill 1041)

AN ACT concerning

Alcoholic Beverages – Breweries, Wineries, and Distilleries – Direct Delivery
~~and~~ ~~Direct~~ ~~Shipment~~

FOR the purpose of establishing certain permits authorizing the direct delivery ~~or~~ ~~shipment~~
of certain alcoholic beverages to a consumer in the State; ~~establishing~~ ~~that~~ ~~certain~~
~~affiliates~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~holders~~ ~~of~~ ~~nonresident~~ ~~brewery~~ ~~permits~~ ~~or~~ ~~nonresident~~ ~~distillery~~
~~permits~~ ~~are~~ ~~included~~ ~~in~~ ~~certain~~ ~~production~~ ~~limits;~~ ~~authorizing~~ ~~common~~ ~~carriers~~ ~~to~~
~~transport,~~ ~~if~~ ~~applicable,~~ ~~beer~~ ~~or~~ ~~liquor;~~ establishing the requirements an individual
must meet in order to qualify for a direct–to–consumer alcoholic beverages delivery
~~or~~ ~~shipping~~ permit; establishing a maximum amount that a recipient of an alcoholic
beverages delivery ~~or~~ ~~shipment~~ may receive annually; repealing a maximum amount
that a consumer may purchase when visiting certain alcoholic beverage
manufacturers; ~~requiring~~ ~~a~~ ~~holder~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~direct~~ ~~beer~~ ~~shipper’s~~ ~~permit~~ ~~or~~ ~~direct~~ ~~liquor~~
~~shipper’s~~ ~~permit~~ ~~to~~ ~~post~~ ~~security~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~alcoholic~~ ~~beverage~~ ~~tax~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~amount;~~
and generally relating to alcoholic beverages.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section ~~2–132~~ ~~and~~ ~~2–132.1;~~ ~~and~~ 2–142 through 2–147 and 2–150 ~~through~~ ~~2–152~~ to
be under the amended part “Part V. Direct Wine Delivery, Direct Wine
Shipper’s, and Common Carrier Permits”; and 2–202(k), 2–205(c) and (d),
2–206(h), and 2–214(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 2–148, 2–149, ~~2–153,~~ ~~2–154,~~ 2–202(a), 2–205(a), 2–206(a), and 2–207(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 2–148.1 and 2–149.1; ~~and~~ 2–167 through ~~2–176~~ 2–175 to be under the new
part “Part VIII. Direct–to–Consumer Beer and Liquor ~~Shipping~~ ~~and~~ Delivery”;
and 2–202(k) and (l), 2–205(d) and (e), 2–206(h) and (i), and 2–207(k) and (l)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~without~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~Section~~ ~~13–825(a)~~ ~~and~~ ~~(i)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

~~BY~~ ~~repealing~~ ~~and~~ ~~reenacting,~~ ~~with~~ ~~amendments,~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~
~~Section~~ ~~13–825(b)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2022~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 2–202(c) and 2–207(d)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 3 of Chapters 359 and 360 of the Acts of the General Assembly
of 2021, as amended by Chapters 477 and 478 of the Acts of the General
Assembly of 2022 and Chapter 594 of the Acts of the General Assembly of
2023)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 2–207(c)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Section 3 of Chapters 359 and 360 of the Acts of the General Assembly
of 2021, as amended by Chapters 477 and 478 of the Acts of the General
Assembly of 2022 and Chapter 594 of the Acts of the General Assembly of
2023)

Preamble

WHEREAS, Section 1–201(a)(1)(i) of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article
states, in part, that it is the policy of the State to regulate and control the manufacture,
sale, distribution, transportation, and storage of alcoholic beverages in the State for the
purposes of obtaining respect and obedience to the law and to foster and promote
temperance; and

WHEREAS, Section 1–201(b)(1) of the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article
states that it is the policy of the State to authorize the Office of the Executive Director and
others to displace or limit economic competition by regulating and engaging in the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages; and

WHEREAS, Section 1–201(b)(1)(i) through (iv) of the Alcoholic Beverages and
Cannabis Article states that it is the policy of the State to obtain respect and obedience for
the law, promote and foster temperance, prevent deceptive, destructive, and unethical

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

business practices, and promote the general welfare of residents of the State by controlling
the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages; and

WHEREAS, To accomplish and ensure that the State can carry out its duties as
required in the Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis Article, this Act reaffirms the legitimacy
of the three–tiered system as a means of regulating the alcoholic beverages industry as
stipulated by the Supreme Court of the United States in Tennessee Wine and Spirits
Retailers Assn. v. Thomas, 139 S. Ct. 2449 (2019); and

WHEREAS, It is the intent of the General Assembly to limit the issuance of direct
delivery permits by the Office of the Executive Director to licensed Maryland
manufacturers in order to protect public health and provide strong incentives not to sell
alcohol in a way that threatens public health or safety; now, therefore,

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

~~2–132.~~

(a) IN THIS SECTION, “AFFILIATE” MEANS A PERSON THAT DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY THROUGH ONE OR MORE INTERMEDIARIES CONTROLS, IS CONTROLLED
BY, OR IS UNDER COMMON CONTROL WITH A HOLDER OF A NONRESIDENT BREWERY
~~PERMIT.~~

(B) There is a nonresident brewery permit.

[(b)] (C) The Executive Director may issue the permit to a person that:

~~(1)~~ ~~is~~ ~~licensed~~ ~~outside~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~engage~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~manufacture~~ ~~of~~ ~~beer;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~produces~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~aggregate~~ ~~from~~ ~~all~~ ~~of~~ ~~its~~ ~~locations~~ ~~not~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~
[22,500] 45,000 barrels of beer annually, ALONE OR IN COMBINATION WITH ITS
~~AFFILIATES;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~hold~~ ~~a~~ ~~nonresident~~ ~~dealer’s~~ ~~permit.~~

[(c)] (D) (1) The permit authorizes the permit holder to sell and deliver not
~~more~~ ~~than~~ ~~3,000~~ ~~barrels~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~permit~~ ~~holder’s~~ ~~own~~ ~~beer~~ ~~annually~~ ~~from~~ ~~a~~ ~~location~~ ~~outside~~
~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~retail~~ ~~license~~ ~~holder~~ ~~or~~ ~~permit~~ ~~holder~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~to~~ ~~acquire~~ ~~the~~
~~beer.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~permit~~ ~~holder~~ ~~shall~~ ~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~all~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article,~~
~~the~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~or~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~
~~that~~ ~~apply~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~holder~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~Class~~ ~~7~~ ~~limited~~ ~~beer~~ ~~wholesaler’s~~ ~~license.~~
– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

[(d)] (E) The annual permit fee is $50.

~~2–132.1.~~

(a) IN THIS SECTION, “AFFILIATE” MEANS A PERSON THAT DIRECTLY OR
INDIRECTLY THROUGH ONE OR MORE INTERMEDIARIES CONTROLS, IS CONTROLLED
BY, OR IS UNDER COMMON CONTROL WITH A HOLDER OF A NONRESIDENT
DISTILLERY PERMIT.

(B) There is a nonresident distillery permit.

[(b)] (C) The Executive Director may issue the permit to a person that:

~~(1)~~ ~~is~~ ~~licensed~~ ~~outside~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~engage~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~manufacture~~ ~~of~~ ~~liquor;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~produces~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~aggregate~~ ~~from~~ ~~all~~ ~~of~~ ~~its~~ ~~locations~~ ~~not~~ ~~more~~ ~~than~~ ~~100,000~~
gallons of liquor annually, ALONE OR IN COMBINATION WITH ITS AFFILIATES; and

~~(3)~~ ~~does~~ ~~not~~ ~~hold~~ ~~a~~ ~~nonresident~~ ~~dealer’s~~ ~~permit.~~

[(c)] (D) (1) The permit authorizes the permit holder to sell and deliver the
~~permit~~ ~~holder’s~~ ~~own~~ ~~liquor~~ ~~from~~ ~~a~~ ~~location~~ ~~outside~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~retail~~ ~~license~~ ~~holder~~ ~~or~~
~~permit~~ ~~holder~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~authorized~~ ~~to~~ ~~acquire~~ ~~the~~ ~~liquor.~~

~~(2)~~ ~~The~~ ~~permit~~ ~~holder~~ ~~shall~~ ~~comply~~ ~~with~~ ~~all~~ ~~the~~ ~~requirements~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~article,~~
~~the~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~ ~~Article,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulations~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~or~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~
~~that~~ ~~apply~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~ ~~holder~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~Class~~ ~~8~~ ~~limited~~ ~~liquor~~ ~~wholesaler’s~~ ~~license.~~

[(d)] (E) The annual permit fee is $100.

Part V. Direct WINE DELIVERY, DIRECT Wine Shipper’s, and Common Carrier Permits.

2–142.

(a) In this part the following words have the meanings indicated.

(b) (1) “Common carrier” means a business entity that:

(i) holds itself out as being available to the public to transport in
interstate or foreign commerce for compensation any class of passenger or property; and

(ii) holds a common carrier permit issued under § 2–151 of this
subtitle.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(2) “Common carrier” does not include a business entity that transports
only property the business entity owns or that is consigned to the business entity.

(c) “DIRECT WINE DELIVERER” MEANS THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT WINE
DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

(D) “Direct wine shipper” means the holder of a direct wine shipper’s permit
issued under this part.

2–143.

(A) A person shall be issued a direct wine shipper’s permit by the Executive
Director before the person may engage in shipping wine directly to a consumer in the State.

(B) BEFORE A LICENSED MANUFACTURER MAY ENGAGE IN DELIVERING
WINE DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE, THE MANUFACTURER SHALL BE
ISSUED A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT.

2–144.

(A) To qualify for a direct wine shipper’s permit, an applicant shall be:

(1) a person licensed outside the State to engage in the manufacture of
wine; or

(2) a holder of a Class 3 manufacturer’s license or a Class 4 manufacturer’s
license.

(B) (1) TO QUALIFY FOR A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT, AN
APPLICANT SHALL BE:

(I) A PERSON LICENSED IN THE STATE TO ENGAGE IN THE
MANUFACTURE OF WINE; AND

(II) A HOLDER OF A CLASS 6 LIMITED WINE WHOLESALER’S
LICENSE.

(2) THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER THIS SUBSECTION MAY SELL AND DELIVER A THE PERMIT HOLDER’S OWN
PRODUCT PRODUCED UNDER THE HOLDER’S LICENSE TO AN INDIVIDUAL IN THE
STATE IF:

(I) THE DELIVERY IS MADE BY AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS:

1. AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD; AND
– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

2. CERTIFIED BY AN APPROVED ALCOHOL AWARENESS
PROGRAM;

(II) THE PURCHASER, OR ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST 21
YEARS OLD DESIGNATED BY THE PURCHASER, IS PHYSICALLY PRESENT TO RECEIVE
THE WINE AT THE TIME AND PLACE OF DELIVERY;

(III) THE PURCHASER PAYS FOR THE PURCHASE AT THE TIME OF
ORDER; AND

(IV) THE DIRECT WINE DELIVERER AND THE INDIVIDUAL
RECEIVING THE DELIVERY EACH ENDORSE A DELIVERY FORM THAT THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR APPROVES CERTIFYING THAT THE DIRECT WINE DELIVERER EXAMINED
THE RECIPIENT’S GOVERNMENT–ISSUED IDENTIFICATION AND THE RECIPIENT WAS
AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

2–145.

(a) An applicant for a direct wine shipper’s permit OR A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY
PERMIT shall:

(1) submit to the Executive Director a completed application on a form that
the Executive Director provides;

(2) provide to the Executive Director a copy of the applicant’s current
MANUFACTURER’S license;

(3) identify the wines manufactured by the applicant that the applicant
intends to ship [into] OR DELIVER TO A CONSUMER IN the State; and

(4) pay a fee of $200 for initial issuance of the direct wine shipper’s permit
OR THE DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT.

(b) The Executive Director shall issue a direct wine shipper’s permit OR A
DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT to each applicant who meets the requirements of this
part for the permit.

2–146.

(A) A direct wine shipper’s permit entitles the holder to sell wine manufactured
by the holder through a holder of a common carrier permit to a consumer by receiving and
filling orders that the consumer transmits by electronic or other means.

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(B) A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT ENTITLES THE HOLDER TO SELL AND
DELIVER WINE MANUFACTURED BY THE HOLDER DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE
STATE BY RECEIVING AND FILLING ORDERS THAT THE CONSUMER TRANSMITS BY
ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEANS.

2–147.

The term of a direct wine shipper’s permit OR A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT
is 1 year and begins on July 1.

2–148.

(a) A direct wine shipper shall:

(1) ensure that all containers of wine shipped directly to a consumer in the
State are conspicuously labeled with:

(i) the name of the direct wine shipper;

(ii) the name and address of the consumer who is the intended
recipient; and

(iii) the words “Contains Alcohol: Signature of Person at Least 21
Years of Age Required for Delivery”;

(2) report to the Comptroller and the Executive Director information about
the direct wine shipper’s wine shipments, in a manner that the Comptroller and the
Executive Director determine;

(3) file a quarterly tax return in accordance with § 5–201(d) of the Tax –
General Article;

(4) pay quarterly to the Comptroller all sales taxes and excise taxes due on
sales to consumers in the State and calculate the taxes as if the sale were made in the State;

(5) maintain for 3 years complete and accurate records of all information
needed to verify compliance with this part;

(6) allow the Comptroller and the Executive Director to perform an audit
of the direct wine shipper’s records on request; and

(7) consent to the jurisdiction of the Comptroller, the Executive Director,
or other State unit and the State courts concerning enforcement of this section and any
related law.

(b) A direct wine shipper may not:

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(1) ship more than 18 9–liter cases of wine each year to a single delivery
address; or

(2) cause wine to be delivered on Sunday to an address in the State.

2–148.1.

(A) A DIRECT WINE DELIVERER SHALL:

(1) ENSURE THAT ANY CONTAINER CONTAINING WINE DELIVERED
DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE IS:

(I) CONSPICUOUSLY LABELED WITH:

1. THE NAME OF THE MANUFACTURER;

2. THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE CONSUMER WHO IS
THE INTENDED RECIPIENT; AND

3. THE WORDS “CONTAINS ALCOHOL: SIGNATURE OF
PERSON AT LEAST 21 YEARS OF AGE REQUIRED FOR DELIVERY”; AND

(II) COMMERCIALLY SEALED BY THE MANUFACTURER;

(2) REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR INFORMATION ABOUT
THE DELIVERIES, IN A MANNER THAT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR DETERMINES;

(3) FILE A QUARTERLY TAX RETURN IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
5–201(D) OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(4) PAY QUARTERLY TO THE COMPTROLLER ALL SALES TAXES AND
EXCISE TAXES DUE ON SALES TO CONSUMERS IN THE STATE;

(5) MAINTAIN FOR 3 YEARS COMPLETE AND ACCURATE RECORDS OF
ALL INFORMATION NEEDED TO VERIFY COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PART; AND

(6) ALLOW THE COMPTROLLER OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR TO
PERFORM AN AUDIT OF THE PERMIT HOLDER’S RECORDS ON REQUEST.

(B) THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT MAY NOT CAUSE
MORE THAN 18 9–LITER CASES OF WINE TO BE DELIVERED TO A SINGLE ADDRESS IN
A SINGLE CALENDAR YEAR.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

2–149.

(a) A direct wine shipper may renew its direct wine shipper’s permit each year if
the direct wine shipper:

(1) is otherwise entitled to have a direct wine shipper’s permit;

(2) provides to the Executive Director a copy of its current permit;

(3) identifies the wines manufactured by the direct wine shipper that the
direct wine shipper intends to ship into the State; and

(4) pays to the Executive Director a renewal fee of $200.

(b) The Executive Director may deny a renewal application of a direct wine
shipper who fails to:

(1) file a tax return required under this part;

(2) pay a fee or tax when due; or

(3) after receiving notice, comply with this article or a regulation that the
Comptroller or Executive Director adopts.

2–149.1.

(A) A DIRECT WINE DELIVERER MAY RENEW ITS DIRECT WINE DELIVERY
PERMIT EACH YEAR IF THE DIRECT WINE DELIVERER:

(1) IS OTHERWISE ENTITLED TO HOLD A DIRECT WINE DELIVERY
PERMIT;

(2) PROVIDES TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND THE
COMPTROLLER A COPY OF ITS CURRENT PERMIT; AND

(3) PAYS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR A RENEWAL FEE OF $200.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY DENY A RENEWAL APPLICATION FOR A
DIRECT WINE DELIVERY PERMIT IF THE HOLDER FAILS TO:

(1) FILE A TAX RETURN REQUIRED UNDER THIS PART;

(2) PAY A FEE OR TAX WHEN DUE; OR

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE, COMPLY WITH THIS ARTICLE OR A
REGULATION THAT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ADOPTS UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

2–150.

(a) To receive a direct shipment OR DIRECT DELIVERY of wine, a consumer in
the State shall be at least 21 years old.

(b) A person who receives a shipment OR DELIVERY of wine shall use the
shipment for personal consumption only and may not resell the shipment OR DELIVERY.

~~2–151.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~There~~ ~~is~~ ~~a~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~permit.~~

(b) A holder of a common carrier permit may deliver [wine] ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES from a location inside or outside the State to a consumer in the State for the
consumer’s personal use under this [part] SUBTITLE.

~~(c)~~ ~~A~~ ~~person~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~issued~~ ~~a~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~permit~~ ~~before~~ ~~the~~ ~~person~~ ~~may~~
engage in transporting:

(1) wine from a direct wine shipper to a consumer;

(2) BEER FROM A DIRECT BEER SHIPPER TO A CONSUMER; OR

(3) LIQUOR FROM A DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER TO A CONSUMER.

~~(d)~~ ~~The~~ ~~term~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~permit~~ ~~is~~ ~~1~~ ~~year~~ ~~and~~ ~~begins~~ ~~on~~ ~~July~~ ~~1.~~

~~(e)~~ ~~To~~ ~~complete~~ ~~delivery~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~shipment,~~ ~~the~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~shall~~ ~~require~~ ~~from~~ ~~a~~
~~consumer~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~address~~ ~~listed~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~shipping~~ ~~label:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~signature~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~consumer~~ ~~or~~ ~~another~~ ~~individual~~ ~~at~~ ~~the~~ ~~address~~ ~~who~~
~~is~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~21~~ ~~years~~ ~~old;~~ ~~and~~

~~(2)~~ ~~government–issued~~ ~~photographic~~ ~~identification~~ ~~showing~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~
~~signing~~ ~~individual~~ ~~is~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~21~~ ~~years~~ ~~old.~~

~~(f)~~ ~~A~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~shall~~ ~~refuse~~ ~~delivery~~ ~~when~~ ~~the~~ ~~intended~~ ~~receiving~~ ~~individual~~
~~appears~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~ ~~under~~ ~~the~~ ~~age~~ ~~of~~ ~~21~~ ~~years~~ ~~or~~ ~~refuses~~ ~~to~~ ~~present~~ ~~valid~~ ~~identification.~~

~~(g)~~ ~~At~~ ~~the~~ ~~time~~ ~~of~~ ~~initial~~ ~~application~~ ~~for~~ ~~a~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~permit~~ ~~and~~ ~~on~~ ~~request~~
~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director,~~ ~~a~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~shall~~ ~~submit~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director~~
~~information~~ ~~concerning~~ ~~the~~ ~~training~~ ~~of~~ ~~its~~ ~~drivers~~ ~~in~~ ~~verifying~~ ~~the~~ ~~age~~ ~~of~~ ~~recipients~~ ~~of~~ ~~direct~~

– 10 –
END OF PAGE 10

START OF PAGE 11
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

wine shipments, DIRECT BEER SHIPMENTS, OR DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPMENTS under this
[part] SUBTITLE.

~~(h)~~ ~~At~~ ~~least~~ ~~once~~ ~~each~~ ~~year,~~ ~~in~~ ~~a~~ ~~manner~~ ~~acceptable~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director,~~ ~~a~~
holder of a common carrier permit shall verify that the shipper of wine, BEER, OR LIQUOR
into the State under this part holds a valid direct wine shipper’s permit, DIRECT BEER
SHIPPER’S PERMIT, OR DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT.

(i) A holder of a common carrier permit that delivers [wine solely] ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES under this [part] SUBTITLE may not be required to obtain a transportation
~~permit~~ ~~issued~~ ~~under~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–118~~ ~~or~~ ~~§~~ ~~2–119~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~subtitle~~ ~~in~~ ~~addition~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~
~~permit.~~

~~(j)~~ ~~The~~ ~~permit~~ ~~fee~~ ~~is~~ ~~$100.~~

~~2–152.~~

~~(a)~~ ~~A~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~shall~~ ~~report~~ ~~quarterly~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~Executive~~ ~~Director:~~

(1) the date of each delivery of [wine] ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES in the
~~State;~~ ~~and~~

(2) the name and address of:

(I) the direct wine shipper, THE DIRECT BEER SHIPPER, OR THE
DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER; and

(II) the receiving consumer of each delivery.

~~(b)~~ ~~A~~ ~~common~~ ~~carrier~~ ~~shall~~ ~~maintain~~ ~~for~~ ~~3~~ ~~years~~ ~~complete~~ ~~and~~ ~~accurate~~ ~~records~~ ~~of~~
~~all~~ ~~information~~ ~~needed~~ ~~to~~ ~~verify~~ ~~compliance~~ ~~with~~ ~~this~~ ~~part.~~

~~2–153.~~

~~A~~ ~~person~~ ~~without~~ ~~a~~ ~~direct~~ ~~wine~~ ~~shipper’s~~ ~~permit~~ ~~may~~ ~~not~~ ~~ship~~ ~~wine~~ ~~directly~~ ~~to~~ ~~a~~
~~consumer~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State.~~

~~2–154.~~

~~Each~~ ~~violation~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~part~~ ~~is~~ ~~a~~ ~~separate~~ ~~violation.~~

2–165. RESERVED.

2–166. RESERVED.

– 11 –
END OF PAGE 11

START OF PAGE 12
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

PART VIII. DIRECT–TO–CONSUMER BEER AND LIQUOR SHIPPING AND DELIVERY.

2–167.

(A) IN THIS PART THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(B) “COMMON CARRIER” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 2–142 OF THIS
~~SUBTITLE.~~

(C) (B) “DIRECT BEER DELIVERER” MEANS THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT
BEER DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

(D) “DIRECT BEER SHIPPER” MEANS THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT BEER
SHIPPER’S PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

(E) (C) “DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERER” MEANS THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT
LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

(F) “DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER” MEANS THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT LIQUOR
SHIPPER’S PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART.

(G) (D) “PERMIT” MEANS A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT, DIRECT
BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT, OR DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT, OR DIRECT
LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT ISSUED BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR UNDER THIS
PART.

2–168.

(A) BEFORE A LICENSED MANUFACTURER MAY ENGAGE IN DELIVERING
BEER DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE, THE MANUFACTURER SHALL BE
ISSUED A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT.

(B) BEFORE A LICENSED MANUFACTURER MAY ENGAGE IN DELIVERING
LIQUOR DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE, THE MANUFACTURER SHALL BE
ISSUED A DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT.

2–169.

(A) (1) TO QUALIFY FOR A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT, AN
APPLICANT SHALL BE:

(I) A PERSON LICENSED IN THE STATE TO ENGAGE IN THE
MANUFACTURE OF BEER; AND

– 12 –
END OF PAGE 12

START OF PAGE 13
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(II) A HOLDER OF A CLASS 7 LIMITED BEER WHOLESALER’S
LICENSE.

(2) THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER § 2–170 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY SELL AND DELIVER A THE PERMIT HOLDER’S
OWN PRODUCT PRODUCED UNDER THE HOLDER’S LICENSE TO AN INDIVIDUAL IN
THE STATE IF:

(I) THE DELIVERY IS MADE BY AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS:

1. AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD; AND

2. CERTIFIED BY AN APPROVED ALCOHOL AWARENESS
PROGRAM;

(II) THE PURCHASER, OR ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST 21
YEARS OLD DESIGNATED BY THE PURCHASER, IS PHYSICALLY PRESENT TO RECEIVE
THE BEER AT THE TIME AND PLACE OF DELIVERY;

(III) THE PURCHASER PAYS FOR THE PURCHASE AT THE TIME OF
ORDER; AND

(IV) THE DIRECT BEER DELIVERER AND THE INDIVIDUAL
RECEIVING THE DELIVERY EACH ENDORSE A DELIVERY FORM THAT THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR APPROVES CERTIFYING THAT THE DIRECT BEER DELIVERER EXAMINED
THE RECIPIENT’S GOVERNMENT–ISSUED IDENTIFICATION AND THE RECIPIENT WAS
AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

(B) TO QUALIFY FOR A DIRECT BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT, AN APPLICANT
SHALL BE:

(1) IF SHIPPING FROM A LOCATION OUTSIDE THE STATE, THE
HOLDER OF A NONRESIDENT BREWERY PERMIT; OR

(2) IF SHIPPING FROM A LOCATION INSIDE THE STATE:

(I) A PERSON LICENSED IN THE STATE TO ENGAGE IN THE
MANUFACTURE OF BEER; AND

(II) A HOLDER OF A CLASS 7 LIMITED BEER WHOLESALER’S
~~LICENSE.~~

– 13 –
END OF PAGE 13

START OF PAGE 14
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(C) (B) (1) TO QUALIFY FOR A DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT, AN
APPLICANT SHALL BE:

(I) A PERSON ISSUED A LICENSE BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
IN THE STATE TO ENGAGE IN THE MANUFACTURE OF LIQUOR; AND

(II) A HOLDER OF A CLASS 8 LIMITED WHOLESALER’S LICENSE.

(2) THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER § 2–170 OF THIS SUBTITLE MAY SELL AND DELIVER A THE PERMIT HOLDER’S
OWN PRODUCT PRODUCED UNDER THE HOLDER’S LICENSE TO AN INDIVIDUAL IN
THE STATE IF:

(I) THE DELIVERY IS MADE BY AN EMPLOYEE WHO IS:

1. AT LEAST 18 YEARS OLD; AND

2. CERTIFIED BY AN APPROVED ALCOHOL AWARENESS
PROGRAM;

(II) THE PURCHASER, OR ANOTHER INDIVIDUAL AT LEAST 21
YEARS OLD DESIGNATED BY THE PURCHASER, IS PHYSICALLY PRESENT TO RECEIVE
THE LIQUOR AT THE TIME AND PLACE OF DELIVERY;

(III) THE PURCHASER PAYS FOR THE PURCHASE AT THE TIME OF
ORDER; AND

(IV) THE DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERER AND THE INDIVIDUAL
RECEIVING THE DELIVERY EACH ENDORSE A DELIVERY FORM THAT THE EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR APPROVES CERTIFYING THAT THE DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERER
EXAMINED THE RECIPIENT’S GOVERNMENT–ISSUED IDENTIFICATION AND THE
RECIPIENT WAS AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

(D) TO QUALIFY FOR A DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT, AN APPLICANT
SHALL BE:

(1) IF SHIPPING FROM A LOCATION OUTSIDE THE STATE, A HOLDER
OF A NONRESIDENT DISTILLERY PERMIT; OR

(2) IF SHIPPING FROM A LOCATION INSIDE THE STATE:

(I) A PERSON ISSUED A LICENSE BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
IN THE STATE TO ENGAGE IN THE MANUFACTURE OF LIQUOR; AND

– 14 –
END OF PAGE 14

START OF PAGE 15
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(II) A HOLDER OF A CLASS 8 LIMITED WHOLESALER’S LICENSE.

2–170.

(A) AN APPLICANT FOR A PERMIT UNDER THIS PART SHALL:

(1) SUBMIT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR A COMPLETED
APPLICATION ON A FORM THAT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR PROVIDES;

(2) PROVIDE TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR A COPY OF THE
APPLICANT’S CURRENT HOME STATE MANUFACTURER’S LICENSE;

(3) IDENTIFY THE PRODUCT MANUFACTURED BY THE APPLICANT
THAT THE APPLICANT INTENDS TO SHIP OR DELIVER TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE;
AND

(4) PAY A FEE OF $200 FOR INITIAL ISSUANCE OF THE PERMIT.

(B) IF AN APPLICANT MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS PART, THE
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR SHALL ISSUE TO THE APPLICANT:

(1) A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT; OR

(2) A DIRECT BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT;

(3) A DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT; OR

(4) A DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT.

2–171.

(A) A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT ENTITLES THE HOLDER TO SELL AND
DELIVER BEER MANUFACTURED BY THE HOLDER DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE
STATE BY RECEIVING AND FILLING ORDERS THAT THE CONSUMER TRANSMITS BY
ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEANS.

(B) A DIRECT BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT ENTITLES THE HOLDER TO SELL
~~BEER~~ ~~MANUFACTURED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOLDER~~ ~~THROUGH~~ ~~A~~ ~~HOLDER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~COMMON~~
~~CARRIER~~ ~~PERMIT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~BY~~ ~~RECEIVING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FILLING~~ ~~ORDERS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~
CONSUMER TRANSMITS BY ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEANS.

(C) A DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT ENTITLES THE HOLDER TO SELL
AND DELIVER LIQUOR MANUFACTURED BY THE HOLDER DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER

– 15 –
END OF PAGE 15

START OF PAGE 16
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

IN THE STATE BY RECEIVING AND FILLING ORDERS THAT THE CONSUMER
TRANSMITS BY ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEANS.

(D) A DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT ENTITLES THE HOLDER TO SELL
~~LIQUOR~~ ~~MANUFACTURED~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~HOLDER~~ ~~THROUGH~~ ~~A~~ ~~HOLDER~~ ~~OF~~ ~~A~~ ~~COMMON~~
~~CARRIER~~ ~~PERMIT~~ ~~TO~~ ~~A~~ ~~CONSUMER~~ ~~BY~~ ~~RECEIVING~~ ~~AND~~ ~~FILLING~~ ~~ORDERS~~ ~~THAT~~ ~~THE~~
CONSUMER TRANSMITS BY ELECTRONIC OR OTHER MEANS.

2–172.

THE TERM OF A PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART IS 1 YEAR AND BEGINS ON
JULY 1.

2–173.

(A) A PERSON WHO HOLDS A PERMIT UNDER THIS PART SHALL:

(1) ENSURE THAT ANY CONTAINER CONTAINING AN ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGE DELIVERED OR SHIPPED DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE IS:

(I) CONSPICUOUSLY LABELED WITH:

1. THE NAME OF THE MANUFACTURER;

2. THE NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE CONSUMER WHO IS
THE INTENDED RECIPIENT; AND

3. THE WORDS “CONTAINS ALCOHOL: SIGNATURE OF
PERSON AT LEAST 21 YEARS OF AGE REQUIRED FOR DELIVERY”; AND

(II) COMMERCIALLY SEALED BY THE MANUFACTURER;

(2) REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR INFORMATION ABOUT
THE SHIPMENTS OR DELIVERIES, IN A MANNER THAT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
DETERMINES;

(3) FILE A QUARTERLY TAX RETURN IN ACCORDANCE WITH §
5–201(D) OF THE TAX – GENERAL ARTICLE;

(4) PAY QUARTERLY TO THE COMPTROLLER ALL SALES TAXES AND
EXCISE TAXES DUE ON SALES TO CONSUMERS IN THE STATE AND CALCULATE THE
TAXES AS IF THE SALE SALES WERE MADE IN THE STATE;

– 16 –
END OF PAGE 16

START OF PAGE 17
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(5) MAINTAIN FOR 3 YEARS COMPLETE AND ACCURATE RECORDS OF
ALL INFORMATION NEEDED TO VERIFY COMPLIANCE WITH THIS PART;

(6) ALLOW THE COMPTROLLER OR THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR TO
PERFORM AN AUDIT OF THE PERMIT HOLDER’S RECORDS ON REQUEST; AND

(7) CONSENT TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
COMPTROLLER, OR OTHER STATE UNIT AND THE STATE COURTS CONCERNING
ENFORCEMENT OF THIS PART AND ANY RELATED LAW.

(B) (1) THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT BEER DELIVERY PERMIT OR A DIRECT
BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT MAY NOT CAUSE MORE THAN 3,456 OUNCES OF BEER OF
THE PERMIT HOLDER’S OWN PRODUCT TO BE DELIVERED TO A SINGLE DELIVERY
ADDRESS IN A SINGLE CALENDAR YEAR.

(2) THE HOLDER OF A DIRECT LIQUOR DELIVERY PERMIT OR A
DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT MAY NOT CAUSE MORE THAN 24 STANDARD
750–MILLILITER BOTTLES OF LIQUOR THE PERMIT HOLDER’S OWN PRODUCT, OR AN
EQUIVALENT AMOUNT, TO BE DELIVERED TO A SINGLE DELIVERY ADDRESS IN A
SINGLE CALENDAR YEAR.

2–174.

(A) A HOLDER OF A PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART MAY RENEW THE
PERMIT EACH YEAR IF THE HOLDER:

(1) IS OTHERWISE ENTITLED TO HOLD A PERMIT UNDER THIS PART;

(2) PROVIDES TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND THE
COMPTROLLER A COPY OF ITS CURRENT PERMIT; AND

(3) PAYS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR A RENEWAL FEE OF $200.

(B) THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MAY DENY A RENEWAL APPLICATION FOR A
PERMIT ISSUED UNDER THIS PART IF THE HOLDER FAILS TO:

(1) FILE A TAX RETURN REQUIRED UNDER THIS SUBTITLE;

(2) PAY A FEE OR TAX WHEN DUE; OR

(3) AFTER RECEIVING NOTICE, COMPLY WITH THIS ARTICLE OR A
REGULATION THAT THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ADOPTS UNDER THIS ARTICLE.

2–175.

– 17 –
END OF PAGE 17

START OF PAGE 18
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(A) TO RECEIVE A DIRECT DELIVERY OR DIRECT SHIPMENT OF BEER OR
LIQUOR, A CONSUMER IN THE STATE SHALL BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OLD.

(B) A PERSON WHO RECEIVES A DELIVERY OR SHIPMENT OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES UNDER THIS PART SHALL USE THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR
PERSONAL CONSUMPTION ONLY AND MAY NOT RESELL THE DELIVERY ~~OR~~ ~~SHIPMENT~~
IN WHOLE OR IN PART.

~~2–176.~~

(A) A PERSON WITHOUT A DIRECT BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT ISSUED UNDER
THIS PART MAY NOT SHIP BEER DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE.

(B) A PERSON WITHOUT A DIRECT LIQUOR SHIPPER’S PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER THIS PART MAY NOT SHIP LIQUOR DIRECTLY TO A CONSUMER IN THE STATE.

2–202.

(a) There is a Class 1 distillery license.

(K) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ANNUALLY ON A FORM PROVIDED BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ON:

(1) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PRODUCED UNDER THE
LICENSE;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD FOR
OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION; AND

(3) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SERVED FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(L) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY
NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION TO A PERSON
WHO INTENDS TO RESELL THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

[(k)] (M) The annual license fee:

(1) shall be determined by the Executive Director; and

(2) may not exceed $2,000.

2–205.

– 18 –
END OF PAGE 18

START OF PAGE 19
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(a) There is a Class 3 winery license.

(c) An individual may purchase wine under subsection (b)(4) of this section if the
individual[:

(1) purchases not more than 1 quart in a single year; and

(2)] has attained the legal drinking age.

(D) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ANNUALLY ON A FORM PROVIDED BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ON:

(1) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PRODUCED UNDER THE
LICENSE;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD FOR
OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION; AND

(3) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SERVED FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(E) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY
NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION TO A PERSON
WHO INTENDS TO RESELL THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

[(d)] (F) The annual license fee:

(1) shall be determined by the Executive Director; and

(2) may not exceed $750.

2–206.

(a) There is a Class 4 limited winery license.

(H) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ANNUALLY ON A FORM PROVIDED BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ON:

(1) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PRODUCED UNDER THE
LICENSE;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD FOR
OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION; AND

– 19 –
END OF PAGE 19

START OF PAGE 20
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(3) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SERVED FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(I) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY
NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION TO A PERSON
WHO INTENDS TO RESELL THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

[(h)] (J) The annual license fee:

(1) shall be determined by the Executive Director; and

(2) may not exceed $200.

2–207.

(b) There is a Class 5 brewery license.

(K) THE LICENSE HOLDER SHALL REPORT TO THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
ANNUALLY ON A FORM PROVIDED BY THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ON:

(1) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PRODUCED UNDER THE
LICENSE;

(2) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD FOR
OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION; AND

(3) THE AMOUNT OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD FOR
ON–PREMISES CONSUMPTION.

(L) EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE PROVIDED BY LAW, THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY
NOT SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR OFF–PREMISES CONSUMPTION TO A PERSON
WHO INTENDS TO RESELL THE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.

2–214.

(a) Except as otherwise provided with respect to a DELIVERY PERMIT ISSUED
UNDER SUBTITLE 1, PART V OR PART VIII OF DIVISION I OF THIS ARTICLE, TITLE
OR A 1–day license in Division II of this article, and subject to subsection (b) of this section,
a holder of a manufacturer’s license may not sell or deliver alcoholic beverages to a person
in the State that does not hold a license or permit under this article.

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~Tax~~ ~~–~~ ~~General~~

~~13–825.~~

– 20 –
END OF PAGE 20

START OF PAGE 21
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

~~(a)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~may~~ ~~require~~ ~~a~~ ~~person~~ ~~whose~~ ~~gross~~ ~~receipts~~ ~~are~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~
~~admissions~~ ~~and~~ ~~amusement~~ ~~tax~~ ~~and~~ ~~whose~~ ~~business~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~ ~~a~~ ~~permanent~~ ~~operation~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~
~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~post~~ ~~security~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~tax~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~determines.~~

~~(b)~~ ~~The~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~shall~~ ~~require:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~a~~ ~~manufacturer,~~ ~~wholesaler,~~ ~~or~~ ~~nonresident~~ ~~winery~~ ~~permit~~ ~~holder~~ ~~who~~
~~sells~~ ~~or~~ ~~delivers~~ ~~beer~~ ~~or~~ ~~wine~~ ~~to~~ ~~retailers~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~post~~ ~~security~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~alcoholic~~
~~beverage~~ ~~tax:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~amount~~ ~~not~~ ~~less~~ ~~than:~~

~~1.~~ ~~$1,000~~ ~~for~~ ~~beer;~~ ~~and~~

~~2.~~ ~~$1,000~~ ~~for~~ ~~wine;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~alcoholic~~ ~~beverage~~ ~~tax~~ ~~on~~ ~~beer~~ ~~and~~ ~~wine~~ ~~paid~~ ~~in~~ ~~any~~ ~~1~~
~~month~~ ~~exceeds~~ ~~$1,000,~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~additional~~ ~~amount~~ ~~at~~ ~~least~~ ~~equal~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~excess;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~a~~ ~~manufacturer~~ ~~or~~ ~~wholesaler~~ ~~who~~ ~~sells~~ ~~or~~ ~~delivers~~ ~~any~~ ~~distilled~~ ~~spirits~~
~~or~~ ~~any~~ ~~wine~~ ~~and~~ ~~distilled~~ ~~spirits~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~post~~ ~~a~~ ~~security~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~alcoholic~~ ~~beverage~~
~~tax:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~amount~~ ~~not~~ ~~less~~ ~~than~~ ~~$5,000;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~in~~ ~~an~~ ~~additional~~ ~~amount:~~

~~1.~~ ~~equal~~ ~~to~~ ~~twice~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~of~~ ~~its~~ ~~largest~~ ~~monthly~~ ~~alcoholic~~
~~beverage~~ ~~tax~~ ~~liability~~ ~~for~~ ~~wine~~ ~~and~~ ~~distilled~~ ~~spirits~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~preceding~~ ~~calendar~~ ~~year~~ ~~less~~
~~$5,000;~~ ~~or~~

~~2.~~ ~~if~~ ~~the~~ ~~information~~ ~~for~~ ~~the~~ ~~preceding~~ ~~calendar~~ ~~year~~ ~~is~~ ~~not~~
~~available~~ ~~or~~ ~~cannot~~ ~~be~~ ~~provided,~~ ~~equal~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~amount~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~requires;~~ ~~and~~

~~(3)~~ ~~except~~ ~~as~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(i)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section,~~ ~~a~~ ~~holder~~ ~~of~~ ~~a~~ ~~direct~~
wine shipper’s permit, DIRECT BEER SHIPPER’S PERMIT, OR DIRECT LIQUOR
SHIPPER’S PERMIT to post security for the alcoholic beverage tax in an amount not less
~~than~~ ~~$1,000.~~

~~(i)~~ ~~A~~ ~~person~~ ~~need~~ ~~not~~ ~~post~~ ~~security~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~ ~~(b)(3)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section~~ ~~if:~~

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~person~~ ~~is~~ ~~a~~ ~~manufacturer~~ ~~that~~ ~~has~~ ~~posted~~ ~~security~~ ~~under~~ ~~subsection~~
~~(b)(2)~~ ~~of~~ ~~this~~ ~~section;~~ ~~or~~

– 21 –
END OF PAGE 21

START OF PAGE 22
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(2)~~ ~~at~~ ~~any~~ ~~time~~ ~~starting~~ ~~3~~ ~~years~~ ~~after~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller~~ ~~first~~ ~~issues~~ ~~a~~ ~~direct~~
~~wine~~ ~~shipper’s~~ ~~permit~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~person,~~ ~~the~~ ~~Comptroller:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~determines~~ ~~that~~ ~~the~~ ~~person~~ ~~has~~ ~~a~~ ~~substantial~~ ~~record~~ ~~of~~ ~~tax~~ ~~and~~
~~reporting~~ ~~compliance;~~ ~~and~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~waives~~ ~~the~~ ~~security~~ ~~requirement.~~

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Laws of Maryland read
as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

2–202.

(a) There is a Class 1 distillery license.

(c) A license holder may:

(1) establish and operate a plant for distilling, rectifying, blending, and
bottling, at the location described in the license:

(i) brandy;

(ii) rum;

(iii) whiskey;

(iv) alcohol; and

(v) neutral spirits;

(2) sell and deliver the alcoholic beverages:

(i) in bulk to a person in the State that is authorized to acquire
them; and

(ii) to a person outside the State that is authorized to acquire them;

(3) manufacture an alcoholic beverage listed in item (1) of this subsection
in the name of another person or under a trade name if the other person or trade name also
holds a Class 1 distillery license;

(4) acquire alcoholic beverages from the holder of a manufacturer’s license
or wholesaler’s license or nonresident dealer’s permit for use in manufacturing;

– 22 –
END OF PAGE 22

START OF PAGE 23
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 918

(5) (i) conduct guided tours of the licensed premises;

(ii) at no cost or for a fee, serve to an individual who has attained the
legal drinking age and participated in a guided tour of the licensed premises, not more than
2 ounces of products, with each product sample consisting of not more than one–half ounce
from a single product manufactured by the license holder;

(iii) serve samples blended with other products manufactured by the
license holder or nonalcoholic ingredients; and

(iv) sell [not more than 2.25 liters of] products manufactured on the
licensed premises, for off–premises consumption, and related merchandise to an individual
who has attained the legal drinking age [and participated in a guided tour of the licensed
premises]; and

(6) subject to subsection (i) of this section, sell liquor manufactured by the
license holder that is mixed with other nonalcoholic ingredients.

2–207.

(b) There is a Class 5 brewery license.

(c) A license holder may:

(1) establish and operate a plant for brewing and bottling malt beverages
at the location described in the license;

(2) import beer from a holder of a nonresident dealer’s permit;

(3) contract to brew and bottle beer with and on behalf of the holder of a
Class 2 rectifying license, Class 5 brewery license, Class 7 micro–brewery license, Class 8
farm brewery license, or a nonresident dealer’s permit;

(4) sell and deliver beer to:

(i) a holder of a wholesaler’s license that is authorized to acquire
beer; or

(ii) a person outside of the State that is authorized to acquire beer;

(5) subject to subsection (i) of this section, serve, at the location described
in the license and at no charge, samples of beer, consisting of a total of not more than 18
ounces of beer per visit, to an individual who:

(i) has attained the legal drinking age; and

– 23 –
END OF PAGE 23

START OF PAGE 24
Ch. 918 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) is participating in a guided tour of the brewery or attends a
scheduled promotional event or other organized activity at the brewery;

(6) subject to subsections (d) and (i) of this section, sell beer for
off–premises consumption at the location described in the license, at retail in a container
other than a keg to an individual who has attained legal drinking age;

(7) subject to subsection (f) of this section, sell beer at the location described
in the license for on–premises consumption; and

(8) brew and bottle malt beverages at a location listed on a permit issued
to the license holder in accordance with § 2–113 of this title.

(d) An individual may purchase beer under subsection (c)(6) of this section if the
individual[:

(1) purchases not more than 288 ounces of beer per visit; and

(2)] has attained the legal drinking age.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Section 2 of this Act shall take
effect July 1, 2024, the effective date of Chapter 594 of the Acts of the General Assembly of
2023. If the effective date of Chapter 594 is amended, Section 2 of this Act shall take effect
on the taking effect of Chapter 594.

SECTION 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That the Executive Director of the
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission shall evaluate the implementation of a
standard digital age verification system that holders of a direct delivery permit issued
under Title 2, Subtitle 1, Part V or Part VIII ~~of~~ ~~Division~~ ~~I~~ of the Alcoholic Beverages and
Cannabis Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act, shall use to verify the age of a person
accepting the delivery of alcoholic beverages.

SECTION ~~4.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That, subject to Section 3 of this
Act, this Act shall take effect July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 24 –
END OF PAGE 24