START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 712

Chapter 712

(Senate Bill 1098)

AN ACT concerning

Correctional Services – Diminution Credits – Sexual Offenses

FOR the purpose of prohibiting the earning of diminution credits to reduce the term of
confinement of an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for rape in the
first degree in a State or local correctional facility; and generally relating to
diminution credits.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Correctional Services
Section 3–702(a) and 11–502(a)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 721 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Correctional Services
Section 3–702(b) and 11–502(b)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2017 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)
(As enacted by Chapter 721 of the Acts of the General Assembly of 2023)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Correctional Services

3–702.

(a) Subject to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, § 3–711 of this subtitle, and
Title 7, Subtitle 5 of this article, an incarcerated individual committed to the custody of the
Commissioner is entitled to a diminution of the incarcerated individual’s term of
confinement as provided under this subtitle.

(b) (1) [An] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–303 or § 3–304 of
the Criminal Law Article involving a victim who is a child under the age of 16 years, or an
incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–305 or § 3–306 of
the Criminal Law Article, as the sections existed before October 1, 2017, involving a victim
who is a child under the age of 16 years, is not entitled to a diminution of the incarcerated
individual’s term of confinement as provided under this subtitle.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 712 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WHO IS SERVING A SENTENCE
FOR A VIOLATION OF § 3–303 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE THAT OCCURRED ON
OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2024, IS NOT ENTITLED TO A DIMINUTION OF THE
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S TERM OF CONFINEMENT AS PROVIDED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE.

11–502.

(a) Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, an incarcerated
individual who has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment shall be allowed deductions
from the incarcerated individual’s term of confinement as provided under this subtitle for
any period of presentence or postsentence confinement in a local correctional facility.

(b) (1) [An] SUBJECT TO PARAGRAPH (2) OF THIS SUBSECTION, AN
incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–303 or § 3–304 of
the Criminal Law Article involving a victim who is a child under the age of 16 years, or an
incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a violation of § 3–305 or § 3–306 of
the Criminal Law Article, as the sections existed before October 1, 2017, involving a victim
who is a child under the age of 16 years, may not be allowed deductions from the
incarcerated individual’s term of confinement as provided under this subtitle for any period
of presentence or postsentence confinement in a local correctional facility.

(2) AN INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL WHO IS SERVING A SENTENCE
FOR A VIOLATION OF § 3–303 OF THE CRIMINAL LAW ARTICLE THAT OCCURRED ON
OR AFTER OCTOBER 1, 2024, MAY NOT BE ALLOWED DEDUCTIONS FROM THE
INCARCERATED INDIVIDUAL’S TERM OF CONFINEMENT AS PROVIDED UNDER THIS
SUBTITLE FOR ANY PERIOD OF PRESENTENCE OR POSTSENTENCE CONFINEMENT IN
A LOCAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.

[(2)] (3) This subsection may not be construed to require an incarcerated
individual to serve a longer sentence of confinement than is authorized by the statute under
which the incarcerated individual was convicted.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2