START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1099 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1099 
(Senator Smith, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Emergency Services - Automated External Defibrillator and Naloxone Co-
Location Initiative - Requirements for Public Buildings 
 
 
This bill expands the purpose of the Public Access Automated External Defibrillator 
Program (AED program) to include an initiative to co-locate up to two doses of naloxone 
with each automated external defibrillator (AED) placed in a “public building.” The 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Board must (1) develop and implement the initiative 
in collaboration with the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) and (2) adopt regulations 
jointly with MDH. The initiative must be funded using funds from the Opioid Restitution 
Fund (ORF) appropriated through the State budget.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund expenditures from ORF increase by at least $74,100 in FY 2025 
and future years for staff. Additional, more significant, costs incurred in FY 2025 through 
FY 2028 are not quantified. Nevertheless, as discussed below, ORF expenditures also 
increase for one-time information technology costs, to supply specified materials, and for 
the naloxone that needs to be co-located. Additional expenditures are also incurred in future 
years as naloxone is used or expires and is replaced. Revenues are not affected. 
 
 
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
74,100 
87,800 
91,700 
95,700 
99,900 
Net Effect 
($74,100) 
($87,800) 
($91,700) 
($95,700) 
($99,900)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  The bill can be implemented within existing resources, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected.  
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1099/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  “Public building” means (1) a public mass transportation accommodation 
that is supported by public funds; (2) an improvement of a public area used for gathering 
or amusement, including a public park or recreation center; and (3) a facility that is 
supported by public funds and primarily used to provide secondary or higher education. 
 
The purpose of the AED program is expanded to include the implementation of an initiative 
requiring the co-location of up to two doses of naloxone (a medication approved by the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the reversal of a known or suspected opioid 
overdose) with each AED in a public building under the program. In order to qualify for a 
valid certificate under the AED program, a registered facility that is a public building must 
(in addition to current law provisions) meet the bill’s requirements to co-locate naloxone 
with each AED maintained in the facility. 
 
The initiative must ensure that the doses of naloxone are maintained in a location that (1) is 
visible and in close physical proximity to the AED and (2) has a label that clearly indicates 
to the public the availability of naloxone. 
 
The EMS Board and MDH must jointly adopt regulations that (1) establish guidelines for 
periodic inspections and maintenance of the naloxone placed in public buildings; (2) assist 
the administrators of each public building in carrying out the bill’s provisions; and 
(3) establish initial prioritization of the public buildings eligible to receive funding under 
the bill with a goal of co-location of naloxone with each AED located in a public building 
by October 1, 2027. 
 
The owner or operator of a public building is immune from civil liability for any act or 
omission in the provision and maintenance of naloxone, if the owner or operator has 
satisfied any requirements established for providing and maintaining naloxone pursuant to 
the initiative. 
 
Likewise, an individual is immune from civil liability for any act or omission in providing 
assistance or medical aid to a victim at the scene of an emergency when administering 
naloxone in response to a known or suspected drug overdose, including an individual who 
administers naloxone made available pursuant to the initiative. 
 
The purposes for which ORF may provide funds is expanded to include supporting the 
initiative to co-locate naloxone with AEDs placed in public buildings under the bill. 
 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1099/ Page 3 
Current Law: 
 
Maryland Public Access Automated External Defibrillator Program 
 
“AED” means a medical heart monitor and defibrillator device that (1) is cleared for market 
by FDA; (2) recognizes the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation or rapid 
ventricular tachycardia; (3) determines, without intervention by an operator, whether 
defibrillation should be performed, and on determination that defibrillation should be 
performed, automatically charges; and (4) requires operator intervention to deliver an 
electrical impulse or automatically continues with delivery of an electrical impulse. 
 
The AED program permits an organization, business, association, or agency that meets 
specified requirements to make AEDs available to victims of sudden cardiac arrest. The 
Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems (MIEMSS) oversees the 
program, including approving entities to participate and issuing registrations. 
 
Under Maryland regulations (COMAR 30.06.02.01), to be eligible for registration or 
renewal of registration, each facility must designate an AED coordinator who must: 
 
 
complete cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and AED training and subsequent 
refresher training, in accordance with specified requirements; 
 
be responsible for implementing and administering the AED program at the facility; 
and 
 
ensure that monthly safety inspections of all supplemental and AED equipment are 
conducted. 
 
Likewise, a facility must ensure that all expected AED operators have completed CPR and 
AED training and subsequent refresher training, as specified. AEDs must be placed in 
locations that are visible and readily accessible to any person willing to operate the AED 
in the event of a suspected cardiac arrest. A facility at which an AED is operated must have 
a telephone or communication service available at all times for the notification of a public 
safety answering point; it must also submit data or other information concerning the  
AED program as requested by MIEMSS. 
 
Overdose Response Program 
 
MDH’s Overdose Response Program (ORP) allows for FDA-approved opioid overdose 
reversal drugs to be offered to specified individuals – free of charge – by multiple 
providers, programs, and entities. Subject to the limitations of the State budget, MDH must 
purchase and provide FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs, at no cost, to the 
entities who may provide the reversal drugs only if MDH provides them. MDH may 
authorize private or public entities to conduct education and training on opioid overdose 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1099/ Page 4 
recognition and response that includes (1) education on recognizing the signs and 
symptoms of an opioid overdose; (2) training on responding to an opioid overdose, 
including the administration of FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drugs; and 
(3) access to opioid overdose reversal drugs and the necessary supplies for the 
administration of the opioid overdose reversal drug. Individuals are not required to obtain 
the specified training and education on opioid overdose recognition and response from a 
private or public entity before a pharmacist may dispense an FDA-approved opioid 
overdose reversal drug. 
 
Standing Orders for Opioid Overdose Reversal Drugs 
 
A licensed health care provider with prescribing authority may prescribe and dispense an 
FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to an individual who is believed to be at risk 
of experiencing an opioid overdose or is in a position to assist the individual at risk of 
experiencing an opioid overdose. A health care provider may also prescribe and dispense 
an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug by issuing a standing order if the licensed 
health care provider (1) is employed by MDH or a local health department or (2) has a 
written agreement with an authorized private or public entity. 
 
A licensed health care provider who issues a standing order may delegate the dispensing 
of an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to an employee or volunteer of an 
authorized private or public entity in accordance with a written agreement between the 
delegating licensed health care provider and the authorized private or public entity that 
employs the employee or volunteer. A licensed health care provider with dispensing 
authority may also dispense an FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug to any 
individual in accordance with a standing order that is issued by a licensed health care 
provider with prescribing authority as described above. A pharmacist may also dispense an 
FDA-approved opioid overdose reversal drug in accordance with a therapy management 
contract under the Health Occupations Article. 
 
Maryland has a statewide standing order for opioid overdose reversal drugs that authorizes 
any Maryland-licensed pharmacist to dispense unlimited prescriptions and refills of 
naloxone and devices for its administration to any individual, as specified. A pharmacist 
must provide consultation with the individual regarding the naloxone dosage that is most 
appropriate, select and dispense two doses of naloxone, and provide directions for use. The 
standing order is set to expire June 30, 2024, at which time a new order will be issued. If a 
patient cannot afford naloxone or related copayments, or does not wish to use insurance 
coverage, pharmacists are instructed to refer them to ORP where they can obtain a 
naloxone kit free of charge. 
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 1099/ Page 5 
Opioid Restitution Fund 
 
Chapter 537 of 2019 established ORF, a special fund to retain any revenues received by 
the State relating to specified opioid judgments or settlements, which may be used only for 
opioid-related programs and services. Chapter 270 of 2022 specifies that ORF may be used 
for programs, services, supports, and resources for evidence-based substance use disorder 
(SUD) prevention, treatment, recovery, or harm reduction that have the purpose of 
currently authorized outcomes and activities. ORF may also be used for: 
 
 
evidence-informed SUD prevention, treatment recovery, or harm reduction pilot 
programs or demonstration studies that are not evidence based if the advisory 
council determines that emerging evidence supports funding or that there is a 
reasonable basis for funding with the expectation of creating an evidence-based 
program and approves the use of money for the pilot program or demonstration 
study; and  
 
evaluations of the effectiveness and outcomes reporting for SUD abatement 
infrastructure, programs, services, supports, and resources for which the fund is 
used. 
 
In fiscal 2023, ORF revenues totaled $57.9 million, and expenditures (largely in the form 
of grants) totaled $26.9 million. The fiscal 2025 budget includes $81 million in grants from 
opioid settlement funds to local government and community organizations for opioid 
abatement efforts. 
 
State Expenditures: 
 
Administrative Costs 
 
As noted above, MIEMSS is responsible for administering the AED program. Under the 
bill, MIEMSS (jointly with MDH) must establish guidelines for periodic inspections of the 
co-located naloxone and assist public building administrators in carrying out the bill. The 
initiative must be funded using funds from ORF appropriated through the State budget. As 
such, this analysis assumes that most of the responsibilities for implementation will be 
undertaken by MIEMSS with support from MDH but paid for using ORF special funds. 
MIEMSS advises it requires two full-time staff (one program manager and 
one administrative officer) to implement the bill. The Department of Legislative Services 
agrees that additional personnel are likely necessary and advises that one full-time program 
manager should be sufficient for implementation in light of the requirement that MIEMSS 
collaborate with MDH to develop and implement the program.  
 
Thus, special fund expenditures from ORF increase by at least $74,108 in fiscal 2025, 
which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 1099/ Page 6 
of hiring one program manager to establish inspection guidelines and assist public building 
administrators in carrying out the bill’s requirements. It includes a salary, fringe benefits, 
one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$66,852 
Operating Expenses 
7,256 
FY 2025 Personnel Expenditures 
$74,108 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. To the extent that additional 
staff is necessary, special fund expenditures may increase further. 
 
Special fund expenditures from ORF increase by an additional indeterminate amount in 
fiscal 2025 only for MIEMSS to update its AED program tracking system to add the new 
requirement to co-locate up to two doses of naloxone with each AED in a public building. 
 
MDH can likely provide support to MIEMSS and expertise as to protocols and procedures 
related to naloxone using existing budgeted resources. 
 
Any operational impact on State agencies for conducting periodic inspections under the 
bill cannot be reliably estimated as MIEMSS and MDH must establish guidelines through 
regulations. Nevertheless, this analysis assumes that the impact of periodic inspections is 
absorbable within existing budgeted resources for each entity.  
 
Costs to Co-locate Naloxone with AEDs in Public Buildings 
 
As the initiative must be funded using available funds from ORF, this analysis assumes 
that all costs related to co-locating naloxone in public buildings statewide (local- and 
State-owned or operated public buildings) are paid for using ORF funds. MIEMSS advises 
that, in order to ensure consistency in storage and packaging of naloxone at AED sites, 
MIEMSS intends to supply sites with these materials at an estimated cost of $25 per AED 
site. MDH has previously advised that the most commonly requested and provided form 
of naloxone within ORP is Narcan nasal spray (4 milligrams). A two-dose kit of Narcan is 
approximately $45 with a shelf life of three years. Thus, this analysis assumes a cost of $45 
for two-doses of naloxone, which is incurred at least every three years (as the naloxone 
expires) or sooner as naloxone is used and needs to be replaced. 
 
Thus, ORF expenditures increase by $70 ($25 for storage and packaging and $45 for a 
two-dose naloxone pack) for each AED located in a public building to supply naloxone 
and storage and packaging materials in fiscal 2025 through 2028 (based on regulations 
establishing initial prioritization of co-location of naloxone with each AED located in a 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 1099/ Page 7 
public building by October 1, 2027); expenditures increase by $45 per AED in future years 
as naloxone is used or expires and is replaced. 
 
MIEMSS advises that, in 2023, there were 15,528 AEDs in 9,226 locations across the State. 
However, the proportion of these AEDs that are located in “public buildings” as defined 
by the bill is unknown. MIEMSS further advises that, while some entities (e.g., restaurants 
and schools) are required to have AEDs, the vast majority of entities that participate do so 
voluntarily. For illustrative purposes only, if the bill applies to 40% of AEDs statewide 
(local- and State-owned or -operated public buildings), ORF expenditures increase by 
$434,784 spread across fiscal 2025 through 2028 to provide initial doses of naloxone and 
the specified storage and packaging materials. At a minimum, additional costs are incurred 
in fiscal 2028 through 2030 to replace expired naloxone – at $45 per two-dose pack (or 
sooner as naloxone is used and needs to be replaced).  
 
Some agencies advise that MDH already provides naloxone for their facilities through ORP 
(paid for by MDH general funds). To the extent naloxone is already provided, additional 
ORF expenditures for this purpose may be reduced; conversely, to the extent that an agency 
accepts naloxone under the bill (rather than requesting through ORP) general fund 
expenditures may decrease. However, overall State finances are not materially affected by 
which program provides naloxone.  
 
Additionally, each public secondary school must have an AED on site and each public 
school must store naloxone. Thus, each secondary public school has an AED, and all public 
schools have naloxone. However, current naloxone supplies are not co-located with the 
AED. This analysis assumes that each secondary public school likely must obtain 
additional naloxone to co-locate with the AED and that the costs to obtain the additional 
naloxone are paid for using funds from ORF as discussed above.  
 
Local Expenditures:  Similar to the above effect for State agencies, any operational effect 
on local jurisdictions due to conducting periodic inspections is assumed to be absorbable 
within existing budgeted resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 1099/ Page 8 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems; 
Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, and Queen Anne’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Maryland State Department of Education; 
Maryland School for the Deaf; Baltimore City Community College; University System of 
Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Department of 
Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Transportation; Baltimore City Public 
Schools; Anne Arundel County Public Schools; Prince George’s County Public Schools; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 29, 2024 
Third Reader - April 1, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 1, 2024 
Enrolled - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Budget Information - April 22, 2024 
 
km/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amber R. Gundlach 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 8