START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1007 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 1007 
(Senator Hayes) 
Executive Nominations 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Government - Executive Appointments 
 
 
This emergency bill establishes that the Governor, with respect to appointments that require 
Senate confirmation, must submit a nomination to the Senate to fill the office within 
40 days from the start of the regular session of the General Assembly if the term of the 
office will end during the next upcoming Senate recess. The bill also establishes conditions 
for the Governor to submit nominations when the Governor becomes aware that a term of 
an office will end during the next upcoming Senate recess. An officer may not continue to 
serve more than four years after the officer’s term expires. However, the bill allows the 
Governor, subject to specified provisions of the Election Law and Education Articles, to 
appoint members of the State Board of Elections (SBE) and the Accountability and 
Implementation Board (AIB) during the recess of the Senate regardless of whether the term 
of office of a member will end during the next upcoming recess. Except for provisions 
related to appointment of members to SBE and AIB, the bill’s provisions take effect 
January 1, 2025. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  As the bill largely clarifies and reiterates constitutional and statutory 
provisions, there should not be a fiscal impact. Nevertheless, as current practice – over 
many Administrations – does not conform to those provisions, there is a significant 
operational impact on the Governor’s Office to come into compliance, including possibly 
needing additional staffing and a new tracking system to do so, as discussed below. 
Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  The bill does not directly affect local finances. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1007/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  If the term of an office that requires Senate confirmation will end during 
the next upcoming recess of the Senate, the Governor must submit a nomination to the 
Senate to fill the office within 40 days from the start of the regular session of the 
General Assembly. If the Governor becomes aware that the term of an office will end 
during the next upcoming recess of the Senate more than 40 days after the commencement 
of the regular session of the General Assembly but before the legislature adjourns sine die, 
the Governor may submit a nomination to the Senate to fill the office only if the Senate 
consents to examine the nominee, subject to its rules. An individual nominated more than 
40 days after the commencement of the regular session of the General Assembly but before 
the legislature adjourns sine die is not eligible for confirmation if there is an incumbent in 
the office unless the Senate consents to examine the nominee, subject to its rules. 
 
The bill also establishes that, at the end of a term, an officer continues to serve until a 
successor is appointed and qualifies. An officer may not continue to serve more than 
four years after the end of the officer’s term. 
 
The bill makes technical and clarifying changes to provisions related to recess 
appointments (described below). 
 
Current Law:   
 
State Board of Elections and the Accountability and Implementation Board – Generally 
 
SBE must manage and supervise elections in the State and ensure compliance with the 
requirements of the Election Law Article and any applicable federal laws by all persons 
involved in the elections process. SBE is comprised of five members, appointed by the 
Governor with the advice and consent of the Senate, with staggered terms of five-years.  
 
Among other things, Chapter 36 of 2021 established AIB as an independent agency 
responsible for the oversight of the Blueprint for Maryland’s Future and evaluating the 
outcomes against the goals of the Blueprint during its implementation period. AIB is led 
by a seven-member board, appointed by the Governor with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, with staggered terms of six years.  
 
Constitutional Provisions 
 
Under Article II, § 13 of the Maryland Constitution, all civil officers nominated by the 
Governor and subject to confirmation by the Senate must be nominated to the Senate within 
40 days from the start of each regular session of the legislature. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1007/ Page 3 
With respect to positions that require Senate confirmation, Article II, § 11 of the 
Maryland Constitution states that, in case of any vacancy during the recess of the Senate, 
the Governor must appoint a suitable person to the office (often referred to as a “recess 
appointment”). The recess appointment remains in effect until the end of the next session 
of the legislature, or until another person is appointed to the same office, whichever occurs 
first. The Governor must submit the nomination of the recess appointee to the Senate on 
the first day of the next regular meeting of the Senate. Under Article II, § 12 of the 
Maryland Constitution, a person rejected by the Senate may not be nominated for the same 
office at the same session, unless at the request of the Senate, nor can the person be 
reappointed during the subsequent Senate recess. 
 
Recess Appointments 
 
An individual who was appointed to fill a vacancy in an office during the recess of the 
Senate or who was nominated to fill a vacancy in an office during a regular session of the 
Senate may not (1) be nominated for the same office at the same session, unless requested 
by the Senate; (2) be appointed to the same office during the recess of the Senate; or 
(3) continue to serve in the office or be designated to serve in an acting capacity for the 
same office after the adjournment of the regular session of the Senate at which the 
nomination was made. These provisions apply only if (1) the Governor withdrew the 
nomination during the regular session of the Senate at which the nomination was made; 
(2) the Senate failed to act on the nomination before the Senate adjourned the regular 
session of the Senate at which the nomination was made and the individual was not 
reappointed to the office by the Governor; (3) the individual withdrew the individual’s 
nomination; (4) the Governor fails to make the nomination on the first day of the regular 
session of the Senate if required under the Maryland Constitution; or (5) the individual is 
not confirmed by the Senate and is designated by the Governor to fill the vacancy in an 
acting capacity. The bill makes technical and clarifying changes to these conditions. 
 
Limits of Rejected Appointees 
 
An individual who is prohibited from continuing to serve under the conditions specified 
above may not, in any capacity, carry out responsibilities of the office or make 
representations that the individual serves in the office or is legally authorized to carry out 
the responsibilities of the office. If the holder is in an office on a public body for which no 
salary is provided, any votes cast by an individual who, at the time the vote is conducted 
by the public body, is prohibited from continuing to serve in the office under the provisions 
specified above may not be counted. The presence of the individual may also not be 
counted for purposes of a quorum. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1007/ Page 4 
Other Provisions for Appointees 
 
An individual who is designated to serve in an acting capacity to fill a vacancy in an office 
for which an appointment is required to be made with the advice and consent of the Senate 
may not serve in the office for more than 275 days after the date the designation was made. 
An individual may not continue to serve in an acting capacity after the adjournment of a 
regular session of the Senate if (1) the individual was serving in the acting capacity before 
the start of the regular session and (2) the individual was not nominated to fill the vacancy 
in the office during that regular session. In addition, the individual may not receive any 
compensation, including a salary or reimbursement for expenses, related to serving in the 
office or carrying out the responsibilities of the office. 
 
State Expenditures:  The Governor’s Office advises that the Appointment’s Office 
oversees approximately 10,000 active applications each fiscal year for both Senate 
approved and non-approved positions for various boards and commissions throughout 
State government. The Governor’s Office advises that it currently does not submit by the 
40th day nominations for Senate-confirmable positions whose terms are scheduled to 
terminate between July 1 and December 31. As the bill requires the Governor’s Office to 
come into compliance with existing constitutional and statutory requirements regarding the 
timing of nominations, the Governor’s Office may incur some costs to do so, particularly 
to screen more applicants in order to submit their nominations by the 40th day of each 
legislative session. 
 
The Department of Legislative Services (DLS) notes that any such fiscal impact is not due 
to the bill itself but to correcting longstanding practice – over many Administrations – in 
order to comply with constitutional provisions related to the timing of the submission of 
appointments. Nevertheless, the Governor’s Office advises it needs five positions and a 
new tracking system to comply with the bill; DLS acknowledges that the Governor’s Office 
may need at least two positions and the new tracking system at an initial cost of  
$270,745 in fiscal 2025. To the extent that more staff may be needed based on experience 
under the bill, the Governor’s Office can add additional positions through the operating 
budget process. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office; Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 1007/ Page 5 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 8, 2024 
Third Reader - March 21, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 21, 2024 
 
km/mcr 
 
Analysis by:   Thomas S. Elder 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5