START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1077 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1077 
(Senators Corderman and Hester) 
Budget and Taxation 
Appropriations 
 
Public Schools - School Security Employees - Appropriations 
 
 
This bill expands the authorized uses of grants from the Safe Schools Fund to include 
school security employees. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. Expanding the authorized uses of the Safe Schools Fund has no effect 
on total revenues for or expenditures from the fund.  
 
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Safe to Learn Act 
 
Chapter 30 of 2018, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act, made comprehensive changes 
designed to improve the safety of the State’s public schools. The remainder of this section 
summarizes relevant provisions of the Act. 
 
School Safety Subcabinet 
 
The School Safety Subcabinet consists of the following individuals or their designees:   
 
 
the State Superintendent of Schools; 
 
the Secretary of Health; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1077/ Page 2 
 
the Secretary of State Police; 
 
the Attorney General;  
 
the Secretary of Disabilities; and 
 
the Executive Director of the Interagency Commission on School Construction. 
 
The State Superintendent or designee chairs the subcabinet, and the Executive Director of 
MCSS provides staff. 
 
The Act required each local school system, by June 15, 2019, and regularly thereafter, to 
conduct a safety evaluation of each public school under its jurisdiction. The purposes of 
the evaluations are to (1) identify and, if necessary, develop solutions for physical safety 
concerns, including issues with building security and (2) identify and evaluate any patterns 
of safety concerns on school property or at school-sponsored events. 
 
Maryland Center for School Safety  
 
Chapter 372 of 2013 established MCSS as an independent unit within State government 
under the direction of a governing board chaired by the State Superintendent of Schools. 
Five years later, the Maryland Safe to Learn Act made MCSS an independent unit within 
MSDE and increased the mandated appropriation for MCSS’s operations from $500,000 
to $2.0 million annually. MCSS’s duties include:   
 
 
assisting local school systems to identify resources and implement training for 
students and parents about relationship violence, identifying the signs of unhealthy 
relationships, and preventing relationship violence; 
 
analyzing data on School Resource Officers (SROs) and developing guidelines for 
local school systems regarding the assignment and training of SROs; 
 
certifying school safety coordinators; 
 
consulting with local school systems on safety evaluations; 
 
reviewing and commenting on school emergency plans; and 
 
reporting on life-threatening incidents that occur on public school grounds. 
 
Safe Schools Fund 
 
The Safe Schools Fund is administered by the subcabinet, which must establish procedures 
for local school systems and law enforcement agencies to apply for grants from the fund. 
The purpose of the fund is to provide grants to local school systems to enhance school 
safety, as specified, and it may be used only for that purpose. 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1077/ Page 3 
School Resource Officers and School Security Employees 
 
The Maryland Safe to Learn Act defines an SRO as (1) a law enforcement officer assigned 
to a school in accordance with a memorandum of understanding between a local law 
enforcement agency and a local school system or (2) a Baltimore City School Police 
Officer, as defined in current law.  
 
Each local school system must file a report with MCSS that identifies (1) the public schools 
that have an SRO assigned and (2) if no SRO is assigned to a public school, the adequate 
local law enforcement coverage that will be provided to the school. 
 
Annually, the Governor must include $10.0 million for the Safe Schools Fund to provide 
grants to local school systems and law enforcement agencies to meet the 
SRO/law enforcement coverage requirements established by Chapter 30. Grants must be 
made based on the proportion of public schools in each jurisdiction.  
 
A school security employee is an individual who (1) is not an SRO and (2) is employed by 
a local school system to provide safety and security-related services at a public school. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1336 (Delegate Ghrist) - Appropriations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City Public Schools; Baltimore County Public 
Schools; Maryland State Department of Education; Interagency Commission on School 
Construction; Maryland Center for School Safety; Maryland Association of Counties; 
Montgomery County Public Schools; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 21, 2024 
Third Reader - March 26, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 26, 2024 
Enrolled - April 29, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 29, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3