START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 584

Chapter 584

(Senate Bill 1014)

AN ACT concerning

State Procurement ~~–~~ ~~Minority~~ ~~Business~~ ~~Enterprises~~ ~~and~~ ~~Small~~ ~~Business~~
~~Enterprises~~ – Procurement Forecast and Outreach

FOR the purpose of ~~requiring~~ ~~each~~ ~~unit~~ ~~to~~ ~~publish~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~unit’s~~ ~~website~~ ~~annually~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~
~~procurement~~ ~~forecast;~~ requiring the Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business
Affairs to consult with each primary procurement unit to identify potential
contracting opportunities for and increase outreach efforts to small businesses;
~~requiring~~ ~~the~~ ~~Office~~ ~~to~~ ~~develop~~ ~~a~~ ~~certain~~ ~~program~~ requiring each unit to submit, on
or before certain dates each year, certain procurement forecasts to the Office in
accordance with certain requirements; and generally relating to ~~minority~~ ~~business~~
~~enterprise~~ ~~and~~ ~~small~~ ~~business~~ ~~enterprise~~ ~~participation~~ ~~in~~ State procurement.

~~BY~~ ~~adding~~ ~~to~~
~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~
~~Section~~ ~~14–302(a)(16)~~
~~Annotated~~ ~~Code~~ ~~of~~ ~~Maryland~~
~~(2021~~ ~~Replacement~~ ~~Volume~~ ~~and~~ ~~2023~~ ~~Supplement)~~

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – State Government
Section 9–302
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – State Government
Section 9–304.1 and 9–308
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2021 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

~~Article~~ ~~–~~ ~~State~~ ~~Finance~~ ~~and~~ ~~Procurement~~

~~14–302.~~

(a) (16) ON OR BEFORE MAY 1 EACH YEAR, EACH UNIT SHALL PUBLISH ON
THE UNIT’S WEBSITE A PROCUREMENT FORECAST LISTING ALL KNOWN AND
~~ANTICIPATED~~ ~~PROCUREMENTS~~ ~~TO~~ ~~BE~~ ~~MADE~~ ~~BY~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UNIT~~ ~~IN~~ ~~THE~~ ~~UPCOMING~~ ~~FISCAL~~

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 584 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

YEAR, INCLUDING AN ESTIMATE OF THE ANTICIPATED MINORITY BUSINESS
ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION GOALS FOR EACH PROCUREMENT.

Article – State Government

9–302.

There is an Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs in the Executive
Department.

9–304.1.

(A) (1) IN THIS SECTION THE FOLLOWING WORDS HAVE THE MEANINGS
INDICATED.

(2) “PRIMARY PROCUREMENT UNIT” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN §
11–101 OF THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(3) “SMALL BUSINESS” HAS THE MEANING STATED IN § 14–501 OF
THE STATE FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT ARTICLE.

(B) THE OFFICE SHALL CONSULT WITH EACH PRIMARY PROCUREMENT
UNIT TO IDENTIFY POTENTIAL CONTRACTING OPPORTUNITIES FOR AND INCREASE
OUTREACH EFFORTS TO SMALL BUSINESSES.

(C) THE OFFICE, IN CONSULTATION WITH PRIMARY PROCUREMENT UNITS,
SHALL DEVELOP A PROGRAM TO:

(1) IDENTIFY AND INCREASE AWARENESS OF PROCUREMENT
OPPORTUNITIES FOR SMALL ~~BUSINESS~~ ~~CONTRACTS~~ BUSINESSES FOR SERVICES AND
SUPPLIES; AND

(2) ASSIST SMALL BUSINESSES IN COMPLYING WITH PROCEDURES
FOR BIDDING ON A PROCUREMENT CONTRACT OR RESPONDING TO A REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS.

9–308.

(A) ON OR BEFORE JUNE 30 EACH YEAR, EACH UNIT SHALL SUBMIT TO THE
OFFICE A PROCUREMENT FORECAST FOR ALL PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS OVER
$100,000 FOR THE UPCOMING FISCAL YEAR.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 584

(B) (1) ON OR BEFORE AUGUST 15 EACH YEAR, EACH UNIT SHALL SUBMIT
ANNUALLY THE UNIT’S RECONCILIATION OF THE PRIOR FISCAL YEAR’S
PROCUREMENT FORECAST TO INCLUDE:

(I) THE STATUS OF THE FORECASTED PROCUREMENTS;

(II) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF FORECASTED CONTRACTS THAT
HAVE BEEN AWARDED; AND

(III) THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PROCUREMENTS THAT HAVE BEEN
AWARDED BUT WERE UNANTICIPATED BY THE UNIT’S PRIOR FISCAL YEAR’S
PROCUREMENT FORECAST.

(2) EACH UNIT SHALL NOTIFY THE OFFICE WITHIN 15 DAYS OF ANY
UPDATES TO THE EXISTING FORECAST, INCLUDING:

(I) ADDITIONAL PROCUREMENTS FORECASTED FOR THE
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR; AND

(II) ANY PREVIOUSLY FORECASTED PROCUREMENTS THAT ARE
NO LONGER ANTICIPATED TO OCCUR DURING THE FISCAL YEAR.

(3) THE OFFICE SHALL PUBLISH THE INFORMATION PROVIDED BY
EACH UNIT ON THE OFFICE’S WEBSITE.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That a Position Identification
Number (PIN) shall be created in the Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women
Business Affairs for a compliance officer to carry out the requirements of §§ 9–304.1 and
9–308 of the State Government Article, as enacted by Section 1 of this Act.

SECTION ~~2.~~ 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3