START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 763

Chapter 763

(Senate Bill 1095)

AN ACT concerning

Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring

FOR the purpose of establishing the Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring; and
generally relating to the Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring.

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That:

(a) There is a Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring.

(b) The Workgroup consists of:

(1) three members of the Senate of Maryland, appointed by the President
of the Senate;

(2) three members of the House of Delegates, appointed by the Speaker of
the House;

(3) the Secretary of Public Safety and Correctional Services, or the
Secretary’s designee;

(4) the Public Defender of Maryland, or the Public Defender’s designee;

(5) the President of the Maryland State’s Attorneys’ Association, or the
President’s designee;

(6) one representative of the Judiciary, appointed by the Chief Justice of
the Supreme Court of Maryland;

(7) the Executive Director of the Maryland Network Against Domestic
Violence, or the Executive Director’s designee; and

~~(6)~~ ~~(7)~~ (8) the following members appointed by the Governor:

(i) one representative of the Job Opportunities Task Force;

(ii) one representative of the Maryland Chiefs of Police Association
and the Maryland Sheriffs’ Association;

(iii) one representative of a large local detention center;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 763 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(iv) one representative of a small local detention center;

(v) one representative of a county pretrial release program that does
not charge fees to participants; ~~and~~

(vi) one representative of a county pretrial release program that does
charge fees to participants; and

~~(7)~~ (vii) ~~two~~ ~~representatives~~ one representative of private home detention
monitoring agencies ~~who~~ ~~shall~~ ~~be~~ ~~nonvoting~~ ~~members.~~

(c) The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House shall select two
cochairs from among the members of the Workgroup.

(d) The Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services shall provide staff
for the Workgroup.

(e) A member of the Workgroup:

(1) may not receive compensation as a member of the Workgroup; but

(2) is entitled to reimbursement for expenses under the Standard State
Travel Regulations, as provided in the State budget.

(f) A member of the Workgroup serves at the pleasure of the person who
appointed the member.

(g) At the first meeting of the Workgroup that occurs on or after July 1, 2024, the
Workgroup shall vote to adopt a code of conduct providing for the acceptable conduct of
Workgroup members.

~~(f)~~ (h) The Workgroup shall study and make recommendations regarding the costs
and availability of both publicly and privately provided pretrial home detention monitoring
systems.

~~(g)~~ (i) On or before December 31 each year, the Workgroup shall submit a report of
its findings and recommendations to the General Assembly, in accordance with § 2–1257 of
the State Government Article.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024. It shall remain effective for a period of 3 years and, at the end of June 30, 2027,
this Act, with no further action required by the General Assembly, shall be abrogated and
of no further force and effect.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2