START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1095 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 1095 
(Senators Smith and Elfreth) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring 
 
 
This bill reestablishes the Workgroup on Home Detention Monitoring, staffed by the 
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services (DPSCS), to study and make 
recommendations regarding the costs and availability of both publicly and privately 
provided pretrial home detention monitoring systems. Workgroup members may not 
receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for expenses, as specified. By 
December 31 each year, the workgroup must submit a report of its findings and 
recommendations to the General Assembly. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024, and 
terminates June 30, 2027. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Any expense reimbursements for workgroup members and staffing costs for 
DPSCS are assumed to be minimal and absorbable within existing budgeted resources. 
Revenues are not affected.    
  
Local Effect:  Local government finances are not anticipated to be materially affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 597 of 2021 established the Workgroup on Home Detention 
Monitoring to study and make recommendations regarding the costs and availability of 
both publicly and privately provided pretrial home detention monitoring systems. 
Chapter 544 of 2022 extended the termination date of the workgroup from June 30, 2022, 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1095/ Page 2 
to December 31, 2023, and required the workgroup to submit an annual report by 
December 31 each year. The workgroup was not fully appointed and never met.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has been introduced within the last 
three years. See HB 1011 and SB 704 of 2022; and SB 23 and HB 316 of 2021. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services; 
Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2