START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1098 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 1098 
(Senator Smith) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Judiciary 
 
Correctional Services - Diminution Credits - Sexual Offenses 
 
 
This bill prohibits an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first-degree rape, 
that occurred on or after October 1, 2024, in a State or local correctional facility from 
earning diminution credits to reduce the incarcerated individual’s term of confinement. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill does not materially affect State operations or finances in the near 
term. In the future, general fund expenditures increase, potentially significantly over time, 
for the Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services as individuals serve longer 
sentences under the bill, as discussed below. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  Offenders sentenced for violent crimes typically are not sentenced to local 
correctional facilities; therefore, local finances are not anticipated to be materially affected. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Generally, incarcerated individuals sentenced to a State correctional 
facility are entitled to earn diminution of confinement credits to reduce the lengths of their 
incarcerations. Individuals sentenced for a “crime of violence” earn diminution credits at a 
lower rate than other incarcerated individuals. The following types of incarcerated 
individuals may not earn diminution credits:   
 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first- or second-degree rape 
against a victim younger than 16; 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1098/ Page 2 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for first- or second-degree 
sexual offense, as the offenses existed before October 1, 2017, against a victim 
younger than 16; 
 
an incarcerated individual who is serving a sentence for a subsequent conviction of 
third-degree sexual offense against a victim younger than 16; and 
 
an incarcerated individual imprisoned for a lifetime sexual offender supervision 
violation. 
 
Diminution credits are deducted from an incarcerated individual’s “term of confinement,” 
which is defined as (1) the length of the sentence, for a single sentence or (2) the period 
from the first day of the sentence that begins first through the last day of the sentence that 
ends last, for concurrent sentences, partially concurrent sentences, consecutive sentences, 
or a combination of concurrent and consecutive sentences. 
 
Diminution credits are made for good conduct, work tasks, education, and special projects 
or programs. For additional information on diminution credits, see the Maryland 
Diminution Credit System report published by the Department of Legislative Services in 
December 2020. 
 
State Expenditures:  Although the bill does not materially affect State finances over the 
five-year period covered by this fiscal and policy note, general fund incarceration 
expenditures increase in the future as individuals serve longer sentences due to the bill’s 
changes. 
 
Persons serving a sentence longer than 18 months are incarcerated in State correctional 
facilities. Currently, the average total cost per incarcerated individual, including overhead, 
is estimated at $5,110 per month. Excluding overhead, the average cost of housing a new 
State incarcerated individual (including health care costs) is about $1,244 per month. 
Excluding all health care (which is a fixed cost under the current contract), the average 
variable costs total $336 per month. 
 
The Division of Correction reports receiving an average of 14 incarcerated individuals 
annually convicted of first-degree rape, with an average sentence of 26 years. For 
illustrative purposes only, for each individual that remains incarcerated for  
5 additional years as a result of the bill, based on the current average variable costs of  
$336 per month (excluding health care), State incarceration costs increase by 
approximately $20,160. 
 
Although a reliable estimate of the total increase in incarceration costs cannot be made, the 
impact could eventually be significant considering the cumulative impact over time. 
 
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1098/ Page 3 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore, Frederick, and Montgomery counties; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 22, 2024 
Third Reader - March 19, 2024 
 
rh/lgc 
 
Analysis by:   Shirleen M. E. Pilgrim 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3