START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 993

Chapter 993

(Senate Bill 1039)

AN ACT concerning

Frederick County – Juveniles – Truancy Reduction Pilot Program

FOR the purpose of authorizing the Circuit Administrative Judge of the Sixth Circuit to
establish a Truancy Reduction Pilot Program in the juvenile court in Frederick
County; and generally relating to Truancy Reduction Pilot programs.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–8C–01
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings
Section 3–8C–02
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2020 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Courts and Judicial Proceedings

3–8C–01.

This subtitle applies only:

(1) In a county in which the circuit administrative judge has established a
Truancy Reduction Pilot Program under § 3–8C–02 of this subtitle; and

(2) To the extent that funds are provided in an annual State budget for a
Truancy Reduction Pilot Program.

3–8C–02.

(a) (1) The Circuit Administrative Judge of the First Circuit may establish a
Truancy Reduction Pilot Program in one or more of the juvenile courts in Dorchester
County, Somerset County, Wicomico County, and Worcester County.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 993 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(2) The Circuit Administrative Judge of the Second Circuit may establish
a Truancy Reduction Pilot Program in the juvenile courts in Kent County and Talbot
County.

(3) The Circuit Administrative Judge of the Third Circuit may establish a
Truancy Reduction Pilot Program in the juvenile court in Harford County.

(4) THE CIRCUIT ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE OF THE SIXTH CIRCUIT
MAY ESTABLISH A TRUANCY REDUCTION PILOT PROGRAM IN THE JUVENILE COURT
IN FREDERICK COUNTY.

[(4)] (5) The Circuit Administrative Judge of the Seventh Circuit may
establish a Truancy Reduction Pilot Program in the juvenile court in Prince George’s
County.

(b) After consultation with the administrative judges of the first, second, third,
SIXTH, and seventh circuits, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Maryland may
accept a gift or grant to implement the pilot programs in each respective circuit.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
October 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2