START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1014 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1014 
(Senator Charles) 
Budget and Taxation 
Health and Government Operations 
 
State Procurement - Procurement Forecast and Outreach 
 
 
This bill requires each State procurement unit, by June 30 of each year, to submit to the 
Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business Affairs (GOSBA) a 
procurement forecast for all procurement contracts valued at more than $100,000 for the 
upcoming fiscal year. It also requires each unit, by August 15 of each year, to submit a 
reconciliation of the prior year’s forecast with specified information about actual 
procurements carried out during the fiscal year. GOSBA, in consultation with primary 
procurement units, must (1) identify potential contracting opportunities for and increase 
outreach efforts to small businesses; (2) identify and increase awareness of procurement 
opportunities for small businesses for services and supplies; and (3) assist small businesses 
with procedures for bidding on a procurement contract or responding to a request for 
proposals. A new staff position must be created in GOSBA to implement the bill. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  General fund expenditures increase by $77,900 in FY 2025; out-year 
expenditures reflect annualization and inflation. State procurement units can otherwise 
carry out the bill’s requirements with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
GF Expenditure 
77,900 
92,700 
96,800 
101,100 
105,500 
Net Effect 
($77,900) 
($92,700) 
($96,800) 
($101,100) 
($105,500)  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease 
  
Local Effect:  None.   
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1014/ Page 2 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  The reconciliation of each procurement unit’s prior year’s procurement 
forecast must include: 
 
 
the status of the forecasted procurements; 
 
the total number of forecasted contracts that have been awarded; and 
 
the total number of procurements that have been awarded but were unanticipated by 
the unit’s prior forecast. 
 
Each procurement unit must notify GOSBA within 15 days of any updates to the existing 
forecast, including (1) any additional procurements forecasted for the current fiscal year 
and (2) any previously forecasted procurements that are no longer anticipated to occur 
during the fiscal year. GOSBA must publish the information provided by each unit on its 
website. 
 
Current Law:  GOSBA is established in statute and is led by a Special Secretary appointed 
by the Governor. Statute assigns numerous responsibilities to the Special Secretary, among 
them providing help to minority persons, small businesses, and veteran-owned small 
businesses and the communities in which they live, work, and employ others. 
 
Primary procurement units are generally those units that are authorized to conduct specified 
procurements on their own behalf without the approval of any other primary procurement 
unit, subject to oversight by the Board of Public Works. They are: 
 
 
the State Treasurer; 
 
the Department of General Services; 
 
the Department of Transportation; 
 
the University System of Maryland; 
 
the Maryland Port Commission; 
 
Morgan State University; and 
 
St. Mary’s College of Maryland. 
 
State regulations require State procurement units to prepare a procurement expenditure 
forecast each year for the upcoming fiscal year. Agencies advise that GOSBA requires 
them to submit the forecasts by June 30 each year, which gives them enough time to 
incorporate procurements prompted by legislation enacted during the legislative session. 
 
State Expenditures:  GOSBA lacks sufficient staff to carry out the additional outreach to, 
and technical assistance for, small businesses required by the bill. Therefore, general fund 
expenditures increase by $77,933 in fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1014/ Page 3 
October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate reflects the cost of hiring one administrator 
to conduct outreach to small businesses, provide technical assistance to small businesses, 
and track procurement activity by State procurement units. It includes a salary, 
fringe benefits, one-time start-up costs, and ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$70,677 
Operating Expenses 
7,256 
Total FY 2025 State Expenditures 
$77,933 
 
Future year expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and employee turnover 
as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses. 
 
Procurement regulations already require State procurement units to submit annual 
procurement forecasts to GOSBA, which GOSBA requires be delivered by June 30, and 
units can likely prepare the required annual reconciliation reports and other updates with 
existing resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small businesses may benefit from increased notifications and 
outreach by GOSBA and State agencies regarding procurement opportunities with the 
State. They may also benefit from technical assistance in responding to State solicitations. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Governor’s Office of Small, Minority, and Women Business 
Affairs; Department of Commerce; Maryland Department of Aging; University System of 
Maryland; Maryland Department of Agriculture; Department of Budget and Management; 
Maryland Department of the Environment; Department of General Services; Maryland 
Department of Health; Department of Housing and Community Development; Department 
of Human Services; Department of Juvenile Services; Maryland Department of Labor; 
Department of Natural Resources; Maryland Department of Planning; Department of 
Public Safety and Correctional Services; Board of Public Works; Department of State 
Police; Maryland Department of Transportation; Department of Veterans Affairs; 
Department of Service and Civic Innovation; Department of Legislative Services 
 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1014/ Page 4 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 22, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 22, 2024 
Enrolled - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 17, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - April 17, 2024 
 
km/ljm 
 
Analysis by:   Michael C. Rubenstein  
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 4