START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1010 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 1010 
(Senator Klausmeier) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Baltimore County - Alcoholic Beverages - Individual Storage Permits 
 
 
This bill requires retailers in Baltimore County to have written approval from the  
Baltimore County Board of License Commissioners before applying to the 
Executive Director of the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC) for an 
individual storage permit. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None.       
  
Local Effect:  Baltimore County can implement the bill with existing resources. 
Baltimore County revenues are not affected.      
  
Small Business Effect:  Potential minimal.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  An individual storage permit authorizes the holder to establish a warehouse 
to store alcoholic beverages in which title to the alcoholic beverages is vested in the permit 
holder. The permit fee is $50.  
 
In Anne Arundel County, a retailer is required to have written approval from the county’s 
board of license commissioners before applying to the Executive Director of ATCC for the 
individual storage permit. In fiscal 2022, ATCC issued 70 individual storage permits in the 
State.  
 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1010/ Page 2 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore County; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - March 12, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2