START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1056 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1056 
(Senator Kramer) 
Finance 
Economic Matters 
 
Cigarettes, Other Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking Devices - Revisions 
(Tobacco Retail Modernization Act of 2024) 
 
 
This bill makes various changes regarding how cigarettes, electronic smoking devices 
(ESD), and other tobacco products (OTP) may be sold in the State and alters related 
enforcement provisions. Generally, cigarettes, ESD, and OTP may not be displayed at retail 
unless the products are located behind a counter. The bill also (1) increases fees for 
specified licenses; (2) imposes additional requirements related to the display of tobacco 
products, ESD, and OTP; (3) requires the Maryland Department of Health (MDH) or its 
designee to conduct at least one unannounced inspection of certain license holders 
annually; (4) expands the grounds by which civil citations may be issued related to the 
display of ESD or tobacco products and the sale of such without age verification; 
(5) increases the criminal penalties associated with the sale of tobacco products to minors; 
(6) repeals various provisions that authorize the sale of cigarettes, ESD, or OTP to a person 
who is at least age 18 and an active-duty member of the military; and (7) requires the 
Alcohol, Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission (ATCC), in conjunction with specified 
entities, to submit a specified report by October 1, 2025.  
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Special fund revenues and expenditures increase by $1.2 million in FY 2025 
and $1.6 million annually thereafter due to higher license fees for enforcement, including 
grants to local health departments (LHDs). General fund revenues may increase by $24,000 
in FY 2025 and $32,000 annually thereafter from higher fines, possibly offset by lower tax 
revenues if less ESD is sold. General fund expenditures increase by $44,800 in FY 2025.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
GF Revenue 
$24,000 
$32,000 
$32,000 
$32,000 
$32,000 
SF Revenue 
$1,187,600 
$1,583,500 
$1,583,500 
$1,583,500 
$1,583,500 
GF Expenditure 
$44,800 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
$1,187,600 
$1,583,500 
$1,583,500 
$1,583,500 
$1,583,500 
Net Effect 
($20,800) 
$32,000 
$32,000 
$32,000 
$32,000  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1056/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  Montgomery County revenues increase from certain license fees; in all other 
counties, LHD revenues also increase, but from grants provided by MDH due to license 
fees distributed to MDH, as discussed below. LHD expenditures may increase to the extent 
additional staff is required to monitor and enforce the bill’s provisions; in counties other 
than Montgomery County, such costs are likely covered by the MDH grants. Civil fine 
revenues may increase, as discussed below.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary/Current Law:   
 
Definitions  
 
The bill alters definitions in a manner that alters the way ESD may be sold to consumers 
in Maryland by vape shop vendors. Further, vape shop vendors are limited to selling ESD 
and related accessories.  
 
ESD Manufacturer:  Under the bill, “ESD manufacturer” means a person that 
(1) manufactures, mixes, or otherwise produces ESD intended for sale in the State, 
including ESD intended for sale in the United States through an importer and (2) sells ESD 
to a consumer through mail order, online, telephone, or other electronic purchases. Further, 
if the ESD manufacturer also holds an ESD retailer or vape shop vendor license, it means 
a person that sells ESD in the same manner as a vape shop vendor to consumers located in 
the State or, unless otherwise prohibited or restricted under law, distributes sample ESD to 
a licensed ESD retailer or vape shop vendor.  
 
ESD Retailer and Vape Shop Vendor:  Under current law, an “ESD retailer” means a person 
that sells ESD to consumers, holds ESD for sale to consumers, or distributes sample ESD 
to consumers. “Vape shop vendor” means an ESD business that derives at least 70% of its 
revenues, measured by average daily receipts, from the sale of ESD and related accessories. 
The bill alters the definition of “vape shop vendor” to mean an ESD business that sells 
ESD and related accessories to consumers on the premises of its place of business.  
 
Cigarette, Other Tobacco Products, ESD, and Vape Shop Vendor License – Authorizations 
 
Under current law, any person with a specified cigarette or OTP license (or an affiliate) is 
authorized to manufacture, distribute, or sell ESD in the same capacity as an ESD licensee 
and may not be required to obtain an additional license. The bill does not change this 
authorization.  
 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1056/ Page 3 
However, the bill specifies that a licensed vape shop vendor is authorized to sell ESDs to 
consumers on the premises of the licensee’s place of business and, if the vape shop vendor 
licensee also holds a license to act as an ESD manufacturer, sell at retail on the vape shop 
vendor premises ESD manufactured under the manufacturer license.  
 
License Fees – Increases  
 
The bill increases the fee for each county cigarette retail license from $25 in a county other 
than Cecil or Montgomery, $50 in Cecil County, and $125 in Montgomery County to $300 
in all counties. From the license fee, the clerk of the court must distribute $25 to ATCC (as 
under current law) and $275 to Montgomery County (if the license was issued in 
Montgomery County) or to MDH (for licenses issues in all other counties) to be used to 
enforce existing laws prohibiting the sale or distribution of tobacco, tobacco products, or 
ESD to individuals younger than 21.  
 
The bill also increases the fee for each ESD retailer license and vape shop vendor license 
from $25 to $300. From each license fee, the clerk of the court must distribute $25 to ATCC 
and $275 to MDH to be used by MDH or its designee to enforce existing laws prohibiting 
the sale or distribution of tobacco, tobacco products, or ESD to individuals younger 
than 21. These funds may not supplant existing funding for such enforcement.  
 
Display of Products for Sale – Exceptions  
 
The prohibition against displaying OTP for sale unless the OTP are located behind the 
counter in an area accessible only to the retailer and its employees does not apply to a 
licensed tobacconist or the sale of premium cigars.  
 
The prohibition against displaying ESD for sale unless the ESD are located behind the 
counter in an area accessible only to a person or employees of the person does not apply to 
an ESD that has been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a 
tobacco cessation product.   
 
Inspections  
 
Under current law, MDH may conduct unannounced inspections of licensed retailers to 
ensure compliance with underage sales and other provisions of law.  
 
The bill requires MDH or its designee to conduct at least one such unannounced inspection 
each year and clarifies that vape shop vendors must also be inspected. If a licensed retailer 
or vape shop vendor violates specified provisions of law, MDH must conduct an additional 
unannounced inspection within 180 days after the initial inspection. To determine the 
location of a licensed retailer or vape shop vendor subject to an unannounced inspection, 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1056/ Page 4 
MDH or its designee must use the list of licensed retailers or vape shop vendors as of 
December 31 of the previous calendar year.  
 
Civil Citations  
 
Under current law, a sworn law enforcement officer or a county health officer (or their 
designee) may issue a civil citation for (1) a person who sells, distributes, or offers for sale 
an ESD to an individual younger than age 21 or (2) a person who distributes a tobacco 
product, tobacco paraphernalia, or a coupon redeemable for a tobacco product to an 
individual younger than age 21. “Designee” means a retired sworn law enforcement officer 
employed by a county health officer or an employee of an LHD trained in civil 
enforcement.  
 
The bill expands the grounds on which a civil citation may be issued to include (1) display 
of ESD or tobacco products unless the ESD or tobacco products are behind a counter in an 
area accessible only to the person or the employees of the person and (2) sale of ESD or 
tobacco products unless the person verifies that the individuals is at least age 21 (unless 
the individual is at least 30 years old).  
 
The bill authorizes the Secretary of Health or the Secretary’s designee to issue a civil 
citation for these violations. The bill also specifies that “designee” includes a retired sworn 
law enforcement officer employed by MDH or an employee of MDH trained in civil 
enforcement for purposes of the sale of ESD, or a retired sworn law enforcement officer 
employed by the Secretary for purposes of the sale of tobacco products.  
 
Criminal Provisions – Sale to a Minor  
 
Under current law, a person who distributes tobacco products for commercial purposes 
may not distribute a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or a coupon redeemable for a 
tobacco product to an individual younger than 21. In addition, a person may not purchase 
for, sell to, or distribute to an individual younger than 21 a tobacco product or tobacco 
paraphernalia. A violator is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $300 for 
a first violation, $1,000 for a second violation within two years, and $3,000 for each 
subsequent violation within two years after the preceding violation.  
 
The bill increases the maximum fine for a first violation from $300 to $500. The bill also 
specifies that, if a licensee violates these provisions, a court must order ATCC to 
(1) suspend the license for up to 90 days for a second violation; (2) suspend the license for 
up to 180 days for a subsequent violation; and (3) revoke the license for each subsequent 
violation. Upon the court’s determination above, the clerk of the court must send a copy of 
the final order issued by the court to the Executive Director of ATCC.  
 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 1056/ Page 5 
Current law specifies that, in a prosecution for a violation, it is a defense that the defendant 
examined the purchaser’s or recipient’s license or other valid identification that positively 
identified the purchaser or recipient as being at least age 21 (or 18 and active-duty military). 
The bill specifies that examination of identification must be a direct, face-to-face exchange 
and repeals the obsolete language regarding individuals aged 18 and active-duty military.  
 
Sales Requirements  
 
The bill specifies that a licensed retailer or vape shop vendor may not sell cigarettes, OTP, 
or ESD, as appropriate, to an individual without verifying the individual is at least age 21 
by means of a government-issued identification in a direct face-to-face exchange. The bill 
specifies that a licensed retailer or vape shop vendor is not required to verify the age of an 
individual at least 30 years old.  
 
The bill also repeals various obsolete provisions that authorize the sale of cigarettes, OTP, 
or ESD to a person who is at least age 18 and an active-duty member of the military.  
 
Required Report  
 
ATCC, in conjunction with MDH, the Office of the Comptroller, and the Maryland State 
Department of Education, must report to specified committees of the General Assembly by 
October 1, 2025, on (1) the number of cigarette, OTP, and ESD retailers, including 
information on proximity to schools and health care facilities; (2) the process and 
procedures currently used by ATCC to maintain a list of all operating businesses that hold 
specified licenses; (3) the geographic density of such businesses; (4) the feasibility and 
resulting impact of limiting or establishing a maximum number of licenses; and (5) with 
regard to the use of tobacco, OTP, and ESD by individuals younger than age 21, an analysis 
of its prevalence in the population and the public health and economic impacts.  
 
State Revenues:   
 
License Fee – Increases  
 
The bill increases the fee for each county cigarette retail license, ESD retail license, and 
vape shop vendor license to $300 and specifies that, for licenses issued in all counties (other 
than for county cigarette retail licenses issued in Montgomery County), $275 of the license 
fee must be distributed to MDH to be used by MDH or its designee to enforce existing laws 
prohibiting the sale or distribution of tobacco, tobacco products, or ESD to individuals 
younger than age 21.  
 
ATCC advises that, as of February 2024, a total of 5,758 cigarette retail, ESD retail, and 
vape shop vendor licenses statewide (which excludes cigarette retail licensees located 

END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
    
SB 1056/ Page 6 
within Montgomery County) are subject to the higher fee, with $275 distributed to MDH 
for each annual license issued. Thus, MDH special fund revenues increase by almost 
$1.2 million in fiscal 2025 (which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date) 
and almost $1.6 million annually thereafter. These fee revenues are assumed to be received 
as special funds since they are dedicated to a specific purpose by MDH or its designee.  
 
This analysis assumes the number of licenses issued remains constant in future years. 
However, to the extent the bill results in fewer licensees maintaining their licenses, ATCC 
general fund revenues (which are otherwise unchanged under the bill) decrease; likewise, 
MDH special fund revenues are reduced. These special fund fee revenues are primarily 
used to offset the costs of conducting at least one unannounced inspection of licensed 
retailers (cigarette, ESD, and OTP) and vape shop vendors as well as any follow-up 
inspections as required under the bill and discussed further under the State Expenditures 
section below. (Even though their fees are not increased, OTP retailers are also required to 
have at least one unannounced inspection under the bill.)  
 
Fines from Violation of Sales to a Minor  
 
General fund revenues increase by up to $200 for each first violation of the current 
prohibition against the sale or distribution of tobacco products to individuals younger 
than 21 due to the increase in the existing fine. The Judiciary reports that there were 
160 such violations recorded in the District Court in fiscal 2023. Should violations remain 
steady, general fund revenues increase by as much as $32,000 annually ($24,000 in 
fiscal 2025 to reflect the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date). However, as the bill 
requires at least one compliance inspection annually, there may be more violations in the 
near term.  
 
Sales and Use Tax  
 
A sales and use tax rate of 12% is imposed on the final retail price of ESD (60% in the case 
of vaping liquid sold in a container that contains at least five milliliters of vaping liquid). 
(Montgomery County also imposes a 30% tax on the wholesale value of vaping products.) 
While this analysis assumes that the sale of ESD is not meaningfully reduced by the bill, 
to the extent the bill does reduce the amount of ESD sold in the State, general fund revenues 
decrease by an indeterminate amount beginning in fiscal 2025 due to foregone sales and 
use tax revenues.  
 
State Expenditures:  Currently, MDH may conduct unannounced inspections of licensed 
retailers (cigarette, OTP, and ESD) to ensure compliance with age-restricted tobacco sales. 
MDH’s Center for Tobacco Prevention and Control (CTPC) currently provides funding to 
LHDs to conduct tobacco retailer inspections, while CTPC separately conducts statewide 
enforcement efforts. The bill requires MDH or its designee to conduct at least 

END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
    
SB 1056/ Page 7 
one inspection of retail cigarette licensees, OTP licensees, and ESD licensees as well as, 
under the bill, vape shop vendors. ATCC advises that, as of February 2024, approximately 
6,475 total such licensees must be inspected annually. To complete more than 5,800 annual 
inspections (excluding those in Montgomery County), MDH advises that it would delegate 
funding and inspections to a designee, specifically LHDs, which already have a robust 
staffing infrastructure to conduct retailer inspections within their jurisdictions. Thus, MDH 
would distribute most revenues from additional license fees (which total almost 
$1.2 million in fiscal 2025, as noted above) to LHDs to conduct the required annual 
inspections. A portion must be retained by MDH, as the department requires at least one 
full-time administrative officer to oversee grants to LHDs and manage the enforcement 
operations.  
 
MDH must also notify retailers, LHDs, and other partners of the bill’s requirements. The 
estimated cost to send a one-time mailing is $6,510 in fiscal 2025 only – which is, for 
purposes of this analysis, assumed to be related to enforcement and eligible to be funded 
with the fee revenues.  
 
MDH further advises that an outside contractor is likely necessary to complete a portion of 
the study required under the bill. Thus, MDH incurs $75,000 in contractual expenses, 
which for purposes of this estimate, are assumed to be incurred in fiscal 2025 (although 
some portion could be deferred to fiscal 2026 as the report is due October 1, 2025). As this 
report is tangentially related to enforcement, related expenditures are likewise assumed to 
be covered by fee revenues.  
 
Accordingly, MDH special fund expenditures increase by almost $1.2 million in 
fiscal 2025, which accounts for the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective date. This estimate 
reflects the cost of hiring one full-time administrative officer to oversee grants to LHDs 
and manage enforcement operations. The estimate includes a salary, fringe benefits, grants 
to LHDs for required enforcement inspections, one-time start-up costs, mailing costs, and 
ongoing operating expenses. All of these costs are assumed to be fully covered by the fee 
revenues.  
 
Position 
1.0 
Salary and Fringe Benefits 
$66,852 
One-time Contractual Costs for Report 
75,000 
One-time Communications Costs 
6,510 
One-time Start-up Costs 
7,719 
Ongoing Operating Expenses  
8,374  
Local Health Department Grants for Inspections  
1,023,133 
Total FY 2025 MDH Special Fund Expenditures 
$1,187,588 
 

END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
    
SB 1056/ Page 8 
Future year special fund expenditures reflect a full salary with annual increases and 
employee turnover as well as annual increases in ongoing operating expenses and more 
funding (approximately $1.5 million) made available to LHDs for inspections.  
 
Other Agencies 
 
General fund expenditures for the Judiciary increase by $44,761 in fiscal 2025 only for 
computer programming costs. The Judiciary advises that expenditures are necessary to 
implement the bill’s notification and disbursement requirements.  
 
ATCC advises that it is able to handle any changes under the bill with existing resources.  
 
Local Revenues:  The bill increases the fee for a license to sell cigarettes at retail in 
counties. The fee is increased from $25 in a county other that Cecil or Montgomery, $50 in 
Cecil County, and $125 in Montgomery County to $300 in all counties. From the license 
fees collected in Montgomery County, the clerk must distribute $275 to the county (rather 
than $100 under current law) for enforcement activities. For all other counties, $275 from 
each licensee fee collected is distributed to MDH for enforcement activities. Accordingly, 
the $25 currently retained by Cecil County for each of the 121 such licensees in that county 
is instead part of the monies distributed to MDH under the bill (totaling about $3,025 on 
an annualized basis and about $2,669 in fiscal 2025 to reflect the bill’s October 1, 2024 
effective date).  
 
As noted above, MDH advises that most revenue distributed to the department from 
increased license fees is subsequently distributed as grants to LHDs – in their capacity as 
the department’s designee to conduct the annual unannounced inspections required under 
the bill – after accounting for other one-time and administrative costs. Thus, LHD revenues 
(excluding Montgomery County) increase by an estimated $1,023,133 in fiscal 2025, and 
by approximately $1.5 million annually thereafter. The Department of Legislative Services 
notes that Cecil County likely receives considerably more as grant revenues for its LHD 
than it foregoes due to the redistribution of fee revenues to MDH. As mentioned above, 
this analysis assumes the number of licenses issued remains constant in future years. To 
the extent the number of total licenses issued decreases, local grant revenues are reduced.  
 
The bill retains provisions requiring fees collected from local retail cigarette licenses issued 
in Montgomery County to be distributed to Montgomery County. Montgomery County 
currently has 630 such retailers and receives $100 of the $125 license fee for enforcement 
activities. Under the bill, Montgomery County receives a total of $275 per license (an 
additional $175). Thus, Montgomery County revenues increase by $110,250 on an 
annualized basis (about $82,688 in fiscal 2025 to reflect the bill’s October 1, 2024 effective 
date). This analysis assumes the number of such licenses issued in Montgomery County 

END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
    
SB 1056/ Page 9 
remains constant in future years. To the extent the number of those licenses decreases, 
Montgomery County revenues are lower.  
 
Local government revenues may increase minimally due to the $200 increase in the fine 
for a first violation of the current prohibition against the sale or distribution of tobacco 
products to individuals younger than 21. The Judiciary reports that there were two such 
violations recorded in circuit courts in fiscal 2023.  
 
In addition, local revenues likely increase from the expansion of prohibited actions that are 
subject to civil penalty. Specially, the bill prohibits the unauthorized sale or distribution 
and display of ESDs and tobacco products by certain retailers. To the extent that more 
violations occur as a result of the expansion, local revenues from fines collected increase. 
Violators are subject to a fine up to $300 for the first violation; a fine up to $1,000 for a 
second violation occurring within 24 months after the first violation; and a fine up to $3,000 
for each subsequent violation occurring within 24 months after the proceeding violation. 
As the bill requires at least one inspection annually, there are potentially more violations 
in the near term.  
 
Montgomery County imposes a 30% tax on the wholesale value of vaping products. To the 
extent the bill reduces the sale of ESD in the county, Montgomery County tax revenues 
decline beginning in fiscal 2025. The amount of the decline depends on the decrease in 
vaping products sold as a result of the bill.  
 
Local Expenditures:  LHDs may incur additional costs to conduct at least one 
unannounced inspection of retailers and vape shop vendors in their jurisdictions (and any 
follow-up inspections for licensees with violations). Even so, any such additional costs are 
anticipated to be covered by annual grants from MDH for enforcement. 
Montgomery County advises that it already conducts at least one annual compliance check 
of retailers with additional visits to retailers that are noncompliant; accordingly, 
expenditures for the county are not expected to materially change.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Small business retailers and vape shop vendors are subject to more 
restrictive and complex compliance standards and restrictions under the bill. The bill also 
subjects certain small business retailers and vape shop vendors to increased licensing fees 
higher penalties for violations.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 9

START OF PAGE 10
    
SB 1056/ Page 10 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1180 (Delegate Wilson) - Economic Matters. 
 
Information Source(s):  Baltimore City; Harford and Montgomery counties; Alcohol, 
Tobacco, and Cannabis Commission; Comptroller’s Office; Judiciary (Administrative 
Office of the Courts); Maryland Department of Health; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 19, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - March 28, 2024 
Enrolled - May 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Updated Information - May 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Other - May 9, 2024 
 
Revised - Correction - May 9, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Donavan A. Ham 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 10