START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1118 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 1118 
(Senator Guzzone) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Environment and Transportation 
 
Natural Resources - Fish and Fisheries - Reporting Requirements 
 
 
This bill modifies the manner in which persons engaged in the business of packing or 
dealing in any fish resource within the jurisdiction of the Department of Natural Resources 
(DNR), and persons licensed by DNR to catch the fish resource, must submit required 
reports to the department. Under the bill, the reports must be submitted in accordance with 
regulations adopted by DNR rather than on forms DNR prescribes/provides. The bill also 
requires persons licensed to fish recreationally (under an angler’s license or a 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license) to submit any report DNR requires in 
accordance with DNR regulations. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  None. The bill does not directly affect State finances, as discussed below.  
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  Potential meaningful.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:   
 
Reporting Related to Packing, Dealing in, or Catching Any Fish Resource 
 
Every person engaged in the business of packing or dealing in any fish resource within 
DNR’s jurisdiction must make any report DNR requires on forms the department 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1118/ Page 2 
prescribes. In addition, every person DNR licenses to catch the fish resource must make 
any report DNR requires on forms the department provides.  
 
Recreational Fishing Data Collection – Pilot Program and Task Force  
 
Under statute governing the Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license (which 
authorizes a license holder to fish recreationally in tidal waters), DNR is authorized to 
provide by regulation for the issuance of an annual special Chesapeake Bay and coastal 
sport fishing license (which DNR calls a “consolidated Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport 
boat license”). When the license, in the form of a decal, is permanently affixed to a boat 
(other than a boat hired to take persons fishing), it authorizes any person on the boat to fish 
under the license, provided the person registers with DNR. 
 
Chapters 409 and 410 of 2022 established a Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Sport Fishing 
License Pilot Program in DNR. The purpose of the pilot program is to (1) collect contact 
information and demographic data of individuals fishing under a consolidated 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license; (2) collect information regarding the 
number of trips taken and fish caught and released under a consolidated Chesapeake Bay 
and coastal sport boat license; and (3) improve compliance with a provision under the 
Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing license statute that requires certain individuals 
authorized to fish without a license (including those fishing on a boat that has a 
consolidated Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport boat license affixed to it) to register with 
DNR. The department must track monthly costs associated with implementing the pilot 
program, and by December 1, 2023, and each December 1 thereafter for the duration of the 
program, report recommendations on expected funding needed to grow and establish the 
program as a permanent program, to the Governor and the General Assembly. The 
provisions of Chapters 409 and 410 that establish the pilot program terminate 
June 30, 2027. 
 
Chapters 409 and 410 also created a Task Force on Recreational Fishing Data Collection 
and Licensing to study specified methods and information, and develop specified plans, 
related to improving recreational fishing data collection for fisheries management. The 
task force was required to report its findings and recommendations by December 1, 2022. 
The provisions of Chapters 409 and 410 that created the task force terminated 
June 30, 2023. 
 
Fishery Management Plans – Conservation and Management Measures  
 
DNR is required by statute to prepare fishery management plans for various listed species 
and has specified authority to prepare plans for additional species. The plans contain a 
systematic description of a given fishery and the objectives and conservation and 
management measures for the fishery. Various requirements apply to both the plans and 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1118/ Page 3 
the conservation and management measures in the plans. Regardless of other statutory 
provisions under State fisheries law, once a fishery management plan has been adopted by 
regulation, the fishery must be harvested in accordance with the conservation and 
management measures in the plan and any regulations implementing or amending that plan. 
“Fishery management” means the system used to conserve and allocate the fishery 
resource, including research and data collection, determination of objectives and 
management measures, and establishment, enforcement, and periodic evaluation of 
regulations. “Conservation and management measures” means one or more techniques 
through which objectives of a fishery management plan are achieved.  
 
State Fiscal Effect:  DNR indicates that the bill allows the department to (1) make existing 
commercial fishing electronic reporting used in pilot programs (conducted under fishery 
management plans, pursuant to authority in DNR regulations) available as an option to all 
licensees, at no additional cost, and (2) potentially establish mandatory recreational fishing 
reporting. The Department of Legislative Services notes, however, that DNR may already 
have, at least on a species-specific basis, authority to establish broad commercial and/or 
recreational licensee reporting requirements or options, in any format (electronic or 
otherwise), as conservation and management measures under fishery management plans. 
The department does not have immediate plans for any further expansion of electronic 
reporting (for commercial or recreational fishing), and any costs associated with future 
expansion of electronic reporting (e.g., for development of a mobile application) will 
(1) depend on the manner in which it is expanded and (2) be accounted for when regulations 
are proposed.  
 
Voluntary recreational fishing reports/surveys are currently available on DNR’s website. 
 
Small Business Effect:  DNR indicates that small businesses in the commercial fishing 
industry could benefit in the future if electronic reporting methods, implemented 
fishery-wide, improve reporting. Improved commercial fishing reporting, and potential 
mandatory recreational fishing reporting, would increase the data available to the 
department in managing sustainable harvest levels, potentially allowing for a greater 
amount of harvest. According to DNR, there is currently less than 60% commercial 
reporting compliance for most fisheries, and limited recreational harvest data, causing the 
department to have to be conservative in the measures it puts in place to manage harvest 
levels, since it does not know the full amount of harvest that is occurring. Of course, 
improved reporting could presumably also lead to greater restrictions on harvesting.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1118/ Page 4 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Natural Resources; Department of Legislative 
Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 22, 2024 
Third Reader - April 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 6, 2024 
 
md/lgc 
 
Analysis by:  Scott D. Kennedy 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 
 

END OF PAGE 4