START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1047

Chapter 1047

(Senate Bill 1184)

AN ACT concerning

Prince George’s County – Alcoholic Beverages – College Athletic Event Venue
Concessionaire Beer, Wine, and Liquor License

FOR the purpose of establishing a Class B–CAEVC (College Athletic Event Venue
Concessionaire) beer, wine, and liquor license in Prince George’s County; authorizing
the Board of License Commissioners for Prince George’s County to issue the license
to a certain concessionaire; authorizing beer, wine, and liquor purchased under the
license to be consumed in certain areas; providing for the hours and days of sale and
an annual license fee; and generally relating to alcoholic beverages licenses in Prince
George’s County.

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 26–102
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis
Section 26–1001.1
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2016 Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Alcoholic Beverages and Cannabis

26–102.

This title applies only in Prince George’s County.

26–1001.1.

(A) IN THIS SECTION, “CONCESSIONAIRE” MEANS A LESSEE, A SUBLESSEE,
OR ANY OTHER OPERATOR OF AN ESTABLISHMENT THAT IS CONTRACTED BY THE
HOLDER OF A CLASS B–ECF/DS BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE TO PROVIDE
FOOD AND BEVERAGES SERVICES IN DESIGNATED AREAS OF VENUES THAT ARE:

(1) LOCATED ON THE UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, COLLEGE PARK

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 1047 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

CAMPUS CAMPUS OR THE BOWIE STATE UNIVERSITY CAMPUS; AND

(2) USED PRIMARILY TO HOST COLLEGE ATHLETIC EVENTS.

(B) THERE IS A CLASS B–CAEVC (COLLEGE ATHLETIC EVENT VENUE
CONCESSIONAIRE) BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

(C) THE BOARD MAY ISSUE THE LICENSE TO A CONCESSIONAIRE.

(D) (1) THE LICENSE AUTHORIZES THE LICENSE HOLDER TO SELL BEER,
WINE, AND LIQUOR BY THE GLASS OR BY THE BOTTLE FOR ON–PREMISES
CONSUMPTION:

(I) IN THE AREA OF THE VENUE PRIMARILY USED TO HOST
COLLEGE ATHLETIC EVENTS, INCLUDING COURTSIDE SEATING AND SUITES AT THE
VENUE; AND

(II) IN ANY OTHER AREA OF THE VENUE CONTROLLED BY THE
HOLDER OF A CLASS B–ECF/DS BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE.

(2) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY RESTRICT ACCESS TO THE LICENSED
PREMISES.

(E) NOTWITHSTANDING § 26–1009(D)(2) OF THIS SUBTITLE, BEER, WINE,
AND LIQUOR PURCHASED FROM AN OUTLET CONTROLLED BY THE HOLDER OF A
CLASS B–ECF/DS LICENSE MAY BE CONSUMED AT THE PREMISES CONTROLLED BY
THE HOLDER OF A CLASS B–CAEVC LICENSE.

(F) A SEPARATE CLASS B–CAEVC BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE IS
REQUIRED FOR EACH VENUE IN WHICH THE CONCESSIONAIRE OPERATES.

(G) THE LICENSE MAY NOT BE COUNTED AS A CLASS B LICENSE FOR
PURPOSES OF § 26–1601 OF THIS TITLE.

(H) THE LICENSE HOLDER MAY SELL BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR DURING THE
HOURS AND DAYS AS SET OUT FOR A CLASS B BEER, WINE, AND LIQUOR LICENSE
UNDER § 26–2004 OF THIS TITLE.

(I) (1) THE ANNUAL FEE FOR THE LICENSE IS $3,500.

(2) THE FEE SHALL BE PAID TO THE BOARD ON OR BEFORE MAY 1.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 1047

Approved by the Governor, May 16, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3