START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1101 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 1101 
(Senator Smith, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Appropriations 
 
Higher Education - Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship 
Program - Alterations 
 
 
This emergency bill expands eligibility for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation 
Agents Scholarship Program by expanding eligible institutions to include community 
colleges in the State.  
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents 
Scholarship Program does not necessitate additional spending, as discussed below. The 
Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can make needed administrative 
changes with existing resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
Local Effect:  Community college revenues and expenditures are assumed to not be 
materially affected.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None. 
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Chapter 59 of 2021, the Maryland Police Accountability Act of 2021, 
established the Maryland Police Officers Scholarship Program, which was subsequently 
expanded (and renamed) by Chapter 100 of 2023 to include probation agents. The 
Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program provides tuition 
assistance for students (1) attending a degree program at an “eligible institution” that would 
further their intent to be a police officer or probation agent after graduation or (2) who are 
currently police officers or probation agents attending a degree program at an “eligible 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1101/ Page 2 
institution” that would further their career. The Office of Student Financial Assistance 
(OSFA) in MHEC must (1) publicize the availability of the scholarship; (2) annually select 
eligible students and offer a scholarship to each student selected to be used at an eligible 
institution of the student’s choice; and (3) to the extent practicable, award scholarships 
under the program in a manner that reflects ethnic, gender, racial, and geographic diversity. 
 
A recipient of a scholarship must (1) be a Maryland resident or have graduated from a 
Maryland high school; (2) be accepted for admission or currently enrolled at an eligible 
institution as a full-time or part-time undergraduate or graduate student, as specified; 
(3) sign a letter of intent to perform the service obligation on completion of the recipient’s 
required studies; and (4) satisfy any additional criteria MHEC may establish. A current 
police officer or probation agent that meets the eligibility criteria is also eligible for a 
scholarship. A recipient of a scholarship must repay MHEC the funds received if the 
recipient does not (1) satisfy the degree requirements of the course of study or program or 
fulfill other specified requirements or (2) perform the service obligation to work as a police 
officer or probation agent for at least five years during the eight-year period after 
graduation. 
 
The annual scholarship award must be 50% of the equivalent annual tuition and mandatory 
fees of a resident undergraduate student at the eligible institution. The Governor must 
annually include in the budget bill an appropriation of at least $5.0 million to MHEC to 
award scholarships, and MHEC must use (1) $2.5 million for scholarships to students 
intending to become police officers or probation agents after graduation and 
(2) $2.5 million for scholarships to existing police officers or probation agents to attend an 
eligible institution and remain a police officer or probation agent after graduation. 
 
For the Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship Program, “eligible 
institution” means a public senior (four-year) higher education institution in the State. 
 
Chapter 59 also established the Maryland Loan Assistance Repayment Program for Police 
Officers to assist in the repayment of a higher education loan owed by a police officer who 
meets specified requirements. Chapter 100 expanded the program to also include probation 
agents and renamed the program accordingly. OSFA must distribute funds from the 
program to assist in the repayment of a “higher education loan” owed by a police officer 
or probation agent who (1) receives a graduate, professional, or undergraduate degree from 
a public college or university in the State; (2) obtains “eligible employment”; and 
(3) satisfies any other criteria established by the office. The Governor must include an 
annual appropriation of at least $5.0 million in the State budget for the program. 
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes a $5.0 million general 
fund appropriation for the Maryland Police Officers and Probation Agents Scholarship 
Program. In fiscal 2023 (the first year of awards for the program and the latest year for 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1101/ Page 3 
which full information is available), MHEC made just five awards for a total of $7,489 in 
scholarships. Therefore, this analysis assumes that expansion of eligibility for the 
scholarship can be accommodated using the existing general fund appropriation. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Howard and Prince George’s counties; Maryland Association of 
Counties; Maryland Municipal League; Governor’s Office of Crime Prevention and Policy; 
Maryland Higher Education Commission; Baltimore City Community College; University 
System of Maryland; Morgan State University; St. Mary’s College of Maryland; Maryland 
Independent College and University Association; Department of Budget and Management; 
Department of General Services; Department of Natural Resources; Department of Public 
Safety and Correctional Services; Department of State Police; Maryland Department of 
Transportation; City of Annapolis; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 27, 2024 
Third Reader - March 28, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 28, 2024 
 
km/clb 
 
Analysis by:   Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3