START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1184 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader - Revised 
Senate Bill 1184 
(Senator Rosapepe) 
Finance 
Appropriations 
 
Prince George's County - Alcoholic Beverages - College Athletic Event Venue 
Concessionaire Beer, Wine, and Liquor License 
 
 
This bill authorizes the Prince George’s County Board of License Commissioners to issue 
a Class B-CAEVC (college athletic event venue concessionaire) beer, wine, and liquor 
(BWL) license for use by a concessionaire contracted to provide food and beverages 
services in designated areas of venues that are located on the University of Maryland, 
College Park Campus (UMCP) or the Bowie State University Campus, as specified. The 
annual license fee is $3,500. This bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The bill will not materially affect UMCP or Bowie State University finances 
or operations. 
  
Local Effect:  Prince George’s County license fee revenues increase by approximately 
$10,500 beginning in FY 2025 from the issuance of three Class B-CAEVC BWL licenses. 
Prince George’s County can handle any additional enforcement activity using existing 
budgeted resources.  
 
Small Business Effect:  Minimal overall, but potential meaningful for a concessionaire 
that is able to sell beer, wine, and liquor under the bill. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  A “concessionaire” means a lessee, sublessee, or any other operator of an 
establishment that is contracted by the holder of a Class B-ECF/DS (educational 
conference facility/dining service) BWL license to provide food and beverages services in 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1184/ Page 2 
designated areas of venues that are (1) located on UMCP and (2) used primarily to host 
college athletic events.  
 
The Class B-CAEVC BWL license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor by the glass or 
by the bottle for on-premises consumption (1) in the area of the venue primarily used to 
host college athletic events, including courtside seating and suites at the venue and (2) in 
any other area of the venue controlled by the holder of a Class B-ECF/DS BWL license. 
The license holder may sell beer, wine, and liquor from 6 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day 
on Monday through Saturday, and from 8 a.m. to 2 a.m. the following day on Sundays.  
 
The license holder may restrict access to the licensed premises. The license may not be 
counted as a Class B license for purposes of the limits on licenses issued by the board under 
statute.  
 
Beer, wine, and liquor purchased from an outlet controlled by the holder of a 
Class B-ECF/DS license may be consumed at the premises controlled by the holder of a 
Class B-CAEVC license. A separate Class B-CAEVC BWL license is required for each 
venue in which the concessionaire operates.  
 
Current Law:  Generally, the board may not issue more than 215 Class B-BWL licenses 
in the county.  
 
The board may issue a Class B-ECF/DS license to an individual who is authorized by 
UMCP or the Prince George’s Community College Main Campus, as specified. The license 
holder is subject to the penalties, conditions, and restrictions under statute and must be a 
resident and registered voter of the county.  
 
Local Revenues:  The annual license fee for a Class B-CAEVC BWL license is $3,500. 
Prince George’s County estimates issuing three Class B-CAEVC licenses in fiscal 2025; 
therefore, Prince George’s County license fee revenues increase by $10,500 annually 
beginning in fiscal 2025.  
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years.  
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Prince George’s County; University System of Maryland; 
Department of Legislative Services 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1184/ Page 3 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 21, 2024 
Third Reader - April 6, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - April 6, 2024 
 
rh/tso 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3