START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 520

Chapter 520

(Senate Bill 1118)

AN ACT concerning

Natural Resources – Fish and Fisheries – Reporting Requirements

FOR the purpose of requiring certain persons licensed or regulated with respect to fish and
fisheries by the Department of Natural Resources to submit reports in accordance
with regulations adopted by the ~~Secretary~~ ~~of~~ ~~Natural~~ ~~Resources~~ Department; and
generally relating to fish and fisheries reporting requirements.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–206
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY repealing and reenacting, without amendments,
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–604(b) and 4–745(a)(1)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

BY adding to
Article – Natural Resources
Section 4–604(i) and 4–745(f)
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume and 2023 Supplement)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Natural Resources

4–206.

(a) (1) The Department shall audit the books of any person who packs or deals
in fish resources within the jurisdiction of the Department including anyone who catches
and ships directly to market.

(2) The Department audit shall be conducted to determine the quantity of
resources caught and any other data needed for reporting and accounting to State officials.

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 520 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(b) (1) Every person engaged in the business of packing or dealing in any fish
resource within the Department’s jurisdiction shall keep accurate books, statements, and
accounts showing every detail of the business.

(2) Every book, statement, and account shall be open for the Department
to inspect at reasonable hours.

(3) Every person engaged in the business of packing or dealing in any fish
resource within the Department’s jurisdiction shall [make] SUBMIT any report the
Department requires [on forms the Department prescribes] IN ACCORDANCE WITH
REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE SECRETARY DEPARTMENT.

(c) Every person the Department licenses to catch the fish resource shall [make]
SUBMIT any report the Department requires [on forms the Department provides] IN
ACCORDANCE WITH REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY THE SECRETARY DEPARTMENT.

(d) (1) An officer or employee of any department or unit of the Executive
Branch of State government may not divulge or use in any manner information contained
in any report submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section that would reveal the
income of any person submitting the report.

(2) This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics classified to
prevent the identification of particular reports and items of them or prohibit inspection of
reports and records by any official or employee of the Executive Branch having a proper
interest in them.

4–604.

(b) Any person 16 years old or older shall secure an angler’s license to fish in the
nontidal waters of the State. An angler’s license entitles the holder to fish in the nontidal
waters of the State only during the open season.

(I) EVERY PERSON LICENSED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL SUBMIT ANY
REPORT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES IN ACCORDANCE WITH DEPARTMENT
REGULATIONS.

4–745.

(a) (1) Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section and § 4–217
of this title, a person may not fish for finfish in the Chesapeake Bay or in its tributaries up
to tidal boundaries or in State waters of the Atlantic Ocean and the Atlantic coastal bays
and their tributaries without first obtaining a Chesapeake Bay and coastal sport fishing
license or registration issued under subsection (d)(3) of this section and possessing the
license or registration.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 520

(F) EVERY PERSON LICENSED UNDER THIS SECTION SHALL SUBMIT ANY
REPORT THE DEPARTMENT REQUIRES IN ACCORDANCE WITH DEPARTMENT
REGULATIONS.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect July
1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, May 9, 2024.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3