START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1103 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Enrolled - Revised 
Senate Bill 1103 
(The President)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) 
Finance 
Health and Government Operations 
 
Hospitals and Related Institutions – Outpatient Facility Fees 
 
   
This bill requires the Health Services Cost Review Commission (HSCRC), in consultation 
with specified entities, to study and make recommendations regarding hospital outpatient 
facility fees and submit a preliminary report to the Senate Finance Committee and the 
House Health and Government Operations Committee by December 1, 2024, and 
December 1, 2025, respectively. HSCRC must also convene a workgroup with specified 
entities to advise and make recommendations on expanding the application of the hospital 
outpatient facility fees notice requirement and submit a report to the Senate Finance 
Committee and the House Health and Government Operations Committee by 
December 1, 2024. The bill specifies that Division II of the State Finance and Procurement 
Article does not apply to HSCRC when completing the required study and convening the 
required workgroup. The bill also alters the required contents of the hospital outpatient 
facility fee notice. The bill takes effect July 1, 2024. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by $75,000 in FY 2025 and 
2026 only for contractual services to complete the required reports. The Maryland 
Department of Health (MDH), the Maryland Insurance Administration (MIA), and the 
Health Education and Advocacy Unit (HEAU) within the Office of the Attorney General 
can provide specified input with existing budgeted resources. Revenues are not affected.  
  
(in dollars) 
FY 2025 
FY 2026 
FY 2027 
FY 2028 
FY 2029 
Revenues 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
$0 
SF Expenditure 
75,000 
75,000 
0 
0 
0 
Net Effect 
($75,000) 
($75,000) 
$0 
$0 
$0  
Note:() = decrease; GF = general funds; FF = federal funds; SF = special funds; - = indeterminate increase; (-) = indeterminate decrease  
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1103/ Page 2 
Local Effect:  None.       
  
Small Business Effect:  None.      
  
 
Analysis 
 
Bill Summary:  Uncodified language requires HSCRC, in consultation with specified 
entities, to study and make recommendations, including legislative recommendations, 
regarding: 
 
 
the nature of costs underlying hospital outpatient facility fees and how similar costs 
are recovered in other health care settings; 
 
the drivers of hospital facility costs that are unique to hospitals and are not reflected 
in other health care settings; 
 
the magnitude and impact of hospital facility fee charges for hospitals, payers, and 
consumers; 
 
industry practices for seeking authority for an outpatient location to be approved as 
“at the hospital” and thereby subject to rate regulation; 
 
alternative mechanisms or revisions to the billing of the facility fees that would 
allow hospitals to recover costs while protecting individual consumers from high 
facility fee bills, maintaining access to health care services, and addressing health 
equity concerns;  
 
the interaction of the alternative mechanisms or revisions (1) with the State’s Total 
Cost of Care (TCOC) model obligations to the federal government, including any 
impact on Medicare total cost of care savings if outpatient facility fees are 
eliminated or reduced and (2) on Medicaid, Medicare, and commercial insurance, 
including consumer out-of-pocket costs, with a particular focus on the interaction 
with high-deductible commercial insurance products; 
 
published material on efforts in other states, by federal Medicare and Medicaid 
regulatory agencies, and by national advocacy organizations related to the 
regulation or minimization of facility fees, and the potential effects that similar 
efforts may have on health care costs in the State, including consumers’ 
out-of-pocket costs;  
 
the regulation of fees charged by out-of-state hospital outpatient facilities located in 
the State; and 
 
the effectiveness of the notice of hospital outpatient facility fees that is provided to 
consumers. 
 
HSCRC must consult with MDH, MIA, HEAU, health care payers, consumer advocacy 
groups and representatives of (1) hospitals, including out-of-state hospitals providing 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1103/ Page 3 
outpatient services to patients in facilities in the State; (2) physician practices that provide 
services in hospital outpatient settings; and (3) employer groups. 
 
Uncodified language also requires HSCRC, in consultation with specified entities, to 
convene a workgroup to (1) advise HSCRC on expanding the application of the hospital 
outpatient facility fees notice requirement to all outpatient services, including services 
provided by out-of-state hospitals at outpatient locations in the State and (2) consider the 
impact of expanding the facility fee notice requirement on consumers, including Medicaid 
recipients and consumers with recurring appointments, with consideration given to the 
impact on providers and payers.  
 
The workgroup must convene MDH, HEAU, health care payers, consumer advocacy 
groups and representatives of (1) hospitals, including out-of-state hospitals providing 
services to patients in facilities in the State; (2) physician practices that provide services in 
hospital outpatient settings; and (3) employer groups. 
 
Current Law:  “Outpatient facility fee” means a hospital outpatient charge approved by 
HSCRC for an outpatient clinic service, supply, or equipment, including the service of a 
nonphysician clinician. “Outpatient facility fee” does not include a charge billed for 
services delivered in an emergency department or a physician fee billed for professional 
services provided at the hospital. 
 
Notice – Required Form, Timing, and Acknowledgement of Receipt 
 
Chapters 365 and 366 of 2020 require a hospital that charges an outpatient facility fee to 
provide a patient with a written notice containing specified information. A hospital may 
not charge, bill, or attempt to collect an outpatient facility fee unless the patient was given 
specified notice. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Chapters 29 and 31 of 2021 delayed the 
implementation of these requirements until January 1, 2022. 
 
The required written notice must include (1) relevant identifying information (for both the 
facility and patient); (2) the expected fee; (3) another location that does not charge a facility 
fee, if applicable; (4) insurance information regarding facility fees; (5) procedures for 
complaints; and (6) a section for the patient to acknowledge, by signature, receipt of the 
information on facility fees and related charges. 
 
If a patient does not speak English or requires the notice to be in an alternative format, the 
hospital must provide the notice in a language or format that is understood by the patient 
to the extent practicable.  
 
A hospital must determine the range of hospital outpatient facility fees and fee estimates 
to be provided in the required notice. The facility fees and fee estimates must be based on 

END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
    
SB 1103/ Page 4 
typical or average facility fees for the same or similar appointments, consistent with the 
hospital’s most recent rate order as approved by HSCRC. Each hospital that charges an 
outpatient facility fee must use the range of hospital outpatient facility fees and fee 
estimates determined by the hospital. 
 
When an appointment is made in person or by telephone, oral notice of information 
available in the form must be given at the time the appointment is made. When an 
appointment is made electronically or using a website, written notice must be provided at 
that time. Regardless of how the appointment is made, written notice also must be sent to 
the patient electronically at the time the appointment is made. However, if a patient refuses 
electronic communication, written notice must instead be sent to the patient by first-class 
mail. 
 
Before professional medical services are provided on the date of the appointment, the 
patient must acknowledge in writing that the notice required under the bill was provided at 
the time the appointment was made.  
 
When lack of notice is alleged in a consumer complaint, HSCRC must give consideration 
in its investigatory and audit procedures as to whether notice was not feasible due to 
circumstances beyond the hospital’s control.  
 
Required Reporting 
 
Each year, each hospital must report to HSCRC a list of hospital-based, rate-regulated 
outpatient services provided by the hospital. HSCRC must post on its website and provide 
MIA and HEAU the list of hospital-based, rate-regulated outpatient services provided by 
each hospital. 
 
Health Services Cost Review Commission 
 
HSCRC is an independent commission within MDH charged with constraining hospital 
growth and establishing hospital rates to promote cost containment, access to care, equity, 
financial stability, and hospital accountability. HSCRC oversees acute and chronic care 
hospitals. HSCRC is responsible for implementing TCOC, the successor to the Maryland 
All-Payer Model Contract, under which it regulates hospital population-based revenues 
(commonly referred to as global budgets). 
 
State Finance and Procurement 
 
Division II of the State Finance and Procurement Article addresses general procurement 
laws. Division II also addresses rules governing source selection, procurement preferences, 
contract administration and dispute resolution, suspension and debarment of contractors, 

END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
    
SB 1103/ Page 5 
and State and local subdivisions. Although the procurement law applies broadly to the 
executive branch, for various policy reasons, certain types of procurement and certain units 
of State government are exempt from its provisions.  
 
State Expenditures:  Under the bill, HSCRC must (1) study and make recommendations 
regarding hospital outpatient facility fees and submit a preliminary report by 
December 1, 2024, and a final report by December 1, 2025, and (2) convene a workgroup 
to advise and make recommendations on expanding the application of the hospital 
outpatient facility fees notice requirement and submit a report by December 1, 2024. 
 
HSCRC advises that the study cannot be absorbed within existing resources and that 
contractual services are required to complete the study and submit the required reports. 
HSCRC estimates that the total cost for these contractual services is approximately 
$150,000. Therefore, HSCRC special fund expenditures increase by $75,000 in fiscal 2025, 
and $75,000 in fiscal 2026 only. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HB 1149 (The Speaker)(By Request - Office of the Attorney 
General) - Health and Government Operations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Office of the Attorney General; Maryland Department of Health; 
Maryland Insurance Administration; Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 4, 2024 
Third Reader - March 25, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - March 25, 2024 
Enrolled - May 3, 2024 
 
Revised - Amendment(s) - May 3, 2024 
 
rh/jc 
 
Analysis by:   Amberly E. Holcomb 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 5