START OF PAGE 1
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 142

Chapter 142

(Senate Bill 1103)

AN ACT concerning

Hospitals and Related Institutions – Outpatient Facility Fees

FOR the purpose of ~~altering~~ ~~the~~ ~~definition~~ ~~of~~ ~~“hospital”~~ ~~to~~ ~~require~~ ~~a~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~located~~ ~~outside~~
~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~that~~ ~~provides~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~services~~ ~~to~~ ~~patients~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State~~ ~~to~~ ~~provide~~ ~~a~~
~~certain~~ ~~written~~ ~~notice~~ ~~regarding~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~ ~~under~~ ~~certain~~ ~~circumstances;~~
altering the required contents of the written notice regarding outpatient facility fees;
requiring the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission, in consultation
with certain entities, to study and make recommendations regarding hospital
outpatient facility fees; requiring the Commission to convene a workgroup on
outpatient facility fees notices; and generally relating to hospital outpatient facility
fees.

BY repealing and reenacting, with amendments,
Article – Health – General
Section 19–349.2
Annotated Code of Maryland
(2023 Replacement Volume)

SECTION 1. BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND,
That the Laws of Maryland read as follows:

Article – Health – General

19–349.2.

(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indicated.

(2) “Electronically” means a secure digital or electronic transmission in
compliance with federal and State law, including by:

(i) Patient Internet portal;

(ii) Encrypted e–mail; or

(iii) Text message with a link to an encrypted notice.

(3) “HOSPITAL” MEANS AN INSTITUTION THAT:

(I) HAS A GROUP OF AT LEAST FIVE PHYSICIANS WHO ARE
ORGANIZED AS A MEDICAL STAFF FOR THE INSTITUTION;

– 1 –
END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
Ch. 142 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(II) MAINTAINS FACILITIES TO PROVIDE, UNDER THE
SUPERVISION OF THE MEDICAL STAFF, DIAGNOSTIC AND TREATMENT SERVICES FOR
TWO OR MORE UNRELATED INDIVIDUALS;

(III) ADMITS OR RETAINS THE INDIVIDUALS FOR OVERNIGHT
CARE; AND

(IV) IF LOCATED OUTSIDE THE STATE, PROVIDES OUTPATIENT
SERVICES TO PATIENTS IN FACILITIES LOCATED IN THE STATE.

[(3)] (4) (i) “Outpatient facility fee” means a [hospital outpatient
charge approved by the Commission for an] FEE CHARGED BY A HOSPITAL FOR
outpatient [clinic service] SERVICES PROVIDED IN THE STATE IN COMPENSATION FOR
THE USE OF A HOSPITAL’S FACILITY, CLINIC, supply, or equipment, including the service
of a PHYSICIAN OR nonphysician clinician.

(ii) “Outpatient facility fee” does not include:

1. A charge billed for services delivered in an emergency
department; or

2. A [physician] fee [billed] CHARGED SEPARATELY BY A
PHYSICIAN OR NONPHYSICIAN CLINICIAN for professional services provided at the
hospital.

[(4)] (5) (i) “Patient” means an individual who receives health care.

(ii) “Patient” includes:

1. A person authorized to consent to health care for an
individual consistent with the authority granted, including a guardian, surrogate, or person
with a medical power of attorney;

2. An individual who is a minor, if the minor seeks treatment
to which the minor has the right to consent and has consented under Title 20, Subtitle 1 of
this article;

3. A parent, guardian, custodian, or representative of an
individual who is a minor; and

4. A person authorized to consent to health care for an
individual who is a minor consistent with the authority granted.

– 2 –
END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 142

(b) Subject to subsections (c), (d), [and] (e), AND (F) of this section, if a hospital
charges an outpatient facility fee, the hospital shall provide the patient with a written
notice, separate from any other forms or notices, in the following form or a substantially
similar form:

IMPORTANT FINANCIAL INFORMATION

(Patient Name)________________ Appointment Date:___________________

Notice Of Hospital Outpatient Facility Fee And Billing Disclosure

a. Your appointment with (provider, practice, or [clinic] OUTPATIENT FACILITY
name) will take place in an outpatient department of (hospital name).

b. (Hospital name) will charge an outpatient facility fee that is separate from
and in addition to the bill you will receive from (provider).

c. You will receive two charges for your visit:

1. a provider services bill from (provider); and

2. a hospital facility bill from (hospital name).

Expected Fee

(if known) The amount of the facility fee that will be charged by (hospital name) for
your appointment is $ ____________. or

(if unknown) (Hospital name’s) facility fee is likely to range from $___________ to
$_____________. [or] AND

(if unknown) Based on appointments like the one you are scheduled for, we estimate
the facility fee to be $____________. AND

(if unknown) We are providing you with a range of fees and an estimate because the
actual amount of the facility fee will depend on the hospital services that are actually
provided. The fee could be higher if you require services during your appointment that we
cannot reasonably predict today.

Financial help for your portion of the outpatient facility fee bill may be available. If
you need financial help with the outpatient facility bill, please contact (hospital financial
assistance office, with telephone number and direct website address).

Receiving services here may result in greater financial liability than receiving
services at a location where a facility fee may not be charged.

– 3 –
END OF PAGE 3

START OF PAGE 4
Ch. 142 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(if applicable) No Facility Fee Location

You can see (provider) at another location that does not charge a facility fee.

(address and contact information)

Contact your insurance carrier to see if (provider) is a participating provider and
in–network at the (address of alternative location) location.

Insurance Information

(1) The amount of the facility fee that you will be responsible for paying
will depend on your insurance coverage.

(2) Insurance companies could impose deductibles or higher copayment or
coinsurance amounts for services provided in hospital outpatient departments.

(3) If you have insurance, you should contact your carrier to determine
your insurance coverage and your estimated financial responsibility for the facility fee,
including copayments, coinsurance, and deductible amounts for the outpatient facility fee.

Facility Fee Complaints

If you have a complaint about an outpatient facility fee charge, please first contact
the hospital, (hospital billing office contact information).

If the complaint is unresolved, you may then file the complaint with the Health
Services Cost Review Commission, (contact information).

If you need additional information regarding your facility fee charges or if you need
assistance mediating a facility fee complaint against a hospital, contact the Health
Education and Advocacy Unit of the Office of the Attorney General, 1–877–261–8807 |
Heau@oag.state.md.us | www.MarylandCares.org.

Acknowledgment

(1) I understand that I will be billed a hospital facility fee and a provider
fee.

(2) (Hospital name) provided me with information on the facility fees that
will be billed for my appointment.

(3) I understand that the fee could vary based on conditions and services
provided to me that the hospital cannot reasonably predict today.

– 4 –
END OF PAGE 4

START OF PAGE 5
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 142

(4) I understand that my out–of–pocket costs will depend on my insurance
coverage.

________(initial here) – by initialing here, I confirm that I received the facility fee
information at the time I made my appointment with (provider).

By signing this form, I acknowledge that I have received this information before
receiving services today.

_____________________________ _______________________________
Signature Date

To request this notice in an alternative format, please call (contact information) or e–mail
(contact information).

(Same sentence in Spanish).

(c) If a patient does not speak English or requires the notice required under
subsection (b) of this section to be in an alternative format, the hospital shall, to the extent
practicable, provide the notice in a language or format that is understood by the patient.

(d) (1) A hospital shall determine the range of hospital outpatient facility fees
and fee estimates, based on typical or average facility fees for the same or similar
appointments, to be provided in the notice required under this section, consistent with the
hospital’s most recent rate order as approved by the Commission.

(2) Each hospital that charges an outpatient facility fee shall use the range
of hospital outpatient facility fees and fee estimates determined under paragraph (1) of this
subsection.

(e) (1) For an appointment made in person or by telephone:

(i) Oral notice of all the information that would be provided in the
form required under subsection (b) of this section shall be given at the time the appointment
is made; and

(ii) Except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection, the
written notice required under subsection (b) of this section shall be sent to the patient
electronically at the time the appointment is made.

(2) For an appointment made electronically or using a website, the written
notice required under subsection (b) of this section shall be:

(i) Provided at the time the appointment is made; and

– 5 –
END OF PAGE 5

START OF PAGE 6
Ch. 142 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

(ii) Sent to the patient electronically at the time the appointment is
made.

(3) If the patient refuses electronic communication under paragraph (1)(ii)
of this subsection, the written notice shall be sent to the patient by first–class mail at the
time the appointment is made.

(f) Before professional medical services are provided on the date of the
appointment, the patient shall acknowledge in writing that the notice required under this
section was provided at the time the appointment was made.

(g) A hospital may not charge, bill, or attempt to collect an outpatient facility fee
unless the patient was given notice in accordance with this section.

(h) (1) On or before January 31 each year, beginning in 2022, each hospital
shall report to the Health Services Cost Review Commission a list of the hospital–based,
rate–regulated outpatient services provided by the hospital.

(2) On or before February 28 each year, beginning in 2022, the Health
Services Cost Review Commission annually shall:

(i) Post on its website the list of the hospital–based, rate–regulated
outpatient services reported by each hospital under paragraph (1) of this subsection; and

(ii) Provide the list of the hospital–based, rate–regulated outpatient
services reported by each hospital to the Maryland Insurance Administration and the
Health Education and Advocacy Unit in the Office of the Attorney General.

(3) When lack of notice in accordance with this section is alleged in a
consumer complaint, the Commission shall give consideration in its investigatory and audit
procedures as to whether notice was not feasible due to circumstances beyond the hospital’s
control.

SECTION 2. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) The Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission, in consultation with
the Maryland Department of Health, the Maryland Insurance Administration, the Health
Education and Advocacy Unit within the Office of the Attorney General, representatives of
hospitals, including out–of–state hospitals providing outpatient services to patients in
facilities in the State, representatives of physician practices that provide services in
hospital outpatient settings, health care payers, consumer advocacy groups, and
representatives of employer groups, shall study and make recommendations, including
legislative recommendations, regarding:

– 6 –
END OF PAGE 6

START OF PAGE 7
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 142

~~(1)~~ ~~the~~ ~~impact~~ ~~of~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~cost~~ ~~of~~ ~~health~~ ~~care~~
~~services,~~ ~~access~~ ~~to~~ ~~care,~~ ~~health~~ ~~equity,~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~topics~~ ~~as~~ ~~determined~~ ~~necessary~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~
~~Maryland~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Services~~ ~~Cost~~ ~~Review~~ ~~Commission,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~impact~~ ~~on:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~consumers,~~ ~~including~~ ~~Medicaid~~ ~~recipients;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~employers;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~physicians~~ ~~and~~ ~~clinicians;~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~hospitals;~~ ~~and~~

~~(v)~~ ~~payers;~~

~~(2)~~ ~~the~~ ~~impact~~ ~~of~~ ~~eliminating~~ ~~or~~ ~~reducing~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~
~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~cost~~ ~~of~~ ~~health~~ ~~care,~~ ~~access~~ ~~to~~ ~~care,~~ ~~health~~ ~~equity,~~ ~~and~~ ~~other~~ ~~topics~~ ~~as~~ ~~determined~~
~~necessary~~ ~~by~~ ~~the~~ ~~Maryland~~ ~~Health~~ ~~Services~~ ~~Cost~~ ~~Review~~ ~~Commission,~~ ~~including~~ ~~the~~ ~~impact~~
~~on:~~

~~(i)~~ ~~consumers,~~ ~~including~~ ~~Medicaid~~ ~~recipients;~~

~~(ii)~~ ~~employers;~~

~~(iii)~~ ~~physicians~~ ~~and~~ ~~clinicians;~~

~~(iv)~~ ~~hospitals;~~ ~~and~~

~~(v)~~ ~~payers;~~

~~(3)~~ ~~industry~~ ~~practices~~ ~~for~~ ~~seeking~~ ~~authority~~ ~~for~~ ~~an~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~location~~ ~~to~~ ~~be~~
~~approved~~ ~~as~~ ~~“at~~ ~~the~~ ~~hospital”~~ ~~and~~ ~~thereby~~ ~~subject~~ ~~to~~ ~~rate~~ ~~regulation;~~

~~(4)~~ ~~how~~ ~~hospitals~~ ~~use~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees;~~

~~(5)~~ ~~how~~ ~~hospitals~~ ~~charge~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~ ~~in~~ ~~addition~~ ~~to~~ ~~physician~~ ~~fees~~ ~~for~~
~~professional~~ ~~services~~ ~~provided~~ ~~in~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~departments;~~

~~(6)~~ ~~the~~ ~~interaction~~ ~~of~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~ ~~with~~ ~~Maryland’s~~ ~~Total~~ ~~Cost~~ ~~of~~
~~Care~~ ~~model~~ ~~obligations~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~federal~~ ~~government,~~ ~~including~~ ~~any~~ ~~impact~~ ~~on~~ ~~Medicare~~ ~~total~~
~~cost~~ ~~of~~ ~~care~~ ~~savings~~ ~~if~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~ ~~are~~ ~~eliminated~~ ~~or~~ ~~reduced;~~

~~(7)~~ ~~efforts~~ ~~in~~ ~~other~~ ~~states,~~ ~~by~~ ~~federal~~ ~~Medicare~~ ~~and~~ ~~Medicaid~~ ~~regulatory~~
~~agencies,~~ ~~and~~ ~~by~~ ~~national~~ ~~advocacy~~ ~~organizations~~ ~~related~~ ~~to~~ ~~the~~ ~~regulation~~ ~~or~~ ~~minimization~~
~~of~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees,~~ ~~and~~ ~~the~~ ~~potential~~ ~~effects~~ ~~that~~ ~~similar~~ ~~efforts~~ ~~may~~ ~~have~~ ~~on~~ ~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~costs~~
~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State,~~ ~~including~~ ~~consumers’~~ ~~out–of–pocket~~ ~~costs;~~

– 7 –
END OF PAGE 7

START OF PAGE 8
Ch. 142 2024 LAWS OF MARYLAND

~~(8)~~ ~~the~~ ~~licensing~~ ~~and~~ ~~regulation~~ ~~of~~ ~~fees~~ ~~charged~~ ~~by~~ ~~out–of–state~~ ~~hospital~~
~~outpatient~~ ~~facilities~~ ~~located~~ ~~in~~ ~~the~~ ~~State;~~ ~~and~~

~~(9)~~ ~~the~~ ~~effectiveness~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~of~~ ~~hospital~~ ~~outpatient~~ ~~facility~~ ~~fees~~ ~~that~~ ~~is~~
~~currently~~ ~~provided~~ ~~to~~ ~~consumers,~~ ~~including~~ ~~any~~ ~~impact~~ ~~of~~ ~~the~~ ~~notice~~ ~~on~~ ~~the~~ ~~consumers’~~
~~choice~~ ~~of~~ ~~location~~ ~~for~~ ~~health~~ ~~care~~ ~~services~~ ~~and~~ ~~any~~ ~~impact~~ ~~on~~ ~~utilization~~ ~~and~~ ~~access.~~

(1) the nature of costs underlying hospital outpatient facility fees and how
similar costs are recovered in other health care settings;

(2) the drivers of hospital facility costs that are unique to hospitals and are
not reflected in other health care settings;

(3) the magnitude and impact of hospital facility fee charges for hospitals,
payers, and consumers;

(4) industry practices for seeking authority for an outpatient location to be
approved as “at the hospital” and thereby subject to rate regulation;

(5) alternative mechanisms or revisions to the billing of the facility fees that
would allow hospitals to recover costs while protecting individual consumers from high
facility fee bills, maintaining access to health care services, and addressing health equity
concerns;

(6) the interaction of the alternative mechanisms or revisions studied under
item (5) of this subsection with the State’s Total Cost of Care model obligations to the federal
government, including any impact on Medicare total cost of care savings if outpatient facility
fees are eliminated or reduced;

(7) the impact of the alternative mechanisms or revisions studied under
item (5) of this subsection on Medicaid, Medicare, and commercial insurance, including
consumer out–of–pocket costs, with a particular focus on the interaction with
high–deductible commercial insurance products;

(8) published material on efforts in other states, by federal Medicare and
Medicaid regulatory agencies, and by national advocacy organizations related to the
regulation or minimization of facility fees, and the potential effects that similar efforts may
have on health care costs in the State, including consumers’ out–of–pocket costs;

(9) the regulation of fees charged by out–of–state hospital outpatient
facilities located in the State; and

(10) the effectiveness of the notice of hospital outpatient facility fees that is
provided to consumers.

– 8 –
END OF PAGE 8

START OF PAGE 9
WES MOORE, Governor Ch. 142

(b) (1) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Health Services Cost
Review Commission shall submit a preliminary report to the Senate Finance Committee
and the House Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance with §
2–1257 of the State Government Article, on the findings and recommendations under
subsection (a) of this section.

(2) On or before December 1, 2025, the Maryland Health Services Cost
Review Commission shall submit a final report to the Senate Finance Committee and the
House Health and Government Operations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the
State Government Article, on the findings and recommendations under subsection (a) of
this section.

SECTION 3. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That:

(a) (1) The Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission shall convene
a workgroup with the Maryland Department of Health, the Health Education and Advocacy
Unit within the Office of the Attorney General, and representatives of hospitals, including
out–of–state hospitals providing services to patients in facilities in the State, representatives
of physician practices that provide services in hospital outpatient settings, health care
payers, consumer advocacy groups, and representatives of employer groups.

(2) The workgroup convened under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall:

(i) advise the Maryland Health Services Cost Review Commission on
expanding the application of the hospital outpatient facility fees notice requirement to all
outpatient services, including services provided by out–of–state hospitals at outpatient
locations in the State; and

(ii) consider the impact of expanding the facility fee notice
requirement on consumers, including Medicaid recipients and consumers with recurring
appointments, with consideration given to the impact on providers and payers.

(b) On or before December 1, 2024, the Maryland Health Services Cost Review
Commission shall submit a report to the Senate Finance Committee and the House Health
and Government Operations Committee, in accordance with § 2–1257 of the State
Government Article, on recommendations for expanding the application of the outpatient
facility fees notice requirement to apply to all outpatient services.

SECTION ~~3.~~ 4. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That Division II of the State
Finance and Procurement Article does not apply to the Health Services Cost Review
Commission when implementing ~~Section~~ ~~2~~ Sections 2 and 3 of this Act.

SECTION ~~3.~~ ~~4.~~ 5. AND BE IT FURTHER ENACTED, That this Act shall take effect
~~October~~ July 1, 2024.

Approved by the Governor, April 25, 2024.

– 9 –
END OF PAGE 9