START OF PAGE 1
 
  SB 1178 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Bill 1178 
(Senator Bailey, et al.) 
Education, Energy, and the Environment 
Appropriations 
 
Higher Education - Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq 
Conflicts Scholarship - Repeal of Service Terminal Date 
 
 
This emergency bill expands eligibility for the Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the 
Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship by repealing the terminal dates of eligibility, 
which are as prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of Defense for service in Iraq or Afghanistan. 
Under the bill, individuals are eligible for a Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan 
and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship provided such an individual, in addition to other eligibility 
requirements, served in (1) Afghanistan or contiguous air space, as defined in federal 
regulations, on or after October 24, 2001, or (2) Iraq or contiguous waters or air space, as 
defined by federal regulations on or after March 19, 2003. 
   
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  Expanding eligibility for the Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan 
and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship does not necessitate additional spending, as discussed 
below. The Maryland Higher Education Commission (MHEC) can make needed 
administrative changes with existing resources. Revenues are not affected. 
  
Local Effect:  None.  
  
Small Business Effect:  None.  
  
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Veterans and active-duty members of the U.S. Armed Forces who served 
in Afghanistan and Iraq, and members of the reserve or Maryland National Guard who 
were activated as a result of the conflicts, are eligible for the scholarships, as are their 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SB 1178/ Page 2 
children, stepchildren, and spouses. To qualify, an applicant must also be a Maryland 
resident and must be accepted for admission or enrolled in a regular undergraduate program 
at a Maryland institution of higher education or a two-year terminal certificate program in 
which the course work is eligible for transfer into a baccalaureate program at a Maryland 
institution of higher education. 
 
An individual is considered to have served in the Afghanistan or Iraq conflict if the 
individual was a member of the uniformed services of the United States who served in 
(1) Afghanistan or contiguous air space, as defined in federal regulations on or after  
October 24, 2001, and before a terminal date prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of Defense 
or (2) Iraq or contiguous waters or air space as defined in federal regulations on or after  
March 19, 2004, and before a terminal date prescribed by the U.S. Secretary of Defense. 
Therefore, individuals are considered eligible if they served (1) in Afghanistan in 
Operation Enduring Freedom through December 28, 2014, or Operation Freedom Sentinel 
through September 30, 2021, or (2) in Iraq in Operation Iraqi Freedom through 
August 31, 2010, or Operation New Dawn through December 15, 2011.  
 
A recipient is not required to file for financial aid; however, a recipient who does file for 
financial aid must file by March 1. A scholarship may supplement, but is not contingent 
on, any federal education benefits for which a recipient qualifies as a result of an 
individual’s military or military dependent status. Recipients must maintain a grade point 
average of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale and may hold the scholarship for up to five years of 
full-time study or eight years of part-time study. 
 
The annual amount of a scholarship may not exceed 50% of the equivalent annual tuition, 
mandatory fees, and room and board at the University System of Maryland institution with 
the highest annual expenses for full-time resident undergraduates, excluding the  
University of Maryland, Baltimore Campus and the University of Maryland Global 
Campus. The Office of Student Financial Assistance (OSFA) in MHEC may not award an 
initial scholarship under the program after June 30, 2030, although existing scholarships 
may be renewed after that date. 
 
Funding for the scholarship program is as provided in the annual State budget. In addition, 
senators and delegates may authorize OSFA to award their senatorial and delegate 
scholarship funds to eligible recipients of the scholarships. There is a Veterans of the 
Afghanistan and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship Fund. MHEC may accept gifts or grants for the 
fund and must report annually on the status of the fund.  
 
State Expenditures:  The fiscal 2025 budget as introduced includes a $750,000 general 
fund appropriation to the Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan and Iraq 
Conflicts Scholarship. MHEC advises that, from fiscal 2021 to 2024, the average number 
of applicants awarded was 133 with an average award of $5,300 and an average total 

END OF PAGE 2

START OF PAGE 3
    
SB 1178/ Page 3 
amount awarded of $735,000. However, in fiscal 2023 alone (the latest full year of data 
available), the program made 196 awards totaling $1.0 million for an average award 
amount of approximately $5,200.  
 
MHEC further advises that, for the current fiscal 2024 application cycle, nine applicants 
were identified as ineligible due to their service falling outside the start and terminal dates 
for the scholarship. For illustrative purposes only, expanding eligibility to nine additional 
applicants each year would necessitate just under $47,000 in additional annual spending to 
the extent existing appropriated funds are insufficient to cover the additional awards. 
Otherwise, individuals can be added to the Douglas J. J. Peters Veterans of the Afghanistan 
and Iraq Conflicts Scholarship waiting list with existing resources. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  None. 
 
Information Source(s):  Maryland Higher Education Commission; Department of 
Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - March 11, 2024 
Third Reader - March 15, 2024 
 
rh/clb 
 
Analysis by:  Michael E. Sousane 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 3