START OF PAGE 1
 
  SJ 1 
Department of Legislative Services 
Maryland General Assembly 
2024 Session 
 
FISCAL AND POLICY NOTE 
Third Reader 
Senate Joint Resolution 1 
(Senator Kelly, et al.) 
Judicial Proceedings 
Rules and Executive Nominations 
 
Affirming the Federal Equal Rights Amendment 
 
 
This joint resolution (1) states the General Assembly’s opinion that the Equal Rights 
Amendment (ERA) meets the requirements of Article V of the U.S. Constitution and 
should be recognized as the Twenty-eighth Amendment; (2) urges the Administration of 
President Joseph 
R. 
Biden 
to 
publish, 
without 
delay, 
the 
ERA 
as 
the  
Twenty-eighth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution; (3) urges the U.S. Congress to pass a 
joint resolution affirming the ERA as the Twenty-eighth Amendment; and (4) calls on other 
states to pass similar resolutions. 
 
 
Fiscal Summary 
 
State Effect:  The joint resolution does not directly affect State finances. 
  
Local Effect:  None. 
 
Small Business Effect:  None. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Current Law:  Article V of the U.S. Constitution states that Congress may propose 
amendments to the Constitution with votes of two-thirds of both Houses. States may also 
apply to Congress to call a convention for proposing amendments, upon application of 
two-thirds of the states. Amendments in either case must be ratified by three-fourths of the 
states, as specified. Article V does not impose a time-limitation on the ratification of 
amendments. 
 

END OF PAGE 1

START OF PAGE 2
    
SJ 1/ Page 2 
As of January 2020, three-fourths of the states have ratified the ERA. The Archivist of the 
United States has still not published the ERA as the Twenty-eighth Amendment. The ERA 
would amend the U.S. Constitution by declaring that equality of rights under the law must 
not be denied or abridged by the United States or any state on account of sex. 
 
Maryland adopted the Maryland Equal Rights Amendment to the Maryland Constitution 
in 1972. 
 
 
Additional Information 
 
Recent Prior Introductions:  Similar legislation has not been introduced within the last 
three years. 
 
Designated Cross File:  HJ 1 (Delegate Patterson, et al.) - Rules and Executive 
Nominations. 
 
Information Source(s):  Department of Legislative Services 
 
Fiscal Note History:  
First Reader - February 20, 2024 
Third Reader - April 2, 2024 
 
js/jkb 
 
Analysis by:   Amanda L. Douglas 
 
Direct Inquiries to: 
(410) 946-5510 
(301) 970-5510 
 

END OF PAGE 2